77.	 In the name of the Chinese delegation, I would like to extend to Mr. Jorge Illueca warm congratulations on his election to the presidency of the thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly. His outstanding talent and rich experience have won wide admiration, and I am convinced that under his guidance the session will conduct its work efficiently and handle all its tasks appropriately.
78.	I also wish to take this opportunity to express our thanks to his predecessor, Mr. Imre Hollai, for the positive contribution he made to the thirty-seventh session.
79.	This is the first time I have attended a session of the General Assembly as chairman of the Chinese delegation. I am very pleased to have this opportunity to exchange views with my colleagues here on international issues of common concern.
80.	The Chinese delegation extends its warm congratulations to Saint Christopher and Nevis on its recent achievement of independence and cordially welcomes it to the United Nations.
81.	Safeguarding world peace is the most important task facing mankind today and the primary concern of all peoples in the world. Working hard for the modernization of their country and the improvement of their living standards, the Chinese people eagerly desire a lasting peaceful international environment. Like other peoples of the world, we are deeply concerned about the maintenance of international peace and security. However, we are compelled to face the harsh realities. The present-day world is far from tranquil and is beset with tensions and turmoil.
82.	The fierce arms race between the super-Powers and their wrangling over the question of deployment of medium-range nuclear weapons have kept Europe in a state of tense confrontation. The hegemonists aggression against, and rivalry in, the third-world countries have given rise to frequent wars and emergencies in Asia, Africa and Latin America. Certain developed countries are shifting the consequences of their economic crises onto others, plunging many developing countries into great economic difficulties. All this has caused disasters in many countries and posed a serious threat to world peace.
83.	People of all countries have come to realize more and more clearly that world peace can be effectively maintained only be resolutely opposing hegemonism. The numerous third-world countries and the people of the world have strengthened their united struggle against expansion, aggression and power politics, so that the super-Powers have met with ever-stronger opposition and constraints in pursuing their hegemonist policies. We are confident that it is possible to maintain world peace, so long as the people of the world become truly united and wage a resolute struggle against alt manifestations of hegemonism.
84.	All the peace-loving countries and people ardently wish to see disarmament realized, and they have expressed this wish in various ways. The massive peace movement that has emerged in some countries in recent years reflects in its main trend the strong aspirations for peace of the people who suffered the havoc of two world wars and are now faced with the increasing threat of a nuclear war. Their aspirations are completely understandable and deserve sympathy.
85.	Historical experience shows that a genuine desire for disarmament is essential to real progress in disarmament. Twenty years have passed since the 1963 signing of the Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under Water. During this period the two super-Powers have held many disarmament talks and reached some agreements. But what is the result? Their armaments, especially nuclear armaments, have increased in quantity and improved in quality despite all the talks on reduction. Their annual military expenditures amount to more than half of the world's total. More than 95 per cent of the world's nuclear weapons are in the hands of the two super-Powers, which admit that they have long possessed what is commonly known as "overkill" capabilities, and it is always the people of the world who are to suffer once these capabilities are put to use. The arms race between superpowers has extended from the land, sea and air to outer space. And the reality is that, for all the disarmament talks, the arms race is intensifying, with each super-Power trying to gain the upper hand over the other. One cannot but question their sincerity for disarmament. Will they give up their nuclear threats and nuclear blackmail to let others live in peace for a while? Without good faith, their words and proposals, however high-sounding and numerous, would in essence only serve to cover up their continued efforts to expand their nuclear arsenals and hoodwink world opinion.
86.	As matters now stand, it is only natural that people should ask the two nuclear super-Powers, which possess the largest arsenals, to be the first to reduce their arms, drastically cut their nuclear and conventional armaments and destroy the reduced armaments before there can be any reduction of arms by other countries.
87.	China desires peace and favours disarmament. We are for genuine disarmament and against sham disarmament, that is, arms expansion under the camouflage of disarmament talks. The Chinese Government has, together with other third world countries, made unremitting efforts to promote real progress in disarmament.
88.	China has always stood for complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons. China declared explicitly, in 1964, on the occasion of the successful test of its first atomic bomb, that China was developing nuclear weapons for defence purposes and that at no time and in no circumstances would China be the first to use nuclear weapons. China was the first country to propose that nuclear-weapon States should undertake not to use nuclear weapons against each other and was the first country to undertake the commitment not to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon States or nuclear-free zones. China respects and supports the proposals of non-nuclear-weapon countries for the establishment of nuclear-free zones or zones of peace. China is in favour of reducing conventional armaments as well as nuclear arms. China stands for the early conclusion of a convention on the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of chemical weapons.
89.	At the twelfth special session of the General Assembly, which was devoted to disarmament, China put forward proposals on the question of the nuclear-weapon States ceasing to develop, and reducing, nuclear weapons,'" calling on the two super-Powers to take the lead in adopting practical measures to cut their nuclear weapons and means of delivery by a wide margin. With a view to promoting progress in disarmament, we are prepared to make a further effort by proposing that, after the Soviet Union and the United States have taken practical action to stop testing, improving and manufacturing nuclear weapons and have agreed to reduce by half their nuclear weapons and means of delivery of all types, a widely representative international conference should be convened, with the participation of all nuclear-weapon States, to negotiate the general reduction of nuclear weapons by all nuclear-weapon States. We hope that this proposal will receive a positive response. Thirty years ago, during the Sino-Indian talks in December 1953, the late Premier Zhou Enlai of China, for the first time put forward the five principles of peaceful coexistence; namely mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence. Those principles give expression to the common desire of the peoples of the world to defend their national independence and sovereignty and promote world peace. They are in full accord with the purposes of the Charter of the United Nations. Over the past 30 years, these five principles have been accepted by the international community as basic norms guiding the relations between States and have played an important role in maintaining international peace and security. Regrettably, however, peaceful coexistence among States, particularly the independence and security of the third world countries, has constantly been subjected to grave threat and violation by imperialism, hegemonism and colonialism.
90.	The Kampuchean issue is, in essence, one of undisguised armed aggression against and military occupation of Kampuchea by the Vietnamese authorities, with the support of a super-Power, in gross violation of Kampuchea's independence and sovereignty. Viet Nam's invasion and occupation of Kampuchea is now more than four years old. It has not only brought untold sufferings to the Kampuchean people but has also posed a grave threat to peace and stability in South-East Asia. Viet Nam has so far refused to withdraw its troops, thus blocking a settlement of the Kampuchean issue which is long overdue. In an attempt to extricate itself from its predicament, Viet Nam has made all kinds of excuses and even described the Kampuchean question as "an issue between China and Viet Nam". This is sheer sophistry and slander.
91.	The General Assembly has at four successive sessions adopted resolutions by an overwhelming majority, and the International Conference on Kampuchea, held in July 1981, issued a Declaration," all calling for the total withdrawal of the Vietnamese troops from Kampuchea so that the Kampuchean people may decide their own destiny free from outside interference. How can the Kampuchean issue be described as one involving differences only between China and Viet Nam? Talking about differences, they could be accurately stated as those between the Vietnamese authorities who crudely trample upon the Charter of the United Nations and the international community which firmly upholds it.
92.	A number of countries have tried more than once to break the deadlock on the Kampuchean question and bring about a political settlement. On 1 March of this year the Chinese Government put forward its proposal for resolving the Kampuchean question and improving Sino-Vietnamese relations. Like the ASEAN countries and all other peace-loving and justice-upholding countries, China hopes that after the Vietnamese withdrawal Kampuchea will become an independent, peaceful, neutral and non-aligned country and that free elections will be held under United Nations supervision for the Kampuchean people themselves to choose their political system and government leaders. We are prepared to join the other countries concerned in an international guarantee. We also hope that the South-East Asian countries will achieve peace and stability in the region on the basis of mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity and non-interference in each other's internal affairs. We are willing to develop friendly and good-neighbourly relations with all countries in the South-East Asian region, including Viet Nam. The heart of the matter is that Viet Nam must implement the resolutions of the General Assembly and the Declaration of the International Conference on Kampuchea, undertake to withdraw unconditionally all its troops from Kampuchea and act accordingly. This is the prerequisite for a political settlement of the Kampuchean issue.
93.	The question of Afghanistan is also a matter of great concern to the international community. Soviet armed aggression against Afghanistan constitutes a gross violation of Afghanistan's independence and sovereignty, which has turned millions of Afghan people into refugees. This is something rare in the modern history of international relations. The international community has strongly called for an immediate, unconditional and total withdrawal of foreign troops from Afghanistan and full respect for the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-aligned status of Afghanistan.
94.	The Chinese Government firmly supports this just demand. We are in favour of a political settlement of the Afghanistan question, and efforts have been made in many ways by some countries to promote indirect talks through the good offices of the United Nations. However, any political solution must accord with the relevant United Nations resolutions, especially the crucial principle of the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of all foreign troops. The formulation of "guarantee before withdrawal" is obviously putting the cart before the horse, and its purpose is none other than legalizing military interference and occupation and putting off withdrawal. We consider that an international guarantee is necessary, and China is prepared to join the other countries concerned in such a guarantee, but this can happen only after, and not before, the withdrawal of all foreign troops from the country and the restoration of Afghanistan's independence and sovereignty. At present, a genuine political settlement depend? on whether the Soviet Union will publicly undertake to withdraw its troops and set a timetable for the withdrawal. Failing this, no effort to reach a political settlement will achieve real progress.
95.	The situation in the Korean peninsula also arouses concern. The division of Korea into North and South has already lasted for more than years. This not only runs counter to the aspirations of the entire Korean people, but also prevents any easing of tension in this region. The Chinese Government and people wholeheartedly support President Kim 11 Sung's reasonable proposal for the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea and the establishment of a Confederal Republic of Korea. The United States should stop interfering in Korea's internal affairs and withdraw forthwith all its troops from South Korea in accordance with the relevant resolution adopted at the thirtieth session of the General Assembly, so that the Korean question may be settled by the Korean people themselves free from interference by outside forces.
96.	The situation in the Middle East has been tense and turbulent for years. The crux of the matter is that the Israeli authorities are carrying out wanton aggression and expansion against Arab countries and trampling upon the national rights of the Palestinian people and that their arrogance is inflated by United States partiality. On the eve of the commencement of the General Assembly session last year, Israeli aggressor troops massacred innocent Lebanese and Palestinian civilians in cold blood. As the current session meets here, Lebanon is confronted with the danger of being divided. To justify its aggression and expansion, Israel has kept harping on the need to guarantee its "security and survival". But the present reality is that Israel not only arbitrarily frustrates the restoration of the Palestinian people's national rights, but also wilfully threatens the security of Arab countries.
97.	The key to safeguarding peace in the Middle East is to stop Israeli aggression. Israel must withdraw from Lebanon and all the Arab territories it has occupied, and the Palestinian people must regain their national rights.
98.	Unity among the Arab countries is the fundamental guarantee of success in checking Israeli aggression and expansion and of the settlement of the Middle East question. As a Chinese saying goes, "Brothers may quarrel at home, but they unite to resist outside attack". We sincerely hope that the Arab countries and all the Palestinian groups will seek common ground on major issues, while setting aside minor differences, and strengthen their unity in the joint struggle against the enemy. The Chinese Government and people will as always firmly stand by the Arab people and support their just struggle. We are deeply convinced that all aggressors will be punished in the long run. Final victory will definitely belong to the united Arab people.
99.	The South African authorities have persisted in their racist policies, continued their illegal occupation of Namibia and carried out repeated armed incursions and military provocations against neighbouring countries. Here lies the root cause of the turbulent situation in southern Africa. Peace and tranquillity in that region require resolute sanctions against the racist South African authorities and the achievement of Namibian independence in compliance with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council. It is totally unjustified to attempt to link Namibian independence with the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola, as those are issues of different natures. What ground is there for obstructing the independence of one country by citing the presence of foreign troops in another? The people of Namibia strongly demand independence at an early date. They have carried out a prolonged struggle under the leadership of the South West Africa People's Organization No force on earth can block the independence and liberation of Namibia.
100.	The conflict in Chad is becoming more and more complicated because of the meddling of external forces. The majority of African countries are in favour of seeking a settlement through the OAU. They want to eliminate intervention by external forces and call for a settlement of the internal dispute in Chad through negotiations. The Chinese Government supports this justified position. We believe the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Chad should be respected, its internal affairs should be settled by the people of Chad themselves and all foreign intervention must cease forthwith.
101.	The tension in Central America has further escalated in the past few months. It is impermissible to attempt either to use military Muff to restrict the struggle of the people in Central America for democracy and social reform or to carry out infiltration by exploiting the national and democratic movements there. We consistently hold that the problems of the Central American countries should be solved by the people of the respective countries, that disputes between Central American States should be settled peacefully on the basis of mutual respect for sovereignty and non-interference in the internal affairs of other countries and that no external forces should be allowed to intervene. The Chinese Government supports the Contadora Group and the Latin American countries in their position against the super-Powers' attempt to involve Central America in their rivalry and confrontation and in their endeavour to uphold the right of the Central American peoples to self-determination and ease the tension in Central America. The issue of the Malvinas Islands remains a matter of public concern. We maintain that Argentina's claim to sovereignty over the Malvinas Islands must be respected by the international community and that resolution 37/9, adopted at the last session of the General Assembly, must be implemented.
102.	In the face of the tense and turbulent world situation, we call on all States strictly to observe the basic principles of peaceful coexistence in their mutual relations and resolutely condemn and halt any acts that violate these principles so as to uphold the purposes of the Charter and promote the noble cause of world peace and human progress.
103.	The question of development is one of the most important issues of our time. It has a direct bearing not only on the effort of the developing countries to safeguard their national independence and develop their national economy but also on the world economy as a whole and international pence and security. Many countries in Asia, Africa and Latin America have now entered a new historical period of bolstering their political independence with economic independence. Although they have achieved some gratifying results in their economic development, they have also come across serious difficulties. In particular, under the impact of the world-wide economic crisis, some developed countries have tried to get rid of their own troubles by shifting the consequences of the crisis on to others. This has wrought havoc among the developing countries, and many of them are faced with economic situations grimmer than any since their independence. We hope that these developed countries will become more farsighted, for all countries are closely linked in their economies, and the economies of the developing countries constitutes an important part of the world economy. If their economic difficulties are not resolved or, worse still, are aggravated, the entire world economy is bound to suffer. In trying to harm others these developed countries will end by harming themselves and will find it difficult to achieve a steady recovery and growth in their own economies.
104.	Last April it was pointed out at the Fifth Ministerial Meeting of the Group of 77, held at Buenos Aires, that the crisis confronting the world economy today is structural as well as periodic. The Group called on the international community to make the maximum effort to seek a global settlement and work out a set of mutually complementary and coordinated policies and measures on a short-term as well as a long-term basis. The Chinese Government supports the series of concrete proposals put forward by the Group of 77 for this purpose. It has become an increasingly urgent task to take emergency measures in the fields that are vital to the developing countries and carry out the necessary reforms in international economic relations. We always maintain that the long-term objective of establishing the new international economic order should be linked with the solution of the immediate urgent problems. In order to promote North- South dialogue and break the present deadlock, it was proposed at the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi in Match, that global negotiations be carried out in phases and that some problems in specific fields be chosen as the basic content of the first-phase negotiations. This proposal is quite reasonable, but it has not been accepted by the major developed countries. The just proposal of the Group of 77 also failed to win positive response from the developed countries at the sixth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development held not long ago. We hope that the major developed countries, and the United States in particular, will change their rigid position in response to the wishes of the developing countries and display sagacity and goodwill in promoting North-South negotiations and improving North-South relations.
105.	While North-South dialogue is at a stalemate, South-South co-operation is making steady progress. This co-operation is new in international economic relations. A sure way to economic prosperity and greater economic strength for the developing countries is to expand South- South co-operation, embark on collective self-reliance, build up independent national economies and reduce dependence on developed countries. The strengthening of South-South co-operation, of course, does not replace North-South dialogue, nor is it intended to lighten the commitments of the developed countries towards the developing countries. But it can serve as a stimulus to North-South dialogue. China, being a developing socialist country and a member of the third world, has had historical experience similar to that of other third world countries and is faced with a similar task.
106.	For the purpose of developing China's economic relations with foreign countries and strengthening South- South co-operation, Premier Zhao Ziyang, in his recent visit to Africa, put forward four principles, namely, "equality and mutual benefit, stress on practical results, diversity in form, and attainment of common progress". We are prepared, in accordance with these principles, to explore with other developing countries ways for active co-operation.
107.	China is ready to work together with other countries for the defence of world peace, in the interest of smooth progress in its modernization programme and of its national security and in the fundamental interests of the people of the world. We will steadfastly pursue an independent foreign policy. We are opposed to all acts of hegemonism. We are striving to maintain and develop normal relations with all countries on the basis of the five principles of peaceful coexistence and will persist in a long-term policy of opening to the outside world on the basis of self-reliance. We attach special importance to strengthening our unity and co-operation with the other third-world countries. We support the Movement of Non- Aligned Countries, which is playing an increasingly important role in maintaining world peace. With unflagging interest we have done our best to develop good-neighbourly and friendly relations with our neighbouring countries. We are steadily promoting our good relations with the developed countries in Western Europe, North America and Oceania. We are striving to improve and strengthen our relations with the East European countries. As for the United States and the Soviet Union, we also hope that the obstacles in our relations with them can be removed and normal relations maintained and developed in accordance with the five principles of peaceful coexistence. We believe that this will not only benefit the people of various countries but is also in the interest of world peace.
108.	As a founding Member, China has always attached importance to the role of the United Nations. We have noted that, thanks to the joint efforts of Member States and particularly those of the third world, the United Nations has in recent years played a positive role in the maintenance of international peace and security, in decolonization and the promotion of economic development. However, we cannot but point out that many of the correct resolutions adopted by the United Nations have not been implemented; as a result, it has become rather weak in the settlement of many important issues. The permanent members of the Security Council have a special responsibility to remedy this regrettable state of affairs. We appreciate the suggestions made by the Secretary-General in his annual report for the strengthening of the role of the United Nations. We support the views put forward by the Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries regarding the democratization of international relations. Together with other countries, we will strive to enable the United Nations to play a more positive and useful role in realizing the purposes and principles of its Charter.
 


28.	 I wish first of all, Sir, to take this opportunity to convey to you the congratulations of the Federal Republic of Germany on your election to the high office of President of the General Assembly. You are a person with exceptional qualities and wide experience, among other things in the work of the United Nations, as well as the representative of a country and a continent with which friendly relations are for us traditional.
29.	I wish also to extend my country's thanks to your predecessor, Mr. Hollai, the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Hungary, whose presidency of the thirty-seventh session bore the stamp of commitment and balance.
30.	I am grateful to the Secretary-General and his staff for their dedicated work in the past year in the service of the Organization and in the cause of world peace.
31.	On behalf of the Federal Republic of Germany, I extend a warm welcome to Saint Christopher and Nevis as the newest Member of the United Nations.
32.	Ten years ago the Federal Republic of Germany became a Member of the United Nations. On that occasion, speaking from this rostrum, our then Foreign Minister, Waiter Scheel, said:
"Peace takes first place. The times have gone when the family of nations allowed a single State or a political group to upset the coexistence of the whole family through the use of force.
"In our time there is no longer any room for the law of the jungle.'" Today those words ring more true than ever. All Members of the United Nations have solemnly undertaken not to use force of any kind. Yet what do we see around us? Afghanistan, Cambodia, South-West Asia, the Middle East, Chad, southern Africa, Central America and other regions of the world are scenes of ghastly wars and civil strife.
33.	This year the world will have spent the staggering sum of $800 billion on arms. How ruthlessly force is resorted to is shown by the shooting down of a South Korean passenger aircraft by a Soviet military aircraft. That must never happen again. I appeal to all nations to participate in the efforts of ICAO to work out rules that will make a repetition of such a tragedy impossible.
34.	The peoples of the earth long for peace and the absence of force, and they look to the United Nations in the hope that the Organization will accomplish its most noble task, which is to promote world peace. It was the desire to participate in this global task of fostering peace that motivated my country in joining the United Nations. We reaffirm our commitment to the United Nations and we shall do all we can to help it accomplish its task of safeguarding peace.
35.	We laid the foundations of our policy for peace in the 1950s when we joined the European Community and the Western alliance.
36.	The treaty policy with our neighbours in the East and with the German Democratic Republic followed. With our accession to the United Nations we assumed our full responsibility within the community of nations.
37.	In 1973, the year of our accession, the efforts to achieve the goals of detente and co-operation between East and West were in full swing. No doubt all Members of the United Nations then hoped that the international community would from then on be able to concentrate its political energies and economic resources more and more on the three great global tasks of mankind: disarmament, the elimination of hunger and want, and protection of the natural environment.
38.	This year 1972 was that of the first United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, and 1975 saw the commencement of the North-South dialogue. But hopes for the progressive, constructive development of East-West relations were dashed. Detente and co-operation have suffered severe setbacks since the end of the 1970s through the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, the events in Poland and the destabilizing arms build-up by the Soviet Union.
39.	Today once more international discussion focuses on East-West tensions rather than on comprehensive North-South co-operation in pursuit of development in the third world. Once again the East-West confrontation is preventing the United Nations from doing its job of f serving world peace.
40.	Yet we must not give up. Proceeding on the basis of its membership in the European Community and in the Western alliance, the Federal Republic of Germany will continue to work for the maintenance of peace in Europe. The European Community, the core of which is Franco-German friendship, is an organization of
European democracies which have pooled their energies to shape their future together, as equals, in peace and freedom.
41.	Referring to the goals of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization's defence alliance, the heads of State and Government declared at Bonn on 10 June 1982: "Our purpose is to prevent war and, while safeguarding democracy, to build the foundations of lasting peace. None of our weapons will ever be used in response to attack."
42.	Europe must be a continent of peace, must become a force for the peace of the whole world.
43.	We shall continue to pursue detente and co-operation with our neighbours in the East. We shall continue to do everything in our power to help build a world order of peace in which nations, conscious of their interdependence, will work together as partners and human rights, the civil and political just as much as the economic, social and cultural rights, will be enjoyed by all.
44.	At this moment the eyes of the whole world are on Geneva, the venue of the negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union on strategic arms reduction and intermediate-range nuclear forces.
45.	My Government welcomes the new American proposals for the intermediate-range negotiations which President Reagan outlined in his address to the Assembly on 26 September. We hope they will make possible at least an interim result in those negotiations before the end of the year. The United States has proposed the total renunciation of all American and Soviet land-based intermediate-range missiles. That remains our goal. Only such a result could render superfluous the deployment of Western missiles scheduled for the end of 1983. The key to that lies in Moscow. The Government and citizens of the Federal Republic of Germany and all nations of Europe and Asia long for nothing more ardently than the attainment of that goal.
46.	We do not want to be constantly exposed to the threat of Soviet intermediate-range missiles. We shall not accept a Soviet monopoly of land-based missiles. As the Soviet Union does not at present seem willing to forgo that weapons system completely, we pin our hope on an interim agreement that would limit Soviet and United States missiles of this type to the lowest possible number.
47.	The new Western proposals have opened up that possibility. They take account of Soviet interests and considerations. I appeal to the Soviet Union not to let the opportunity to achieve a concrete result pass. I appeal to the Soviet Union not to block the intermediate-range nuclear forces negotiations any longer by insisting that the British and French systems be included.
48.	The Soviet Union should take careful note of what has been said by President Mitterrand and the British Foreign Secretary and also the Chinese Foreign Minister about taking into account and limiting strategic systems in terms of arms control policy.
49.	We must view these disarmament negotiations at Geneva in the overall context of East-West relations. The fact that today the West and East are engaged in such intensive and comprehensive negotiations on confidence- building, arms control and disarmament is encouraging. We have never doubted that the military aspects of security pose the most difficult problems in the detente process, but the settlement of these issues is indispensable for real detente and for the development of a durable peace order in Europe.
50.	Chancellor Kohl has reaffirmed that we recognize the Soviet Union's need for security in the light of history. We want for ourselves no more, but also no less, than equal recognition of our own security interests.
51.	The process of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe offers one of the most promising opportunities for resolving or reducing East-West problems through mutual understanding and compromise and for carrying out common tasks through co-operation. That Conference has linked human rights and human contacts with the process of detente and economic cooperation. It has become a matter which concerns not only governments but peoples as well. We made every effort to ensure that the follow-up meeting at Madrid took place in spite of critical international developments and that it was assiduously continued and eventually concluded at the ministerial level.
52.	The result of that meeting shows our endeavours to have been worth while. The net woven by the Final Act of Helsinki2 has held up under many heavy strains. Now the Concluding Document of the Madrid meeting has brought important progress. It makes allowance for the interests of the people and for questions of co-operation, security and confidence-building. Now the aim must be to translate these results into practice and to let the positive impulses generated at Madrid give impetus to the disarmament negotiations also.
53.	The Conference on Confidence- and Security-building Measures and Disarmament in Europe due to begin at Stockholm on 17 January 1984 will for the first time open the whole of Europe, from the Atlantic to the Urals, to arms control. Military stability in the field of conventional forces in Europe can become a reality only if confidence-building measures and arms control encompass all European territory. Thus that Conference is a necessary complement to the Vienna negotiations on mutual and balanced force reductions, which cover only central Europe.
54.	In the first phase of negotiations the Conference will seek agreement on verifiable confidence-building measures to reduce the danger of a conventional surprise attack in Europe. A further phase of the Conference could lead on to disarmament negotiations proper. The sooner stability in the conventional sphere is established at the lowest possible level of forces, the sooner it will become possible also to reduce nuclear capabilities in Europe step by step on the basis of agreements. We must remain constantly aware of this broad perspective. Disarmament directed towards the establishment of equilibrium is the aim of German peace policy. We want to achieve peace with ever fewer weapons.
55.	Speaking on behalf of the new German Government formed after the March elections, Chancellor Kohl said that we would consistently pursue the policy of understanding, detente and co-operation with our Eastern neighbours on the basis of the treaties concluded in the seventies. That policy is designed for the long term. We shall continue our efforts to infuse those treaties with life.
56.	We are convinced that positive developments in the political and economic relations between West and East can facilitate the settlement of the difficult security issues. Economic co-operation brings stability to East-West relations. We want neither a trade war nor any misuse of economic relations as a disciplinary instrument. That applies in relation to all countries.
57.	We want to expand consistently our relations with the Soviet Union in the long term and improve their quality. We are conscious of the importance of German- Soviet relations for East-West relations. But this policy cannot be a one-way street. Chancellor Kohl said in his policy statement on 5 May 1983 that we judge the will for co-operation of the Soviet Union's leaders by the extent to which they actually help to reduce and eliminate all impediments.
58.	We wish to keep on developing our relations with our other Eastern neighbours also. Europe does not stop at the Elbe. Europe has a common history and a common future. All of us in Europe can gain from progress in detente and in co-operation, but we can all only lose through confrontation.
59.	Constructive development in East-West relations is greatly influenced by the relationship between the two German States. The Germans in West and East have a common responsibility towards peace in Europe, and the Governments of the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic must constantly be aware of that responsibility. We share the conviction that Germany must never again be a source of war but that it should rather generate impulses for peace.
60.	The treaty between the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic laid the foundation for the development of comprehensive cooperation. We Germans in West and East must have the ambition not to be outdone by anyone else when it comes to putting into practice the Final Act of Helsinki and the declaration of Madrid. A peaceful and stable situation in and around Berlin is crucial both for German-German relations and for East-West relations as a whole.
61.	Co-operation between the two German States strengthens the cohesion of the nation. Our aim is to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will regain its unity through free self-determination. Our aim is to work for a peace order in the whole of Europe that is characterized by trust and comprehensive cooperation.
62.	All countries concerned must make their contribution to detente and co-operation between West and East. This means the following. The political dialogue between West and East must not stop; indeed it must be intensified precisely when the going is rough, and this applies in particular to the dialogue between the two super-Powers. My Government regrets that Foreign Minister Gromyko is not attending this session of the General Assembly. We strongly advocate a summit meeting between President Reagan and General Secretary Andropov and welcome the readiness of the United States to attend such a meeting.
63.	Co-operation in all spheres consolidates peace. Disarmament negotiations cannot bear fruit in a climate of confrontation, nor can they be conducted in a vacuum. They need to have a place in the framework of constructive East-West relations. This calls for a willingness to see and appreciate the other side's interests, needs, fears and problems. Presenting each other as demons poisons the international atmosphere. Reason, clear-headedness and cool calculation are indispensable.
64.	All nations, in the West and in the East, must adhere strictly to the principle of the renunciation of force, as they have promised in the Charter of the United Nations and in the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, to the extent that they are signatories. This includes the exercise of moderation in the pursuit of one's own interests. Referring to the further development of the concept of the renunciation of force, Chancellor Kohl, during his visit to Moscow on 4 July 1983, said that a further binding renewal of the prohibition of the use of force "can help improve the international situation if it actually prevents the threat of force and stops it where it is still being used",
65.	We do not want war, either a nuclear or a conventional one. President Reagan is right; a nuclear war cannot be won and must never be fought.
66.	All countries must contribute to arms control and disarmament directed towards the establishment of an equilibrium, and all countries must be willing to help establish tangible confidence-building measures. Transparency and verifiability must be translated into concrete measures.
67.	All nations, in the West and in the East, must discharge the obligation to keep the East-West confrontation out of the third world. There is no longer any future in hegemony or in spheres of influence, either in Europe or elsewhere in the world. We must all contribute to a peaceful settlement of the conflicts in Asia, Africa and Latin America. Economic development and the elimination of hunger and want in the third world brook no further delay. It is not the export of weapons but development co-operation that is urgently needed. Only if disarmament produces a stable equilibrium between East and West at the lowest possible level of armaments will East and West be able to make the necessary contribution to the global tasks of the future: the development of the third world and the preservation of the natural basis of life on our planet. My country is conscious of its responsibility concerning peace, development and environmental protection. We are playing our part in the efforts to accomplish these tasks.
68.	The principles guiding our co-operation with third world countries are clear: we respect the right of all nations to independence and self-determination; we support genuine non-alignment, which we see as a stabilizing element of international relations; we plead the cause of the renunciation of force world-wide and support the peaceful settlement of conflicts; we are helping to eliminate hunger and want everywhere in the world; and we are striving for progress in the global exercise of human rights, since without this nations will find no lasting peace, internally or in their external relations.
69.	At its thirty-eighth session the General Assembly will be debating a number of crises. The most urgent problem to be solved in safeguarding world peace is unchanged: that of a comprehensive and equitable peace settlement in the Middle East. In Lebanon the bloodshed and the suffering of the civilian population must be ended without delay and the way to national reconciliation reopened. Reconciliation is essential for the independence, sovereignty and unity of Lebanon. The peace process in the wider Israeli-Arab Middle East conflict must be resumed. The right of self-determination of the Palestinian people must be recognized, as must the right of all nations in the region, including Israel, to live within secure and recognized boundaries.
70.	We appeal to Iraq and Iran to stop the war in the Gulf that has claimed so many lives on both sides.
71.	The Cyprus question exemplifies attempts by the United Nations to help resolve conflicts by peaceful means. My Government supports the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus. It supports all efforts by the Secretary-General to ensure the regular pursuit of intercommunal talks.
72.	The continuing Soviet occupation of Afghanistan and the Vietnamese intervention in Cambodia place a particularly heavy strain on international relations. The Soviet Union and Viet Nam must cease their resistance to the demand of the entire world that they withdraw their forces. Concerning the Cambodian question, we support the recent appeal by the members of the Association of South-East Asian Nations in all respects. Afghanistan is a touchstone of Soviet will do to recognize the independence of third world nations, to respect their desire for non-alignment and not to seek a position of dominance.
73.	The peaceful settlement of the conflicts in the Horn of Africa, Western Sahara and southern Africa is urgently needed. International efforts to secure Namibia's independence must at long last be brought to a successful conclusion on the basis of Security Council resolution 435 (1978). As a member of the Western contact group, the Federal Republic of Germany has been playing an active part in these efforts for a number of years and will not relax its efforts. We welcome the Secretary-General's initiative in this respect and promise him our full support. In the Republic of South Africa, the policy of apartheid, which is inimical to the very notion of human rights, must at long last be ended.
74.	It is only by peaceful means that the political, economic and social conflicts currently convulsing Central America can be resolved. Here too we are ready to help in so far as we can to bring stability to that region. We see a possibility for regional co-operation between the European Community and the nations of that region. We strongly support the peace initiative of the Contadora Group.
75.	The worsening conflicts in Asia, Africa and Latin America are accompanied by an increasing arms build-up in those parts of the world. Military spending in the third world has quadrupled over the past 20 years and today accounts for one quarter of the global military expenditure. Thus arms control and disarmament are becoming increasingly urgent tasks for many regions of the third world also. Confidence-building measures are indispensable for the third world too. An international symposium held in the Federal Republic of Germany in the spring called for such measures in order to defuse tensions in the third world. Within the Disarmament Commission our work on the list of guidelines for confidence-building measures continues.
76.	Regional co-operation is an effective and promising concept for the promotion of peace and stability in the world. My Government sees tit as the best way of safeguarding and strengthening the political and economic independence of the developing countries. The European Community is a model for a regional grouping in which all members have equal rights. It has long been a factor of stability in Europe and in the world. Through cooperation agreements with regional groupings in the third world it has created a model for future co-operation between industrial and developing countries. The Lom6 Convention which links the European Community with African, Caribbean and Pacific States, and the successful co-operation between the European Community and ASEAN testify to this.
77.	According to the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, international co-operation should also serve to ensure the protection of human rights. Innocent people are still being held, tortured and murdered in prisons. Individuals are still the object of discrimination merely on account of their colour or their religion. Many millions of people, principally in the third world, are still having to live in conditions of poverty that are unworthy of the human race. These pictures of violence, injustice and misery illustrate the challenge. They show how much still has to be done to make human rights a reality.
78.	The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights must not remain mere declarations. They must become a reality. We support the proposal for the appointment of a high commissioner for human rights. We call upon the family of nations, conscious of the good done by the European Court of Human Rights, to agree on the institution of a court of human rights of the United Nations. We hope that the next session of the General Assembly, acting on the basis of the report submitted by the Commission on Human Rights, will approve our proposed optional protocol for die abolition of capital punishment. A convention affording protection against torture is urgently needed.
79.	Among the important creative tasks of the United Nations in the Held of law is that of formulating the right to development. We support the current work of the Commission ca Human Rights in this field.
80.	The refugee situation is one of the most pressing problems of our time. It demonstrates how closely human rights are tied up with peace. Millions of refugees mean not only human misery a million times over. This trend endangers the political and economic stability of the overburdened receiving countries and is a threat to peace.
81.	As the Secretary-General explained in his report on the work of the Organization the refugee problem can only be resolved if the underlying political causes are removed. It was  mark of progress when, at the initiative of my country, the General Assembly included in the agenda of its thirty-fifth session an item concerning international preventive measures to avoid new flows of refugees. We must now develop a system of concrete measures so that the United Nations can take timely action to prevent new flows.
82.	The economic and social development of the third world is only possible if world peace is safeguarded. Development needs peace, but, conversely, peace needs development. For the sake of world peace all energy must be devoted to the task of economic development in the third world. That is also a vital self-interest of the industrialized countries. The world economy is gradually overcoming the worst recession since the thirties. Nowhere has that recession had such devastating consequences as in the third world. In the African countries with low incomes, the situation of many people has become desperate. And even in Latin America, per capita incomes have dropped sharply in the past two years.
83. The development process now needs to be started up again and accelerated everywhere in the third world. The international community as a whole must help. The industrialized countries of the East, too, must finally meet their responsibilities. Belief in the success of the development process needs to be revitalized. 86. How great the difficulties are is reflected in the discussions at the annual meeting of the World Bank and IMF in Washington. But neither can we afford to resign ourselves to the situation, nor would such resignation be justified. The incipient upswing in the industrialized countries must be harnessed to the needs of the third world. Energy prices have become more stable. Interest rates, though still high, are distinctly below the 1981/82 peak. Every per cent less in Eurodollar interest rates saves the developing countries over two billion dollars in interest payments a year. World trade is showing signs of picking up again. Rising commodity prices mean bigger export earnings for many developing countries. The industrial democracies must maintain their economic growth without rekindling inflation. This still cannot be done without reducing budget deficits. One per cent or less growth in the industrialized countries can be instrumental in determining the success or failure of the developing countries' own efforts.
87.	This places an additional responsibility on the industrialized countries to ensure lasting, non-inflationary growth. Widespread North-South co-operation must afford direct support to the development process. The international flow of capital to the developing countries must now scrupulously be maintained and extended. Development requires—and this applies at any time—an inflow of capital and foreign exchange. To the least developed countries, official development aid is crucial. In recent years this aid has accounted for 84 per cent of capital inflows.
88.	In the case of the advanced developing countries, on the other hand, the problem of easing the external debt is the prime concern. With a volume of some 700 billion dollars and an annual interest burden amounting to 50 billion dollars, the debt of the developing countries has assumed dramatic proportions. Co-operation between IMF and development and commercial banks, as well as between the governments of debtor and creditor countries, must be intensified. The commercial banks must be ready to provide even more loans. The World Bank, IMF and the regional development banks must make their contribution, and to do so they must receive the necessary funds from their member countries. The ability of these proven institutions to function must be preserved if the basic conditions for the economic recovery of the third world and of the world as a whole are not to be placed in jeopardy.
89.	Rescheduling must allow for special individual circumstances and take place within the scope of sensible stabilization programmes. More effective measures are needed to counter protectionism. Commodity markets and the earnings from commodity exports must be stabilized. By means of such measures, coupled with resolute adjustment policies on the part of the developing countries, the present crisis can be overcome and the development process consolidated and energetically continued.
90.	To ensure the success of development efforts, the industrial countries must not only keep their markets open to exports from developing countries, but widen them. Protectionist policies in relation to the developing countries are tantamount to refusing development. East-South trade must also be intensified. The industrialized state- trading nations of Eastern Europe account for only four per cent of exports from developing countries, whereas the market economy industrial countries absorb 67 per cent. Thus, the Western industrialized countries import more than sixteen times as much from the developing countries as the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance countries, although they have only about twice their population. CMEA's economic planning is therefore, obviously, of a protectionist character.
91.	It is time the East European industrial countries created wider possibilities for imports from developing countries. Only thus will they meet their responsibility towards the third world. Helping those countries in their development is a dictate of peace and, especially in relation to the poorest nations, an expression of global solidarity.
92.	Yet it can never be more than an aid towards self- help. The key to successful development lies ultimately in the economic and social policies of the third world nations themselves. Here it will be important to draw on the experience of three development decades.
93.	The economic co-operation of the Federal Republic of Germany is concentrated on four main areas: rural development; the development of conventional and renewable sources of energy; education, particularly vocational and primary education; and environmental protection. 
94.	We attach special importance to support for UNFPA. It is now widely recognized that too rapid a population growth can be too great a burden on the development process; it can drag it down and stifle it. Official development aid must be complemented by private direct investment in the third world and by cooperation between companies in the developed and industrialized countries. In the third world, too, private in vestment must become one of the hubs of growth.
95.	The mutual desire of North and South to re-establish stable growth and development calls for a continuous dialogue between North and South at all levels. The sixth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, at Belgrade, proved disappointing in some ways, yet the many resolutions adopted indicate that North and South place their faith in co-operation. That consensus must be the basis for further co-operation. The launching of global negotiations must not be put off any longer. The participants in the International Meeting on Co-operation and Development, at Cancun, came out in favour of them. Now words must be followed by deeds. Global negotiations must be complemented by smaller but, at the same time, representative bodies. The Cancun meeting clearly brought more objectivity into the North- South dialogue. It will continue to require impulsion at the highest political level.
96.	Preserving the natural basis of life on an Earth that has become smaller is a task that will be crucial for the future of mankind.
97.	In Europe the forests are dying. In other regions of the world the deserts and steppes are spreading; the land is becoming barren. The air is becoming more and more polluted; the ecological balance of lakes and rivers, even of the oceans, is in jeopardy. The ecosystems of tropical regions, too, are particularly sensitive, and many developing countries have suffered environmental damage, which at the same time does great harm to the economy. Therefore, environmental protection must already be an integral part of any development strategy.
98.	Long-term damage resulting from the indifferent- worse, irresponsible—use of natural resources spells danger for the existence of the whole of mankind.
99.	Global environmental problems can be solved only through close international co-operation. Protection of the environment is a major objective of the Federal Republic of Germany, both at home and in other parts of the world. We are co-operating for the protection of the environment with other industrial countries in the European Community, the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development and the Economic Commission for Europe. In 1984 a conference is to be held at Munich at which all nations of Western and Eastern Europe, as well as the United States and Canada—that is, all members of the Commission—will tackle the problems connected with dying forests and the ecosystems of national and international waters.
100.	Part of our bilateral development co-operation is to help the third world countries solve their environmental problems. Our aim is to bring all development projects into harmony with their respective environments.
101.	In regard to the environmental protection programme of the United Nations it is important to note the following.
102.	There must be no lasting North-South gap in terms of environmental protection.
103.	Environmental pollution must not be transferred to the third world.
104.	Environmental protection and economic co-operation must be linked in such a way that ecological aspects are always taken into account when implementing development projects.
105.	A pool of experts must be available to third world countries, which can request their assistance through UNEP in the planning, implementation and evaluation of environmental projects.
106.	The training and advisory services available to nations of the third world must be expanded to cover environmental aspects. This applies in particular to food and water supply problems.
107.	The community of nations must use the world's natural resources rationally and in a manner compatible with the environment.
108.	We want all men to be able to live in a world without fear, without force, without want. We realize that in order to build such a world we require a strong world organization. Hence we must all, together, give the United Nations that strength.
109.	We say to the Secretary-General: "We stand by your side. We support your efforts to make the United Nations the focal point of global co-operation through which conflicts can be resolved by peaceful means and the great common tasks accomplished."
110.	The world is at the crossroads. It must decide between international anarchy, confrontation and the use of force, and co-operation between equals for the sake of peace, freedom and progress.
111.	Only if we all act in accordance with the principles of the Charter, only if the right to the self-determination of nations and human rights are realized everywhere, only if the renunciation of force, disarmament, development and protection of the natural environment are seen as our common task, will mankind survive.
 


 Mr. President, thank you very much for your kind words of welcome. For the first time since the Federal Republic of Germany became a Member of the United Nations its President has the great privilege of addressing this world forum.
3.	Ten years ago the Federal Republic of Germany became a Member of the United Nations. My visit today is a mark of the high esteem which the United Nations enjoys in the Federal Republic of Germany. At the same time it underscores a great importance which my country attaches to close co-operation with the United Nations in the pursuit of peace and justice.
4.	From the very outset the goal of the Federal Republic of Germany has been peace. This policy is an expression of our political conviction, which stems from the bitter experience of two world wars in one century.
5.	This policy also has its roots in the tradition of German philosophers and thinkers who saw peace as the basis for the well-being of every nation. Two hundred years ago one of the great German philosophers, Immanuel Kant of Koenigsberg, described the preconditions for a world order in a treatise which reflects his deep insight into man's nature. The citizen of the world, as Kant called him, is the starting point and the goal, as it were, the subject and the object of politics and law. Kant saw a close link between a State's internal constitution and its foreign policy. A State's internal constitution, its legal system, is also bound to affect its conduct in relation to others. By the same token, injustice in matters of foreign policy poses a serious threat to the State's internal structure.
6.	Throughout history mankind has longed for and dreamed of peace and justice, but to this day the reality is, unfortunately, different. Throughout the centuries, right down to the present day, the world has been torn by war and conflict. Today, the United Nations is the great hope of mankind. Imperfect though it may be, there is no alternative to the United Nations. My country has learnt from the terrible experience of two world wars. We have chosen the path of reconciliation and mutual understanding.
7.	Today, the Federal Republic of Germany is a member of the European Community. The enemies of yesterday have become the friends and partners of today. The European Community is a unique example of what common ideals and common aims can achieve for the benefit of more than 300 million Europeans and all the 62 third world countries that are linked with us within the framework of the Lome Convention.
8.	The Federal Republic of Germany is also a member of the Atlantic alliance which links Western Europe with the United States and Canada. This community safeguards peace in our part of the world, which so often in the past has been the battlefield of conflicting power interests. The Atlantic alliance differs from the military pacts of former times by virtue of its defensive character and the identity of shared values, such as peace, equality, democracy and respect for the rights of the individual.
9.	For over 30 years we have owed peace and security in Europe to this alliance. Peace in Europe, may I add, is not an exclusively European affair. The state of peace we Europeans have been able to enjoy for more than three decades has also placed us in a position to develop and extend our economic relations with the nations of the third world, with the objective of promoting the economic and social development of those countries for the sake of their citizens.
10.	The treaties which the Federal Republic of Germany has concluded with its Eastern neighbours have helped to reduce tensions in Europe and opened the way for new forms of co-operation on our continent. The Federal Republic of Germany attaches great importance to continuing dialogue and peaceful co-operation with the countries of Eastern Europe. The 1975 Final Act of Helsinki' and the process it initiated have revitalized the concept and the ideal of human rights, the desire for closer human contacts and the intent to reduce tensions between East and West.
11.	The agreements between the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic have paved the way for closer co-operation between the two States on German soil. We see that co-operation as an element of and a means of strengthening the bonds between the people in divided Germany. It remains our political aim to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will regain its unity through free self-determination. The boundary which cuts Germany in two, the wall that runs right through our old capital of Berlin, cannot be the final word of history.
12.	Disarmament and arms control leading to balance at the lowest possible level are one of the foremost objectives of the German peace policy. At many conference tables our Governments are striving for a reduction of armaments. To achieve this what we need above all is mutual confidence. That is why the Federal Republic of Germany sets so much store by confidence-building measures that lead to greater transparency and control. The first significant results to this end were achieved in the Final Act of Helsinki. The Conference on Confidence- and Security-building Measures and Disarmament in Europe, as envisaged in the Concluding Document of the Madrid follow-up meeting to the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe and scheduled for Stockholm early in 1984, will be another important step in this direction. My country hopes and works for real, substantial results in this Held which is so important to us all. Positive results will make peace safer throughout the world. The Federal Republic of Germany, for its part, renounced many years ago the production and possession of nuclear, biological and chemical weapons. I wish others would follow this example.
13.	Since the 1950s, close co-operation with the nations of the third world has been one of the pillars of our foreign policy. We believe in solidarity and partnership. We respect the right of every nation to choose its own path into the future and to safeguard its independence. It was from a sense of responsibility that the Federal Republic of Germany took part in the International Meeting on Co-operation and Development at Cancun in October 1981. We had hoped it would produce more than it has so far. One of the reasons for the unsatisfactory progress in this sphere is no doubt the critical world economic situation. However, we shall not relax our efforts in pursuit of a constructive North-South dialogue.
14.	My country's accession to the United Nations ten years ago was a question of political logic and a result of our conviction that we would thus be serving the cause of peace. It was also an expression of our willingness to participate in global co-operation and to assume worldwide responsibilities. This is exemplified by our membership in the Security Council in 1977 and 1978.
15.	From the very beginning the Federal Republic of Germany conceived its membership of this world Organization as service for human rights. We strongly support efforts to reinforce the protection of human rights and to ensure that they can be exercised. This was the purpose of our proposals for the universal abolition of the death penalty, the adoption of preventive measures against the emergence of new flows of refugees and for a convention against the taking of hostages. The reality which we experience every day is depressing and is a long way from the goals to which we all feel committed. Yet we must not relax our efforts to secure respect for the inalienable rights of every individual, irrespective of his religious or political convictions, his origin or race. Here is an important task for the world Organization. The respect which a State enjoys must depend on the freedom of its citizens and not on the strength of its weapons.
16.	There is also a deep gulf between the idea of global peace and the reality of a world full of conflict and violence. In his last annual report as Secretary-General, in 1961, Dag Hammarskjold said:
"A failure to gain respect for decisions or actions of the Organization within the terms of the Charter is often called a failure for the Organization. It would seem more correct to regard it as a failure of the world community, through its Member nations and in particular those most directly concerned, to co-operate in order, step by step, to make the Charter a living reality in practical political action as it is already in law."
17.	It is not sufficient for us simply to regret that not much has changed since those words were spoken. You, Mr. Secretary-General, indicated in your report on the work of the Organization to the thirty-seventh session how the instrument of the United Nations can be used more effectively to achieve the goal of collective security. The Federal Republic of Germany supports your proposals.
18.	We continue to have an obligation to mankind not to spare any effort to achieve the goals of the Charter of the United Nations, no matter how difficult and toilsome the path may be. The moral leadership of the United Nations and the universal acceptance of its decisions and resolutions will be decisively enhanced the more they are seen as an expression of justice and political wisdom.
19.	The United Nations plays a major role in the elaboration of new rules of international conduct and in the further development of international law. International law binds everyone, weak and strong alike. There is a natural tension between sovereignty of the individual States and the concept of universality. Here lies one of the major tasks of the world Organization, namely to seek a balance between the interests of the individual Member State and the well-founded rights of the whole international community.
20.	I firmly believe that the course of history will lead away from short-sighted, egocentric power politics. Hegemonic aspirations, the desire to dominate others, have no future in this world. Ever more countries regard themselves as members of a world community with equal rights and equal opportunities. It is politically wise to promote this development with energy and patience.
21.	We Germans endeavour to understand other nations, their culture and their history and to establish links with them. This applies not only to North and South America, to which millions of Germans emigrated and with whose new home countries we today have many economic and cultural ties. It also holds true for the Far East, whose languages and cultures have fascinated our writers and philosophers no less than the languages and cultures of the Near and 'Middle East, where the origins of European civilization are to be found. Equally, it holds true for Africa with whom we have close bonds of friendship. Tolerance is the key word for international co-operation and for understanding among nations.
22.	Many years of experience in public life and inter-national affairs have convinced me that, as in private life, tolerance is also indispensable in relations between States. Tolerance in the international sphere implies respect for the historical and cultural identity of every nation and its political, economic and social needs. The Federal Republic of Germany, in whose name I have the honour to speak today, is willing, as the Charter says, "to practice tolerance and live together in peace with one another as good neighbours".
23.	I wish the United Nations endurance and success in its pursuit of peace. The aim of preserving peace and the hopes which mankind places in the world Organization deserve our every effort.


﻿30.	It is a great honour for me to address the Assembly.
31.	Since the United Nations was founded—and I have not forgotten that France was at San Francisco as one of the founding Members—it has filled an essential role. Whatever results it may or may not have achieved, it has remained the one place where, in spite of set-backs and the eternal temptation to use force, peaceful solutions have been tirelessly sought. Through the testimony of that search and that perseverance it has become the symbol of all that is best in the international community .
32.	I should like to pay a tribute, Mr. President, to the wisdom of the thirty-eighth session which, in electing you to preside over it, has underlined the important place occupied today by Panama, and also by Latin America.
33.	It is my pleasure to reaffirm here the confidence of France in the Secretary-General; I have already met Mm several times in Paris, and my country has had the opportunity to appreciate his impartiality and talent and the high-minded approach he takes to his duties. The report he presented to the Assembly last year remains fresh in our memories. Like this year's report, it contained suggestions concerning the role of the Security Council, the reduction of tension, regional conflicts, disarmament, human rights and economic and social development, suggestions which I would solemnly endorse. It is on the subjects of disarmament and development that I shall now address the Assembly.
34.	For more than 30 years a de facto peace based upon deterrence has prevailed between the great Powers of the northern hemisphere, whereas in various corners of the world conflicts have proliferated. There have been more than 100 such conflicts during this period. However, up to the 1970s, the world had the feeling that it was making progress—difficult progress, uncertain progress, but nevertheless progress towards a less chaotic universe where, it was thought, underdevelopment would be overcome and peace would gain ground in the south as in the north. We now see that the gap is growing wider between the rich, who are growing ever richer in spite of the crisis, and the poor, who are growing ever poorer because of the crisis. Passing from one state of imbalance to another, the arms race is accelerating. Human rights are still being trampled under foot. All too many conflicts remain unresolved. One crisis succeeds another and each gives rise to another—economic, monetary, strategic and cultural. Before our very eyes the world is being remade by blood and the sword; might responds to might, and weakness entails further weakness.
35.	Are we to despair of the efforts that have been made to find solutions for the problems of our world other than domination, violence or war? If the words uttered from this rostrum have any meaning, we cannot resign ourselves to that. Poverty and war are not inexorable, but the inevitable result of a false logic that we must join together to defeat. More than ever we need to realize that this must be done, at a time when fate is making a dramatic choice between peace and war.
36.	Yet, what could be more simple than the hopes of the peoples of the world—hopes centred on food, clothing, shelter, a free life, freedom from fear, access to knowledge, security of ownership and the ability to pass possessions on to one's children? However legitimate such hopes may be, are they, I should like to ask, too much to ask for?
37.	Each of us, I believe, is convinced that the consequences of a new world war would be incalculable, perhaps irrevocable. But peace between nations can be maintained only on the basis of a genuine equilibrium. That is the lesson of history. It is through respect for this golden rule that the rights of all to independence and security are reconciled. To establish these equilibriums, or to re-establish them when they have been disturbed, to guarantee their stability, to reduce forces gradually to a lower and lower level, and to provide for continuous monitoring of the information provided—that is the only possible approach to the problems that confront us.
38.	In the recent past the negotiations between the Soviets and Americans on strategic arms limitation, known as SALT, have made it possible to limit certain technological developments and to slow down the qualitative strategic arms race, but at the same time we have seen a rapid development of the destructive capacity of these weapons, multiplication of the number of their warheads and improvements in their accuracy.
39.	Thus the two great Powers, which each possess a central nuclear system of 2,000 to 3,000 delivery vehicles carrying 8,000 to 9,000 warheads, can attack each other and destroy each other—if I may so put it—seven to eight times over.
40.	One set of negotiations under way at Geneva is attempting to bring about a reduction of strategic intercontinental weapons with a view to bringing about a balance between American and Soviet armaments. France hopes that these negotiations will be successful, but for the time being world attention is focused on another set of negotiations, those dealing with what are known as intermediate nuclear forces. I should like to make my views on this subject absolutely clear.
41.	As a result of continuous escalation on both sides on the ground in Europe, a new situation has come about in which today in our continent the Soviet Union alone possesses a considerable intermediate nuclear force of three-headed missiles which are mobile and accurate, with a range of about 5,000 kilometres, which, since they cannot cross the Atlantic, consequently have as their only possible target the nations of Western Europe. The same reasoning applies to the missiles installed in the Asian part of the Soviet Union, aimed at the States bordering on that region. France welcomed as a very positive act the opening at Geneva of negotiations between the Soviet Union and the United States on weapons of this type, after the latter, in compliance with the twofold decision taken by the member States of the integrated North Atlantic Treaty Organization command—a body to which France does not belong—made plans to install Pershing II missiles and cruise missiles in various European countries at the end of this year.
42.	I shall not here go into all the aspects of a debate which I have dealt with elsewhere and which does not involve France directly even if it concerns it. But I should like to make my country's position clear in the face of the request that its nuclear weapons be included with a view to a Euromissile balance of some kind. In this respect I recall that France, for a quarter of a century now, has possessed a nuclear deterrent force, defensive by its very nature, against any possible nuclear aggressor. That force forms a whole and constitutes for my country a central defence system essential to its security. A few figures will demonstrate its defensive character: each of the two major Powers today possesses 8,000 to 9,000 Warheads; France, for its part, possesses 98.1 am sure that is enough for our own deterrent, but it excludes the possibility of any other use. These 98 missiles are, furthermore, part of a strategic concept and not a tactical one, nor an intermediate concept, if we are to use the extremely precise vocabulary used by the Soviets and the Americans when discussing their own affairs.
43.	Moreover, it would be paradoxical to have my own country depend on the results of a conference in which it is not participating and which, without its consent, would be debating strategic weapons, particularly underwater weapons, which neither the Americans nor the Russians, who possess many more of them, are debating among themselves, at least in that conference.
44.	We can only compare what is comparable. The idea of weighing the central weapons system on which the independence and survival of my country rest against the intermediate nuclear forces of the two major Powers, which for them constitute a mere supplement to their formidable strategic arsenal, is unacceptable. Since in fact this is a request by the Soviet Union, on what grounds can that country expect France to give up something essential, namely its own national defence? Of course we are told—and I am prepared to believe it—that this is not the aim of the request. Of course we are promised that the inclusion of the French force at Geneva will in no way lead to its reduction. But if France were to enter into a calculation it has nothing to do with, would it not be running the risk of having the modernization of its means of defence placed under the control of others? Would it not be taking on a responsibility which it rejects, that of disrupting the world balance?
45.	My country is independent. Its deterrent force obeys the orders of the President of the Republic alone. Its loyalty to the Atlantic alliance does not affect its autonomy. It respects the great Russian people and wishes to maintain the age-old good relations linking us. It has neither the intention nor the means—and it does not wish for them—to impose its law by force of arms. It possesses weapons for its own defence, no more, no less. It would not understand a monopoly of intermediate nuclear forces in Europe being agreed to for the Soviet Union in particular, which is the case today, and it hopes that mutual concessions between the two Geneva partners will make it possible to end that monopoly, while creating conditions for a new balance, which I fervently hope for. This presupposes a continued tireless search for a midpoint from which we shall be able to see whether preference has been given to reduction of tensions rather than to their exacerbation.
46.	However, since we must consider the whole picture, we must not forget that several conflicts, the direct or indirect results of the policy of blocs, or stirred up or aggravated by such a policy, are giving rise to concern.
47.	The unjustifiable destruction of a South Korean civilian aircraft by a Soviet military aircraft leads us to deplore the contempt for moral standards and the tragic absence of laws strong enough to make the perpetration of such an act impossible. I hope that France's proposals to ICAO will finally be heeded.
48.	But beyond this event, how many unacceptable situations exist, how many countries are occupied or threatened by foreign armies and how many peoples on all continents are prevented from choosing their own destiny, from Central America to South-East Asia, through Africa, the Middle East, central Asia and not forgetting Europe Let us stop; the list would be long. I am also thinking of these men and women throughout the world, in exile, refugees, political prisoners, victims of torture, those whose most elementary rights are flouted. On this latter point, surely the international community has been too sparing in its protests and sanctions, and finally has it not resigned itself to these crimes?
With regard to the former point, has it shown enough intransigence whenever a people has been threatened or has lost the right to self-determination? This is a principle which brooks no exception. Where it is possible, why do we not envisage a process of disengagement which would confer a status of neutrality, once these three conditions are met—the will of the State concerned, the evacuation of foreign forces and the solemn undertaking not to interfere in other countries—under the supervision of the Security Council?
49.	But I should like to dwell on two conflicts in which France is involved: the conflict in Lebanon and the conflict in Chad. In Lebanon, the French are present as soldiers of peace, first within a United Nations force, the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, and later with three other countries at the request of the Lebanese Government, as part of a multinational force in Beirut to act as a buffer between the opposing forces there. Has it been forgotten that France contributed to the dignified departure of the Palestinian soldiers and then to protecting the survivors of the tragic Sabra and Shatila camps? We regarded this mission as an honour and we fulfilled it. As for the situation recently created by the partial withdrawal of the Israeli Army and by the new increase in lethal fighting involving civilian and foreign forces, we have tackled this task by placing ourselves at the service of peace. I proclaim loudly from this rostrum: France has no enemy in Lebanon. It is protecting its nationals, as it must. That is all. Its wish is for the Lebanese to manage to overcome their divisions within the framework of their institutions and respect for their legitimate authorities, for Lebanon to regain its independence, sovereignty and unity and for the United Nations to broaden its mission as soon as possible, if necessary, in line with the proposals of relevant leaders. Departure of the foreign armies will make it unnecessary to maintain an international security force.
50.	As regards Chad, we went to that country at a time when it was the victim of external aggression, at the request of the Government recognized by the international community and in accordance with Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations and Security Council resolution 387 (1976). Our efforts today are aimed at mediation, and as a matter of priority mediation by the Organization of African Unity making possible a cease-fire between the opposing parties and the opening of negotiations the primary purpose of which would be to guarantee the integrity of Chad and the withdrawal of foreign armies. Then, I assure the Assembly, France will not delay by one hour the repatriation of its troops. I have mentioned the OAU, thus indicating France's interest in regional efforts, which are an excellent way of dealing with the conflicts. I could have praised, in this regard, the action undertaken in another part of the world by the Contadora Group, and I can think of many other examples.
51.	It is time, at this stage of my statement, to come back to strategic nuclear armaments in the world. We cannot reject the idea—and I do not—that the five nuclear Powers should together debate, when the time comes, a permanent limitation of their strategic systems. We must therefore set out clearly the conditions for progress in this field.
52.	The first of these conditions is the correction of the fundamental difference, in terms of type and quantity, between the armaments of the two major Powers and those of the others, and the difference between a country that might use them to assert its power and a country which might be forced to make use of them for its own survival.
53.	The second condition flows from the wide gap between conventional forces, particularly in Europe, a gap which has become even wider, I fear, because of the existence of chemical and biological weapons, the manufacture and stockpiling of which must be prohibited by a convention.
54.	The third condition is the cessation of the escalation in anti-missile, anti-submarine and anti-satellite weapons.
55.	It is also essential to safeguard peoples against threats from space. Is space to become an additional Held for the limitless development of the old earthly antagonisms? Space is surely by its very essence the common heritage of mankind, as the Earth itself should be. It would be a betrayal of the interests of our peoples if we were to fail to define, in time, a code of law which would preserve it.
56.	Now there is no curb on the development of antimissile weapons in space, no limit to the number of satellites, because only weapons of mass destruction—that is, nuclear weapons—are banned by the 1967 Treaty.' An amendment to that Treaty which banned the placing in orbit of any type of weapon, brought about the gradual withdrawal of arms already in orbit and provided for effective verification would give it its proper scope.
57.	In another field which concerns us, and whatever may be the controversies about its tests—controversies with which I am familiar—I wish to stress that France has decided to open its underground nuclear test sites next month to a fact-finding visit from foreign scientists from the South Pacific. I hope this example will be followed.
58.	I shall end this part of my statement as I began it, that is, with Europe. If peace has reigned in this continent since the Second World War, it has been in a Europe divided, rent asunder, and which has barely invented ways and means of protecting its future and its own security. No true European will renounce the possibility of doing away with the consequences of this division, renewing the ties that were Oroken and repairing the situation born in Yalta. It was with this in mind that France worked for the success of the Madrid meeting of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe and will continue to work for the success of the conference in Stockholm. Only good mutual knowledge of military activities throughout the region stretching from the Atlantic to the Urals will restore the conditions for greater trust.
59.	I would recall that the relations between France and Germany were very important in laying the foundations for the European Community, thus making war unthinkable among the 300 million West Europeans. This commitment and this experience explain our support for any process which would ensure increased security for all Europeans. Believe me, the contagion of peace can overcome the consequences of war.
60.	The States represented here are going through the worst recession afflicting their economies in the last 50 years. The crisis affects us all. The upsurge, sometimes remarkable and always difficult, experienced by the developing world has been halted. While in certain industrialized countries there are signs of a recovery, the difficulties are getting worse for the majority. The burden of the past—that is, the burden of debt—is being added to the uncertainties of the present to impose upon the fragile societies efforts at austerity and discipline which are exceptionally severe.
61.	Of course, we must improve public finances. Of course, we must reduce deficits which are too high. But When the solution to the economic crisis only exacerbates it, where are the signs of a cure? When the increase in poverty and hunger sows the seeds of social and political crises, surely the difficulties are increasing. When the North is content with its own recovery, does it believe for a moment that it can find lasting well-being alone? What does it propose to those who are living today and what does it propose for the 2 billion men and women who will be born within the next 15 years? Silence has become the ally of the worst. Let us all resume dialogue between the two hemispheres. Let us urgently respond and lay down firm foundations for the future.
62.	A transfer of resources from the countries of the North to those of the South is a natural course and is desirable for the well-being of all. The present levels of aid should be considered irreversible. The principal donors should undertake not to reduce their aid as long as the recipient countries show no sign of economic growth. The banking sector must be encouraged not to slacken its efforts.
63.	But these immediate actions will not spare us damage to our societies if the currencies in which the third world debt is payable and the interest rates on this debt reach excessive levels. It is up to each industrialized country to shoulder its responsibilities.
64.	France, for its part, is making steady progress towards the aid target it has fixed for itself: 0.7 per cent of its gross national product for the third world, 0.15 per cent for the least developed countries. We intend to do everything possible to see to it that the seventh replenishment of the International Development Association represents a significant increase. We snail continue to give our support to the Paris Club to seek ways of dealing with the most critical situations of indebtedness. We support the idea of an increase in the resources of IMF to be assigned as a matter of priority to the developing countries.
65.	We have to attack the deep-rooted causes of the instability and disarray which mark international economic relations. For my part there are three major priorities: currency, primary commodities and technology.
66.	If I begin with currency it is because, after all, it is the main primary commodity. A few months ago I put forward the idea of a new Bretton Woods. This was a symbolic reference, as far as I was concerned, to stress the need to recreate the conditions of an ordered monetary system with currencies sufficiently stable and reflecting the actual evolution of economies. That is a need felt by us all. The Prime Minister of India and the Prime Minister of New Zealand were right to issue an appeal for international monetary co-operation. The seven industrialized countries decided at Williamsburg to consider the role that could be played at the right time by a monetary conference with a view to improving the international monetary system. This, I know, is something that will take a great deal of time and requires very thorough preparation, and all the countries interested must be involved in this enterprise. Consideration of stricter rules for the establishment of exchange parities, diversification of reserve instruments, agreement on a rate of evolution of international liquidities, definition of the necessary disciplines in the light of the specific economic and social situations of each country—these are the principal subjects to which thought should be given.
67.	With regard to primary commodities, the path was laid by the sixth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, held at Belgrade last June. But the matter cannot rest there. France proposes improvement of the functioning of private commodity markets by regularizing futures markets, which too often by .their erratic and speculative movement mislead economic agents instead of informing them. Stricter discipline Li the area of competition would return those markets to their proper role. And I stress that vital primary commodity, energy. The current stabilization of the oil markets in no way diminishes the importance of encouraging the financing of investment in non-renewable energy sources, whether through the World Bank or any other specialized agency.
68.	Over and above the difficult situations it has created, the crisis has made it possible for us to understand the growing role of technical progress. It is certainly necessary to make constant efforts at adaptation, but it also offers exceptional opportunities for the development of the South and the progress of the North. This fact seems obvious, and yet too often some countries tend to consider that this is their own business, as if technical progress were a privilege reserved for the richest, the cleverest or the most advanced. We are well aware that nothing is more ambivalent than technical progress—a source of growth but also a decisive element in the arms race. Are we to remain content with this finding? Are we to concede that the major efforts of the biggest countries must be devoted to military technology? Are we to concede that the overwarming of the planet should prevail over its development? This is the most important question, and it is becoming ever more acute from one generation to the next. It is something which has been unceasingly asked in and by France, and not France alone. From the beginning of the century Jean Jaures, Albert Thomas, Eduard Herriot, Aristide Briand and Leon Blum each in turn tried to banish the threat of a modern war and to work for disarmament. They carried further the inextinguishable hope, hope that has resisted all set-backs.
69.	The world will recover its equilibrium and security only if solidarity—which today, unfortunately, is expressed in military terms—assumes another dimension, for solidarity is the higher form of security. But how are we to give expression to it? The General Assembly has already repeatedly reaffirmed the link between the tasks of development and the endeavour to achieve disarmament, between the rejection of poverty and the rejection of arms escalation. Our Governments, in spite of their differences on the approaches to disarmament and security, would surely subscribe to the disarmament-development link and the establishment of an international fund which would make it possible to give effect to this. France itself has put forward suggestions along these lines: as far back as 1955 by the Government of Mr. Edgard Faure, who is here today, and in 1978, on the initiative of my predecessor, during the first special session on disarmament.
70.	To deal with the problem of over armament at its roots and put disarmament at the service of development, it is not enough—although of course the idea may be supported—to seek to use for the benefit of the countries of the South a tax levied on military budgets or procurement expenditures. The prolonged crisis we have experienced leads us to adopt a global approach—or should lead us to adopt a global or, more precisely, a political approach. We have to go back to the origin of these expenditures, that is, the close and growing link between military insecurity and economic insecurity which characterizes the world today. By a series of paradoxes, the deregulation of the international economic system strengthens the need for security and by the same token fuels the arms race, which, in its turn, causes disequilibrium. In view of this, the following essential tasks must be tackled. First of all, we have to determine the true weight of armaments, and urgent questions arise: for example, how to overcome differences in terms of both data and estimates; how to work out a basis of evaluation acceptable to all. Next, we must assess the internal and external economic effects of the increase in military expenditures. Thirdly, how do we judge the relationship between the increase of military expenditure and the major factors of international economic disorder? Finally, while clarifying the above points, the essential issue is the possibility and the means of carrying out the tasks of interest to mankind as a whole, those concerning health, vocational training and agricultural development in the third world—to all of which we must devote the sizeable resources that would be released by a gradual but methodical reduction in military expenditures in the principal countries. And there is also the question of how we are to ensure favourable economic effects of these reductions and conversions in the contributing countries themselves, and how to devise mechanisms to assist in this switch to disarmament and development.
71.	Each country can provide only a partial response to these major questions, but no country can escape them. Indeed, what country today can deny that after 10 years— sometimes even longer—of crisis the patterns of military expenditure are creating increasing difficulties for it? What is the point of spending more for less security, whether military or economic? That is the fundamental question which everyone has to face. It is a question which I wanted to bring before you.
72.	All countries have an interest in this important debate which transcends our differences, but since what is essential in this Held depends upon a small number of States, I think it desirable that action should be taken in two stages. In the first stage there should be, as early as possible, a meeting on the problem posed by the link between disarmament and development and the creation of an international fund provided for by the General Assembly. When the major military Powers have announced their agreement, France is ready to be host to such a conference in Paris. As a second stage, representatives of the Governments participating in that meeting could set themselves the task of preparing a United Nations conference, which would be open to all Members of the Organization, and that preparatory meeting could, without delay, define an initial series of targets to be reached for transfers for the benefit of development.
73.	In the words and logic of the time, the Prime Minister of France, Mr. Pierre Mendes-France, appealed in 1954, at the 498th meeting of the General Assembly, for co-operation between the Eastern and the Western Powers. "By making them partners in life-giving tasks, it is bound to deflect them from the path of death. By facilitating and promoting exchanges among them, it may break down impassable barriers, clarify mysteries and dispel distrust."
74.	I myself, 30 years later—and the weight of facts having now become almost unbearable—wish to state that no country can avoid this debate.
75.	Let us begin now to free ourselves from our acquired reflexes, from fear, from mistrust, from habits of which we ourselves are the first victims, and embark on this common endeavour.
 


﻿150.	 Mr. President, may I begin by joining other speakers in congratulating you on your election to the presidency of the thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly. You have my best wishes for the difficult task which lies ahead of you. May I also express my thanks to the outgoing President, Mr. Hollai, who has so ably fulfilled his role on behalf of the Assembly.
151.	It gives me particular pleasure to pay a tribute also to the Secretary-General. We owe a great deal already to his careful authority and leadership. His report to last year's session' brought out in a striking way the gravity of the problems facing us in the United Nations. His report this year has again underlined the crucial problem of trust. He has also drawn our attention to the need for the Secretary-General, in the interests of all, to exercise tighter control over the administration of the Organization. It is now up to us to do something about these problems. As my predecessor said last year, the blame for the state of the world does not lie with the United Nations system or with the Charter, but with us, the Member States. I endorse that conclusion wholeheartedly, but I see absolutely no evidence that it has sunk in.
152.	This is my first year as a foreign minister. But it is a reflection of today's increasingly complex and interdependent world that this year has not by any means been my first taste as a minister of international affairs.
153.	My own particular experience has been in international economic and financial affairs, and I have learned from that one very clear lesson: the problems which face us can effectively be tackled only through close international co-operation and, of course, with the necessary determination and patience. If that is true, as it is, of economic and social questions, it must be even more so in the political field, where major questions of peace and security are at stake.
154.	Economic and political problems are, of course, often interlinked. Indeed, the former can cause, or exacerbate, the latter. That is why foreign ministers, even if they were so minded, cannot fail to concern themselves with economic questions. These are, of course, questions which require effective action at the national level, and national determination to solve, but the need for action on the international plane is no less clear.
155.	So, as a foreign minister, I remain very interested in what is happening—and what is not happening—in the world economy. There are signs of recovery in my country and in others, but complacency and over-confidence would be equally damaging to the prospects of sustained non-inflationary growth: complacency because there will not be much growth if we rest on the laurels of our achievements so far; and over-confidence because growth will not be sustained if we abandon the fight against inflation. The consequences of inflation, of inflated expectations and of over-ambitious and over-promising governments, are still very much with us, in particular, the problems of debt and the pressures to resort to quick and wrong solutions, like protectionism. It will take patience as well as energy to ensure that they are safely overcome.
156.	On the whole, I am optimistic. While vast problems remain, there have been encouraging signs that many members of the international community recognize that we are all affected by the same economic conditions and are ready to respond to the challenge of joint action. For example, the Interim Committee of the International Monetary Fund was able to reach agreement in February on an increase in quotas and a parallel enlargement of the General Arrangements to Borrow—an agreement which would not have been possible if all parties had not been willing to show considerable flexibility. It remains vitally important for countries to take legislative action necessary to implement their increased quotas so that IMF can be more effective.
157.	Some of these problems are technical, or perhaps it is just that they are made to sound that way by the economists who propose solutions in a language which does not always make for easy understanding. But the underlying reality shines through any amount of jargon: we need to restore the balance and vitality of the world economy in order to provide a rising standard of living, and above all to meet the basic human needs of the people of the world for food, shelter and a decent standard of life.
158.	For the last decade, the world has been proving Malthus wrong, but only just—world agricultural production has kept slightly ahead of population increase. But this conceals the fact that in many countries agricultural production per capita has stagnated or declined. Experience shows that the opposite can be achieved where policy is directed to encouraging individual enterprise and more widespread use of appropriate technology.
159.	Population policy must be part of the answer, and progress has already been made. But much more needs to be done. We should give a high priority to this since it is the poorest people who will benefit most. Aid too has a vital part to play, but food aid is only first aid. The main requirement is for aid to increase production where it is most needed, and it is on this that the international community should concentrate.
160.	Production alone is not enough. We cannot afford not to make the best use of the resources at our disposal, and therefore we cannot afford to relent in the fight against protectionism. Barriers to trade are barriers to economic efficiency and the creation of wealth. We all need to fight more resolutely against them. There must be no new upward twist to the spiral of protection. Instead, I should like to see a vigorous programme of commercial disarmament.
161.	I have mentioned the word' 'disarmament'' in an unusual context. That is not because I underrate its importance in the more normal one. Indeed, nothing could illustrate more vividly the link between the economic and the political world. 
162.	Without security there can be no lasting prosperity; arms control and disarmament can contribute to both by reducing at the same time the risks of war and the burden of defence costs.
163.	It would, of course, be madness to turn our backs on such a prospect, or to reduce our efforts to achieve so obviously beneficial a result. In theory, there is no doubt that agreements can be reached which will bring lasting economic and military benefit to both sides.
164.	Over the last two decades there have been practical examples of successful agreements between East and West, which should encourage us to persevere in our efforts. But history shows also that the road is not an easy one: confidence is hard to build up and all too easy to destroy; secrecy inevitably breeds suspicion; and the stake: are high enough to underline the need for caution.
165.	But caution should not prevent movement, and on the Western side, at least, it has not. President Reagan has proposed major cuts in strategic missiles and the elimination of a whole class of intermediate range missiles. Speaking from this podium only two days ago he revealed a further package of steps designed to advance the negotiations as rapidly as possible. These are radical measures by any standards, and they have our support. So do the Western proposals to reduce the forces facing each other in central Europe to a common ending. We have put forward proposals of our own trying nearer a ban on chemical weapons. It is dear that the West means business over disarmament. It is now up to the Russians to respond.
166.	Our objective in these and other negotiations is simple: we want realistic, balanced and verifiable measures of arms control and disarmament which will enhance peace and security—not just for ourselves, but for all participants. We do not seek unilateral advantage, nor shall we give in to those who seek it at our expense.
167.	That, for the moment, is what the Soviet Union is trying to do by claiming that British and French systems should be included in the intermediate-range nuclear force negotiations. The two participants in the negotiations, the United States and the Soviet Union, have agreed that their own strategic systems should be excluded. There can be no reason in equity or logic why the strategic systems of non-participants should be included. The Soviet attempt to suggest otherwise should perhaps be dismissed as a smokescreen designed to hide what I hope is only a temporary unwillingness to negotiate seriously.
168.	Taken literally, what the Soviet leaders are asking for is either the unilateral strategic disarmament of Britain and France or a monopoly of intermediate-range missiles in Europe at the expense of the United States and its allies. These demands are unacceptable and will remain so— not because British weapon systems would be affected, but because what is proposed is unbalanced and inequitable and would benefit one side at the expense of the other.
169.	When it comes to arms control and disarmament, we in Britain claim no special privileges and no sanctuary. The record makes this clear, and we remain ready to play a full part in the arms control and disarmament process.
170.	As far as the British deterrent is concerned, we must naturally take into account that our force is a strategic one and that it represents less than 3 per cent of the strategic nuclear forces available to the United States or to the Soviet Union. It would be absurd as things stand for us to seek to trade reductions with a superpower. But we have never said "never". On the contrary, we have made it clear that, if Soviet and United States strategic arsenals were to be very substantially reduced and if no significant changes had occurred in Soviet defensive capabilities, Britain would want to review its position and to consider how best it could contribute to arms control in the light of the reduced threat. That remains our position.
171.	I have spent some time on the subject of arms control and disarmament because it is one which is rightly at the centre of the international stage and rightly of concern to the United Nations and its Member States. But, as Mrs. Thatcher made clear when she addressed the twelfth special session of the General Assembly in June 1982 the causes of war do not lie in the existence of particular weapons, whether nuclear or conventional, or even in particular numbers of weapons. They lie in the disposition of States to ignore international law and to seek to impose change on others by resort to force.
172.	We in Britain had direct experience of this last year, when Argentina invaded the Falklands in flagrant violation of one of the most fundamental principles of the Charter of the United Nations. That invasion has not faded into history. We, for our part, have upheld and will continue to uphold the principles of the Charter. We will defend the Falkland Islands and their inhabitants against the possibility of renewed attack; our military dispositions are designed solely for this purpose. We will continue to defend the right—the inalienable right—of the people of the Falkland Islands to self-determination, a right to which they are no less entitled than other small island peoples, and we will carry forward economic and constitutional development in close consultation with the islanders.
173.	At the same time, we shall continue to seek a more normal relationship with Argentina and a reduction of tension in the South Atlantic. We have played a constructive part in international efforts to help with the problem of Argentine debt. It was very much at our initiative that progress has been achieved in the removal of bilateral financial restrictions. We look to Argentina to honour the agreement that has been reached. We would like to do the same in the commercial and economic fields and have supported the initiative of the European Community to this effect. We have also taken other initiatives intended to promote the development of a more normal bilateral relationship.
174.	The return for these efforts, I regret to say, has not been encouraging. The Argentine authorities have shown no regret at their resort to the use of force, no interest in reducing tension and no response to these various initiatives from the British side aimed at restoring a better relationship between our two countries. They continue to see negotiations purely as a means for transferring sovereignty without regard for the wishes of the islanders. A radical change of approach is required in Buenos Aires.
175.	The lengthy passage on the Falklands in the statement of the Foreign Minister of Argentina consisted of rhetoric which is as unhelpful as it is tendentious. His reference to respecting the existing cessation of hostilities has yet to be translated into a convincing and dependable renunciation of the use of force. The whole world knows who stands rightly convicted of deception and of dangerous military adventures. The Argentine invasion, launched without warning when we were negotiating in good faith, cannot be wished away. I can understand why the Argentine representative found it too embarrassing to mention. To accuse us of threatening the security of the Latin American region is lurid nonsense; we have done and will do no more than is necessary to protect the Islands and their population against a threat which recent history has shown to be all too real and which the current pattern of Argentine arms purchases seems designed to keep alive.
176.	As for the charge of colonialism, the answer can be seen by looking round this chamber. Britain's record speaks for itself. Only a few days ago, in response to the freely expressed wishes of the people exercising their right to self-determination, we gave independence to the Federation of Saint Christopher and Nevis. I congratulate Saint Christopher and Nevis on becoming, last week, the 158th Member of this Organization and the 48th member of that unique association of nations, the Commonwealth. The strength of the Commonwealth will once again be reaffirmed when its heads of Government meet in November at New Delhi.
177.	It is sad that so many of the political problems which confronted us last year are no less acute now. The Middle East is a prime example. Violence and the rule of force are the order of the day. There is not much time left for peaceful change. The United Kingdom was greatly disappointed, especially after the initial response from the Twelfth Arab Summit Conference, held at Fez on 25 November 1981 and 9 September 1982, that the proposals put forward by President Reagan on 1 September 1982' were not taken up by the parties. They offered a realistic starting point for negotiations aimed at reconciling the right of Israel to live within secure and recognized borders with the right of the Palestinian people to determine their own future.
178.	Only through negotiation will there be a just and lasting solution to the Arab-Israel dispute. But we are a long way from a negotiation, and we shall stay a long way as long as the parties do not take the first steps to build mutual confidence and trust. On each side there is a long-canvassed step which could transform the picture: for Israel, to halt its policy of building illegal settlements in occupied territory; for the Arabs, including the Palestinians, to show that they are ready to accept Israel's right to live in peace and security.
179.	Efforts to tackle the central issue of the future of the occupied territories of the West Bank and Gaza have been diverted by events in Lebanon. This is a tragedy for Middle East peace, but it is a greater tragedy for the people of Lebanon. Let us be honest about this: Lebanon has internal problems which would be difficult enough to solve in conditions of peace. It has no chance of solving them as long as it is at the mercy of foreign forces. That is why we shall continue to support all efforts to restore Lebanon's sovereignty and independence and to secure the withdrawal of all foreign forces from that country. The presence of a small contingent of British troops in Beirut is a symbol of that support.
180.	Israel's invasion of Lebanon last year has, predictably enough, solved nothing. On the contrary, it has led only to more suffering, while making even more difficult the essential process of national reunification. Meanwhile, the Syrian refusal to withdraw, despite the clear wishes of the Lebanese Government, only prolongs the agony and increases the risk of partition. I warmly welcome the declaration of a cease-fire and the intention of all parties to pursue a dialogue aimed at reconciliation of the various communities. The important thing now is for this to be implemented fully and faithfully by all concerned.
181.	Sadly, conflict in the Middle East is not an isolated phenomenon. In the Gulf we shall support all efforts to end the bloody war between Iran and Iraq. The work of the Secretary-General's mission of inquiry provides a starting-point for a consensus. Meanwhile, members of the international community should avoid any action which could extend or increase the level of conflict in the area.
182.	This is an appropriate place to mention also two other issues with which the United Nations remains closely concerned: Korea and Cyprus. The best prospect of peaceful reunification in Korea lies in direct talks between the two sides. The Republic of Korea has made clear its positive approach. It is high time that it received a constructive response from Pyongyang. In this context let me repeat my Government's total condemnation of the shooting down by the Soviet Union of a South Korean civilian airliner. What is essential now is full redress and effective arrangements to avoid such incidents in future. We will work strenuously to this end in ICAO.
183.	In Cyprus the United Nations has been tireless in its efforts to promote a settlement. The Secretary-General has this year increased his personal involvement. My Government welcomes this and stands ready to help in every appropriate way. Despite some limited progress in the intercommunal talks held under United Nations auspices, a peaceful and lasting settlement regrettably still seems to be a long way off. I cannot believe that it is in the interests of any of the parties that the current situation should become frozen, still less that it should deteriorate.
184.	That conclusion applies overwhelmingly also in southern Africa. Violence cannot be the solution. Human rights must not be trampled upon or ignored. South Africa will not succeed in the end in coercing its neighbours into a change of heart through the use of military force or subversion. Nor, on the other hand, will bomb attacks against innocent people incline the South African Government to change its course.
185.	The only hope for a peaceful future in southern Africa lies in political change and the creation of greater trust through regional co operation and international support. We believe these can be achieved and achieved peacefully. The independence agreement for Zimbabwe was an important first step. A settlement in Namibia has still to be reached, but I am confident that, with so many of the difficult issues now settled, it can be reached, and on the basis of Security Council resolution 435 (1978). My country is committed to such a settlement and will continue to use its weight and influence to help bring it about, both through our own efforts and in conjunction with the other members of the Western contact group. We have no doubt that the front-line States will be using their influence in the same direction.
186.	We do not see or seek to present all the problems and conflicts in the world in terms of East against West. It would be factually wrong to do so wrong also in terms of policy. Problems like those in southern Africa and the Middle East are quite hard enough to deal with as it is. To introduce an element of East-West rivalry, or to add to it where it already exists, could only make things worse. And it is indeed the case that problems are worse where tension is exploited from outside and where international efforts to promote peaceful change are thwarted.
187.	In Afghanistan the Soviet Union continues to use military force to suppress a small and non-aligned people. But after nearly four years of brutal military occupation in support of an unpopular and unrepresentative regime, the struggle of the Afghan people for national liberation continues to inspire widespread admiration. Only a complete and prompt Soviet withdrawal can open the way to the return of the Afghan refugees and to the establishment of an independent Government, in accordance with the true wishes of the people and with the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly. 
188.	The Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia is another example of a situation in which foreign military force is being used to deny the right to self-determination of a neighbour. We shall continue our full support for the efforts of the United Nations and the neighbouring countries of ASEAN to find a comprehensive political solution based on self-determination.
189.	In Central America there is no doubt that many problems stem from social, economic and political injustice. But there is no doubt also that these problems have been and are being exploited by those who seek, not to solve them for the good of the people of those countries, but rather to use them to bring about violent revolution. Our own position is clear. On the one hand we support all efforts to correct injustice by peaceful and democratic means, and we welcome efforts such as those of the Contadora Group to reduce tension and encourage dialogue. On the other hand, we condemn the action of all who use force to block the path to peaceful reform and evolutionary change.
190.	The conduct of the Soviet Union in these regional problems has contributed to the present state of strain in East-West relations. The Soviet military build-up, the situation in Poland and the disregard of human rights in the East have also played a part. The brutal destruction of the Korean Air Lines airliner and the murder of its passengers only a few weeks ago were a reminder of how far Soviet international behaviour can fall short of civilized standards. Britain has made plain to the new Soviet leadership that these are matters of grave and continuing international concern to the entire world. But together with our partners we have also said—and said repeatedly —that we are ready for a more constructive relationship, provided that the Soviet Union is prepared to adopt a new approach. What we are calling for is willingness by the Soviet Union to base its actions and its policies on respect for internationally accepted standards of behaviour. If the Soviet Union were ready to take real steps in this direction, I have no doubt that the international response would be overwhelming.
191.	I have already had occasion to mention human rights when speaking of southern Africa and East-West relations. I could equally have done so in relation to the Middle East, Afghanistan and elsewhere. This year is the thirty-fifth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Yet human rights continue to be widely disregarded in many parts of the world. It is an appealing comment on the failure of the international community to implement the commitments that its Members so readily proclaim.
192.	Personal freedom and individual rights are the foundation of national and international order. If they are absent, both national and international edifices, however imposing and monolithic, are a betrayal of those they serve and must ultimately crumble away. Where they are encouraged, international co-operation—and thus international security and prosperity—will grow on firm foundations. Let each country look honestly at its own performance in this field and resolve to do better. That, rather than speeches, will produce the improvements the people of the world demand.
193.	I have ranged widely in my speech and yet left many important subjects untouched. The challenge before us is indeed formidable, but it can be faced successfully if we are prepared to work effectively together. International co-operation is the key: it has worked in Antarctica and it can surely be made to work also nearer hope. We need to think more about our neighbours and to co-operate more with them. We need to take more seriously our international obligations, including respect for individual rights and freedoms and the need to settle problems by peaceful means.
194.	Confrontation is easy. Pursuit of national interest appears to be. But neither confrontation nor blind nationalism can provide the conditions of stability essential for peace to break out and the world economy to flourish. That is what our people want, and we owe it to them to make a reality of international co-operation under the Charter.
 

﻿1.	  I congratulate you, Mr. President, on your election to that august office. Your long association with the United Nations and your experience give us hope that during your tenure the Organization will gain strength. We are glad also to see the Secretary-General by your side. His analysis of the current world situation deserves serious reflection. We wish success to his patient and untiring labour in the cause of world peace.
2.	I welcome our newest Member, St. Kitts-Nevis.
3.	I am here on a quest of peace and co-operation. I have the privilege of addressing the Assembly not only on behalf of the people of India, one of the founder Members of the United Nations, but also on behalf of 100 other members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, which met at New Delhi in March at the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries and renewed their pledge to work for a world which would not be driven by distrust and hatred and for a truly international community where nations would grasp hands of friendship across geographical frontiers.
4.	For the last 20 years the non-aligned have customarily met once in three years, and the Chairperson has reported to the United Nations. Firm faith in the United Nations is central to the non-aligned. All members of the Non- Aligned Movement are Members, current or potential, of the United Nations. However, the United Nations is an institution, the non-aligned group a movement. The United Nations is, or ought to be, a forum for solving disputes; the Non-Aligned Movement eschews discussion of bilateral problems. But the aim is the same: to maintain peace by removing the sources of tension and to bring out the humanity in human beings.
5.	At the New Delhi Conference we adopted a comprehensive statement on the economic and political state of the world. Our views were summed up in what has now come to be called the New Delhi Message. The final paragraph says:
"The crisis which confronts our civilization today is unprecedented in history. Great tasks call for wise decisions. We appeal to the great Powers to give up mistrust, engage in sincere, forward-looking negotiations in a spirit of shared good faith to reach agreement on various disarmament measures and to find a way out of the deepening economic crisis which threatens all of us. United, the members of the Non-Aligned Movement are prepared to do everything in their power to assist in this process. The earth belongs to us all- let us cherish it in peace and true brotherhood, based on the dignity and equality of man." I am here to give this message to the entire world.
6.	When the non-aligned plead with the aligned to give up confrontation and conflict, it is not out of any presumption. We are only too keenly aware of our own weaknesses, of the unnecessary discords and disputes between ourselves. But, being militarily weak, we do not have to find justification for strength. We are familiar with pain and suffering, we do not want them to increase anywhere. Our plea for peace is not out of superior virtue but because peace is indispensable, because humankind now has the choice, the knowledge and the power to prevent the calamity of extinction.
7.	Scientists, scholars and some notable soldiers have vividly described the outcome of a future nuclear war. Imagine a hundred or a thousand Hiroshima at one time. Imagine a world with nowhere to hide and perhaps nobody left to hide. As more and more people in all countries comprehend the full implications of the monstrous stockpiles of nuclear death, peace movements grow in number and beyond political ideology, driven by peoples' inmost urge to live. We can all live only if we all combine in the struggle for peace.
8.	Some quarters believe that nuclear armaments can be controlled, and deployed with exact calculation of cost- effectiveness. Equally frightening is the preparation and willingness to use other deadly chemical, biological and other such devices. Even more disturbing is the talk in depersonalised terms of using outer space for future wars.
9.	This relentless search for ever increasingly barbaric weapons systems is undertaken in the name of security. India and other non-aligned countries are convinced that only general and complete disarmament can provide real and enduring security. Nuclear-weapon Powers owe it to humanity to renounce the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons in any situation whatever. As a first step they should resume negotiations for disarmament and ban the production and testing of all nuclear weapons.
10.	In four days we shall celebrate Mahatma Gandhi's one hundred and fourteenth birthday. There is renewed awareness of the continued relevance of his message of non-violence and tolerance. He said:
"Man as animal is violent, but as spirit is non-violent. The moment he awakes to the spirit within he cannot remain violent. Either he progresses towards non-violence or rushes to his doom. That is why the prophets and avatars have taught the lessons of truth, harmony, brotherhood, justice—all attributes of nonviolence."
11.	The other major theme of the non-aligned is development. We are largely poor and technologically backward. Even the handful of the rich amongst us are not technologically self-reliant. Most of us have become free from colonial rule only in the last 35 years. Our national freedom is new; our national unities need to be consolidated. Freedom itself releases long-pent-up hopes and yearning for rights. In this age of instant globe-encircling information technology, the media dazzle eyes and fill ears with images and reports of affluence. Even the modest expectations of our peoples are far beyond our present means. Besides, we are hard put to preserve our independence because of the many economic, political and military pressures.
12.	The present world economic order is based on domination and inequality. The basic aim of the programmes of action drawn up at New Delhi was to strengthen the economies of weak nations. We outlined a mechanism to pool our own technological resources, a South-South dialogue as a supplement to the North- South one. We also indicated some immediate measures, the most important of which was the convening of a conference on money and finance for development. To help developing countries is not mere largesse. It will directly benefit the industrialized because development in Asia, Africa and Latin America, and the enlargement of their incomes by removing obstacles to their export, will absorb industrial goods and machinery from advanced countries, stimulate economic activity and ease their unemployment problem. What better investment can the North make in its own future than by turning today's deprived of the South into tomorrow's consumers?
13.	Existing international institutions and those who have headed them have done valuable work, but these bodies are not wholly representative, nor do they reflect the changes that have occurred in the international economy. No country or set of countries is without dilemmas. The affluent ones which follow market economies have problems of production, unemployment and currency instability. Industrialized countries with planned economies, which do not formally belong to the international monetary system but participate in the global activities of commerce and technological exchange, also face problems of production and renovation. We the developing are caught between the inadequacies of internal and external resources. All these are parts of one global crisis. There is no way out except through dialogue among us all. Each country, however powerful, has more to gain by accommodation and co-operation than by withdrawal into individual isolation or adoption of policies to maintain the solidarity of the strong. That is why we advocate a new international economic order based on equality and justice. Unfortunately, over the past three years the procedural hurdles to the launching of global negotiations have not been overcome.
14.	The advanced countries have held consultations regarding their own problems and the accumulated burdens of the economically weakest. Nothing concrete has emerged. Intentions are offset by supposed domestic compulsions. The Summit of Industrialized Nations at Williamsburg in May and the sixth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in June and July have shown up once again the fear of the unfamiliar, of lowering easy, safe, existing protective barriers and releasing restrictive rules. Why should these countries be afraid of the demands of the weak? It is time for bolder moves in trade and in financial and technological cooperation and a daring new initiative to eliminate global poverty by the end of the century. The demand of the developing countries for a North-South dialogue is all too often seen as yet another plea of the have-nots which has to be resisted by the haves. The world today is too complex for such a simplistic division. Political independence is not an end to problems, but only a recognition of the realities of governance in adverse circumstances.
15.	Ideas and initiatives come through discussion, through collective counsel. At New Delhi the non-aligned felt the universal need for further communication and more informal discussions with one another, hence the suggestion that the current session of the General Assembly could be an occasion for heads of State or Government leaders of the developing and the developed countries, the non-aligned and the aligned, the North and South, West and East of common parlance, to be together for just a few days to think and talk about the great problems of peace and security, disarmament and development. We expect no dramatic results, but the immensity of our challenges calls for persistence. Every attempt may take us just a little further in promoting a climate of peace.
16.	It is gracious indeed of so many heads of State and Government to listen to this call of the Movement of Non- Aligned Countries. We are having informal meetings individually and collectively, joined by the President of the General Assembly and the Secretary-General. Could 1983 mark a watershed in the history of the United Nations? This great world body was founded as a group of nations united in a wartime alliance. With the entry of newly freed countries, the end of the decade saw its expansion into a much bigger body. The next 30 years have brought about near universality in its composition. Today, because of the unique authority entrusted to it in controlling military crises through its instruments and its influence on social and economic developments through its various specialized agencies, the United Nations is an integral part of the lives of nations and individuals. It has not yet come near the beginnings of a global approach. Its progress has to be halting and tentative, sometimes unavoidably ineffectual in facing up to immediate problems, because of the very nature of its origin and institutional structure, particularly the ideological divide, which was not envisaged by those who drew up the Charter. It is our task to improve this institution to make it capable of facing difficulties which were not foreseen 40 years ago.
17.	Some issues arouse intense feeling in individual nations, others our common indignation. One such is the persistence of racialism. How can the denial of freedom to the majority of the people of South Africa and the people of Namibia be condoned? I affirm our total support for the freedom struggle of the people of Namibia, under the leadership of the South West Africa People's Organization [SPK4PO], and to the Governments and peoples of the front-line States, which have to endure pressure and provocation. Almost my own first conscious thoughts were admiration for those who fought for freedom and concern for those who suffered. Nelson Mandela, a flaming symbol of freedom, and many others are behind prison bars, but their voices cannot be stilled; they resound the world over.
18.	The turmoil in West Asia remains the most serious threat to peace. Driven from their homes, the Palestinian people are in physical and mental agony. We support the valiant efforts of the Palestine Liberation Organization [PLO] to secure their legitimate rights. The occupation of the land of others will not guarantee Israel's security. The Palestinians must be masters in their home, and all States of the region should live within secure international frontiers. The voice of the non-aligned spoke out firmly at the New Delhi summit for a peaceful settlement which ensures justice. This call was endorsed and reaffirmed by the International Conference on the Question of Palestine, held at Geneva in August and September. All parties concerned should begin the process of reconciliation.
19.	The sufferings of the people of Lebanon, caused by the intervention of foreign forces, have been of great concern to all of us. Here again, the Israeli aggression triggered the crisis. We are relieved to learn of the ceasefire, which we hope will be maintained. All foreign forces should be withdrawn and the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Lebanon should be respected by all.
20.	The crisis in Central America must be urgently defused. We should demand and support efforts to create a climate of negotiation without external interference. India and the other non-aligned countries have welcomed the peace initiatives of the Contadora Group.
21.	The non-aligned have always stood for non-interference and non-use of force. The complex situation in Afghanistan can be solved only on the basis of these twin principles. We fully support the representative of the Secretary-General in working for a solution which takes into consideration the concerns of all the involved parties. The tragic and wasteful Iraq-Iran war harms both countries. Conflicts in other regions also, including Kampuchea, admit only of political solutions.
22.	Militarily, today's leading countries are incomparably more powerful than in the days when a single gunboat could silence and immobilize millions. The weak are not so weak, nor the strong so strong. The essence of the concept of non-alignment is peaceful coexistence and the promotion of constructive co-operation. The "non" in non-alignment relates to the importance of resisting attitudes of irreconcilable hostility. The positive aspects are the desire for friendship with other nations irrespective of patterns of government—which are their own business —and to strengthen the fabric of our own nations.
23.	In India we work for self-reliance in action and self- respect in thought, which Bertrand Russell called "the better half of pride". But this pride is for human achievement and human potential. Its justification would be our ability to discern the future beyond the gloom of the present.
24.	The safety of the weak is the strength of the strong. That is why the weakest and the poorest amongst us, within each society and in the international community, must be shielded from the inclemencies of the international climate. Continued disparities also aggravate political tensions and lead to instability. The strong, with the help of the rest of the international community, can think of measures to contain the enormous destructive potential which gives them illusions of strength but whose very power is troublesome. It is a welcome sign that the two most powerful nations are engaged in negotiations on vital strategic matters and have not allowed even serious incidents to deflect them. The myriad other problems concerning the environment, the optimum utilization of the resources of our planet and the reorganization of political and economic systems at the global and State levels need our co-operative endeavours.
25.	The Industrial Revolution gave a major turn to history. Out of it emerged industrial capitalism and, as a reaction to it, Marxism in its various forms. Together these have given rise to the great social upheavals of our time. The two have followed different paths but their ethos is basically materialistic. All that begins must end. And the seeds of the ending are present from the very beginning. What we have witnessed—the two world wars, the possible approach of a third, so much more destructive and disastrous, and the struggle for power—are the end of the road for the existing order of competing systems. Out of this chaos a new order is struggling to be born. This is our last chance of appealing to the old and entrenched not to infect the new with its diseases: neocolonialism, monopoly, economic oppression, class divisions and big-Power politics, as well as the idea that power is invincible and can feed on itself, with militarization as the ultimate tool.
26.	For us, the non-aligned, and for all who are deeply concerned with the future of humanity, the question is whether we help the birth of this new creation or throttle it before it can draw breath. The matter is not simple, because history has proved time and again that ideas and movements can be obstructed, but not stopped. How long can a few pockets of affluence continue to exert influence on the large populations, the natural resources, the cultural strength of the others? How long can allies and supporters, who may not have a base in their own countries and who are not in tune with the changing times, be perpetuated? You cannot kill an idea by killing its adherents. The newborn will not die; the birth can be delayed but the cost will be much higher and the affluent will have to pay. When peaceful change is thwarted, violent upheaval occurs. Previously, the end of a civilization brought destruction and trauma in its trail. If we keep to past trends, we too will be engulfed by circumstances. But today we have the opportunity, which may well be the first in human history, for humankind to bridge the transition from the old to the new in a conscious way, to build a new era, to move together to a new future.
27.	The barriers which have been put up to shut out the new are the different faces of colonialism—economic, technological and the powerful weapons of food and information. These are the walls at which we raise our voices. That is why we lay stress on a new economic order, a new information order, preserving cultural identities. Walls do not move and can be got around.
28.	Vast knowledge and technological advances concentrated in the hands of a few can lead to a new type of oppression, the barbarity inherent in technological excellence when it is monopolized by the powerful and used for their ends. What just a few years ago were considered as interesting fantasies are today perilously close to the facts of contemporary living. Brainwashing is not confined to any one system or one part of the world, to say nothing of the other cruelties of deprivation.
29.	The shape of this new order is not clear. What form the future will take is being moulded right now by our actions. When I speak of the new order, I am not talking merely of more effective and more widespread use of technology, however dramatic it may be, of which we read so much and about which there are many prognoses. I speak of entirely different thought processes and emotional reactions m the use of technology. We must imbue technology with deeper understanding of the difficulties of others and ensure protection against any further technological colonialism. The new order cannot be confined to the economic or social or cultural. It must encompass all of these and yet be much larger. We must create a new international order of humanity, where power is tempered with compassion, where knowledge and capability are at the service of all humanity.
 

﻿208.	 Mr. President, at the outset, permit me to congratulate you on your election to the presidency of the thirty-eighth session. Since this year marks the 200th anniversary of the birth of Simon Bolivar, the election of the representative of a Bolivarian country to the presidency is also an expression of esteem by the international community of the ideals of Bolivar, beyond being a tribute to your nation, Panama, and indeed to the Americas as a whole. We know that your vast experience and skill will stand us in good stead in our deliberations.
209.	I should also like to express our appreciation to your predecessor, the Deputy Foreign Minister of Hungary, Mr. Imre Hollai, for the able manner in which he carried out his tasks as President of the thirty-seventh session.
210.	Israel wishes to congratulate also from this rostrum Saint Christopher and Nevis on its accession to independence and to welcome it on its admission to the United Nations. We wish its people peace and prosperity.
211.	The official closing of the thirty-seventh session on 19 September marked the passage of yet another year of turbulence and incertitude. But as we begin this new thirty-eighth session, we see amply demonstrated once again the aspirations of Member States for peace and tranquillity, for equality and justice in our world. This, after all, should be the common denominator for all of us who have been meeting in this Hall. And yet it is a sad comment on the ingenuity of the human race that so little has been done in these last 38 autumns to go beyond the hopes invested in the United Nations in 1945.
212.	New wars have been erupting perennially, some more bloody than the greatest battles fought in the Second World War, and old conflicts have continued to smoulder without let-up. Significantly, the greatest problems which have faced mankind since the end of the Second World War have been dealt with outside this Organization, although it was founded on the belief that the concert of nations can and must stand up to its trials and travails together and out of common accord.
213.	It is indeed gratifying to observe the family of nations grow from year to year. We welcome new partners in our common endeavours, for the United Nations will either stand or fall on the principle of universality based on equal sharing of opportunities and burdens in a pluralistic world. But reality must not be cast aside; the United Nations is patently incapable of meeting its challenges, as it is, regrettably, an organization which has been hijacked to serve the narrow interests of those who would do anything to advance their particular and selfish causes, and theirs alone. The United Nations has become a forum of mercantile transactions of favours, of a complacent trampling of the principles and purposes of the Charter. These are the sad realities within which we live—realities which, however, we are not compelled to accept or adopt.
214.	There is today no evident correlation between the hopes of nations and the United Nations role in the realization of those hopes; no rational connection between the aspirations and expectations expressed at the beginning of each General Assembly session and the many acrimonious debates in committees and the flood of paper resolutions that emerge at the tail end of the sessions. This is not only the point of view of Israel; it has been dwelt upon by several Assembly Presidents in the past.
215.	Israel, of course, has had its own share of disillusionment with the United Nations. The persistence of Israel's adversaries' hatred and rejectionism has been largely tolerated here without prohibition or hindrance, primarily because of a great transfer of wealth, gratuitous and unprecedented, from the highly industrialized nations of the West to some Arab countries and the resultant concentration over the last decade of economic influence in the hands of the oil-producing Arab nations.
216.	Yet, however frustrating Israel's experience with the United Nations has seemed to be, my country has not relinquished the first flush of hope that the founding of the United Nations produced in the wake of the Second World War. Beyond its own political preoccupations at the United Nations, Israel has been observing with great concern those economic and social problems which consistently mar relations among nations.
217.	Economic issues, as well as those of war and peace and arms control, have given more cause for fear than for hope in the past year. Insecurity and distress continue to afflict the greater part of humanity.
218.	The deliberations on economic issues conducted between developed and developing nations, as well as those among the developing nations themselves, progress far more slowly than the rate at which these problems continue to grow. The gravity of these issues requires unrelenting endeavour.
219.	Israel, for its part, is willing, within the means at its disposal, to make its contribution to the advancement of international economic co-operation. In this spirit, we have recently presented our "transitional economy plan", already circulated at the thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly. The aim of the plan, which is based on Israel's own experience, is the application of low-cost improvements to the rural sectors of various societies. Dozens of developing countries and international economic organizations have already expressed their interest in advancing this programme and in implementing the ideas relevant to their needs and special circumstances. We are happy to note that some developed countries have shown eagerness to incorporate parts of this project into their own development strategy for the developing and least developed countries.
220.	Israel believes in both collective and individual efforts to fight hunger on this planet and has participated actively, through its international co-operation programme, in alleviating this scourge. The United Nations system should be the central vehicle for the required international co-operation. Its ability to carry out this role efficiently must depend to a large degree on its observance of the principles of universality in participation and adherence to genuine objectives of economic development.
221.	Unfortunately, we have been witnessing an ever growing attempt to politicize international economic efforts by the injection of elements of global and regional conflicts. The developing countries are ultimately the main victims of this attitude, as precious resources for development are channelled into futile and senseless exercises totally unrelated to the pressing economic needs of the greater part of mankind.
222.	No less disturbing is the insufficient progress in the international handling of the arms race and security- building measures. Israel has long been concerned about the danger posed by nuclear armaments. It has, therefore, consistently supported the objective of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons.
223.	Israel naturally examines these problems from the perspective of the Middle East. We have concluded that the most credible barrier to the proliferation of nuclear weapons in our region would be to make the Middle East a nuclear-weapon-free zone. To that end, Israel has made proposals based on the precepts of the Latin American model which had led to the conclusion of the Treaty of Tlatelolco.
224.	It is only logical that the initiative for the establishment of such a zone should originate with the States in the region, and the preliminary consultations necessary for achieving this aim must be carried out directly among them; they should be conducted in good faith and be addressed to issues pertinent to the establishment of such a zone.
225.	It is clear that only free and direct negotiations among all Middle Eastern States can ensure real progress towards the conclusion of a convention which would establish a system of mutually binding obligations on all States of the region. My delegation has been advocating this approach in the annual General Assembly debates; it introduced a draft resolution, contained in the annex to a letter dated 9 June 1981/ and formed part of the consensus on the subject. Our initiative gained wide- ranging support, and recognized leaders and experts in the field of disarmament paid tribute to Israel's position. Israel's proposal, however, was unfortunately turned down by hostile States in the region.
226.	Israel is fully aware of the many political differences between the States of the Middle East. None of those differences should be permitted to stand in the way of the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone. Israel, for its part, stands ready to commence negotiations on this matter among the interested States of our region at any time and without any preconditions.
227.	In recent years, the suppression of human rights by many Governments around the world has reached alarming proportions. It persists in all but a few countries and is in clear violation of the principles enshrined in various international treaties and in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. In the Middle East itself, many of the Arab regimes flagrantly violate these rights by persecuting political, ethnic and religious groups and minorities; by imprisoning political opponents without trial on a widespread scale; by humiliating, torturing and, indeed, executing many political prisoners; by staging at times large-scale massacres of their own citizens, as was the case in Hama, Syria, in February of last year; and by suppressing such fundamental liberties as freedom of expression and assembly.
228.	The Jewish people have known for centuries what it is like to suffer at the hands of cruel authoritarian regimes. Israel abhors such manifestations of repression. My country supports all sincere efforts to foster respect for and safeguarding of human rights. At the same time, it deplores attempts in this Organization and elsewhere hypocritically to divert legitimate concern for human rights in directions which serve objectionable and narrow political interests.
229.	Unfortunately, the Soviet Union's continuing harassment of Soviet Jewry remains one of the most persistent and glaring human rights problems faced by the world today. In spite of the many international agreements to which the Soviet Union is a signatory, such as the Helsinki accord,' hundreds of thousands of Jews in that country are being systematically denied the basic human right to emigrate and to be reunited with their families in Israel. At the same time, those who have been formally denied exit permits have been forced to live as outcasts in Soviet society, often for lengthy periods, having been deprived of their means of livelihood, exposed to the whims of the authorities and subjected to all manner of harassment. In some cases, Jews who apply to leave for Israel or who seek to preserve their Jewish heritage and identity are arrested and imprisoned and languish in Soviet jails and labour camps under the most inhuman conditions.
230.	Indeed, as the gates of emigration have been nearly sealed, officially inspired anti-Semitism, with the inevitable strong racist overtones, is being increasingly manifested in the Soviet media and in various forms of discrimination. Regrettably, the United Nations has yet to take appropriate action on this matter, which must distress decent people everywhere and which is certainly worthy of the Organization's attention.
231.	Unfortunately, the United Nations, and the General Assembly in particular, have also done very little of a constructive nature to alleviate international tension and defuse the many conflicts which have continued to plague much of the world for several years now. The cause of neither peace nor world security has been advanced in this past year. The past year has seen the escalation of the confrontation between the super-Powers, which in turn has had grave repercussions throughout the world, particularly for the smaller nations. International tension was greatly increased when the Soviet Air Force recently deliberately shot down a South Korean airliner—an act that was overwhelmingly condemned by the international community. Most of the armed conflicts and local wars raging around the globe year ago continue to exact a heavy toll in casualties despite destruction and suffering. In Afghanistan, Kampuchea foreign intervention continue, with hundreds of thousands having been killed or injured thus far and millions rendered homeless. The Middle East is torn apart by violent inter-Arab rivalries and by a number of conflicts, of which the Arab- Israel conflict is but one. Iraq and Iran are locked in a bitter, prolonged war which has now entered its fourth year and has already claimed the lives of hundreds of thousands. Internecine strife, encouraged by Syria, has rent Lebanon. Libya has pushed ahead with its imperialistic ambitions in Chad, while seeking to subvert also other regimes in Africa and elsewhere. Various disputes have also been plaguing the western hemisphere.
232.	Although usually stemming from local factors, much of the unrest throughout the world, including the Middle East, has been sharply exacerbated by Soviet policies which have exploited tensions to generate instability and thereby broaden the scope of Soviet influence. Whether directly, as in Afghanistan, or indirectly, through such proxies as Viet Nam, Syria and Libya, the Soviet Union has, instead of contributing to world peace, aggravated crisis situations and even sparked the outbreak of hostilities. Unfortunately, this holds true also for Soviet involvement in the Arab-Israel conflict.
233.	The last decade has demonstrated that the solution of the Arab-Israel conflict is indeed possible, provided that the parties to the conflict are sincere in their efforts to resolve it. Once again it must be stressed that progress in this regard was made entirely outside the United Nations. Indeed, instead of contributing to the promotion of peace in the Middle East, the Assembly and other United Nations organs have often added to the violent rhetoric which has fanned the flames of the Arab-Israel conflict. Were we to judge matters as they are reflected in these chambers, one might easily conclude that the conflict is insoluble. However, in the real world of the Middle East itself—as distinct from the world of the United Nations—progress has been achieved, as we have seen in the cases of the Israel-Egypt peace treaty and in the recent Israel-Lebanon agreement. Once States engage in serious and direct negotiations which acknowledge their mutual legitimate needs and interests, agreement has been shown to be possible.
234.	The United Nations, manipulated by powerful blocs and automatic majorities, has generated a basic misconception concerning the essence of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
235.	The essence of the conflict has always been and remains the persistent enmity of Arab States towards Jewish national renaissance. For decades now Arab leaders have obstinately maintained that the whole region from the Atlantic Ocean to the Persian Gulf must be exclusively Arab. This intolerant and exclusivist attitude has been reflected in their repressive policies directed against various non-Arab national groups in the Middle East. This, and no other, has been the primary cause also of the ongoing Arab-Israel conflict.
236.	Unfortunately, after several costly wars started by Arab States in their bid to destroy Israel, many of the Arab countries have apparently not yet realized that their designs concerning Israel are both wrong and futile. Thus, what they have been unable to achieve on the battlefield, they are now trying to achieve in the diplomatic arena. This has been demonstrated again at this podium during the last few days by the extreme language and content of the speeches made by, among others, the Foreign Ministers of Syria and Iraq.
237.	Significantly and most regrettably, representatives of Arab countries habitually referred to as "moderates" have not objected but acquiesced. Such indeed is their "moderation", which should be duly taken note of by all those nations here at the United Nations which have either deliberately or, at the very least, unwittingly aided and abetted a campaign which strives to delegitimize my country in order to dismantle it by stages.
238.	In the context just described, Arab enmity towards the State of Israel has been demonstrated very clearly in the case of the terrorist organization known as the PLO, an artificial framework which was created by the Arab Governments in the early sixties. That grouping of rival terrorist factions has always depended on the continued support of the Arab States and their allies for its very existence, as has been evidenced most vividly during and since the destruction of the PLO infrastructure in and around Beirut last year.
239.	Too many people have resorted to wishful thinking when referring to the PLO. Smooth phrases and eloquent double-talk cannot hide the PLO's true intentions and nature. Its criminal goal remains the destruction of Israel, whether in one fell swoop or in stages. In pursuing this objective, the PLO terrorists have perpetrated bloody atrocities which have struck at all, Jews and non-Jews, young and old, men, women and children. The PLO's true character and objectives must have become evident recently even to those who in the past were taken in by PLO phraseology.
240.	The continuing tragedy of Lebanon is a consequence of the havoc wreaked by the PLO and its allies over the past decade. Knowing full well the potential for subversion inherent in the PLO, Arab Governments were unwilling to tolerate the presence of this terrorist organization on their own countries' soil and, as a result, dumped that group upon Beirut and on the people of Lebanon. As a consequence, Lebanon's sovereignty was eroded and the country was tom apart by violent strife.
241.	It is well known that Israel stands for the full restoration of Lebanese sovereignty, of Lebanese independence, of Lebanese territorial integrity, of the unity of Lebanon within its internationally recognized boundaries, as well as for the restoration of the authority of the lawful government of Lebanon within that country. Israel believes that in order to permit the attainment of that goal, all foreign forces must be withdrawn from that country. Alongside these objectives, and bearing in mind the experience of recent years, Israel's legitimate security needs must also be guaranteed and Lebanese territory must never be used again for attacks upon our citizens.
242.	The agreement concluded by Israel and Lebanon on 17 May 1983 is linked to these requirements. Israel was and remains determined to proceed towards full and speedy implementation of this agreement aimed at the restoration of Lebanese sovereignty. However, it must have become clear to everyone by now that Syria and the PLO have no more intention of respecting Lebanese sovereignty today than they did in the past.
243.	We have all heard Lebanon's emphatic and repeated demands for the withdrawal of the Syrian forces and the PLO from its territory. At the last session, Lebanese President Amin Gemayel used this rostrum to call for "the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of all non-Lebanese forces from Lebanon". In a letter to the Twelfth Arab Summit Conference at Fez, a year ago, Lebanon explicitly demanded the termination of the Syrian and PLO presence in that country. Lebanon reiterated its demands as recently as last month. On 2 September, the Lebanese Foreign Minister wrote to the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States insisting again on Syrian and PLO withdrawal and he repeated this demand in his statement from this rostrum during the last meeting. Yet all this has been to no avail. Not only has Syria paid no heed to these demands, but it has increased its involvement in Lebanon and is engaged in direct warfare against the legitimate Government of that country. President Assad, backed diplomatically and militarily by the Soviet Union and assisted by Palestinian terrorists, continues his ruthless operations to keep Lebanon in disarray in an attempt to force Lebanon to submit to Syrian domination. Resorting to its well-known tactics of threats and extortion, Syria continues to undermine Lebanon's path to regaining its sovereignty. This is pursued by Syria directly or by proxy, and its uninhibited brutality stops at nothing.
244.	Israel's withdrawal from the Shouf Mountains, a first step in the direction of total withdrawal, was announced well in advance in order to provide the Lebanese Government and army with a chance to extend its control over that area. They were prevented from doing so by Syria and its proxies, which turned Lebanon once again into a battleground, exploiting existing enmity between groups there and encouraging all-out war against its legitimate Government.
245.	Israel welcomes the fact that a cease-fire has now been declared in Lebanon and hopes that the cessation of hostilities will endure, leading to true reconciliation, free of outside interventions and dictates. We are following the situation closely and are looking forward to the establishment of conditions which will ensure security and tranquillity along the Israel-Lebanon border. Under no circumstances will Israel agree to return to the state of affairs which prevailed until 16 months ago, when Lebanese territory was used as a base for terrorist operations against our citizens. Israel sincerely hopes and wishes to see an independent Lebanon in which a strong and stable regime exercises control throughout the country.
246.	Earlier, I had occasion to note that the United Nations has been systematically exploited in recent years as an instrument of Arab warfare against Israel. The most recent effort in this regard was the ill-conceived international conference at Geneva several weeks ago. As part of the manipulation of United Nations organs during the past decade by countries arrayed against Israel, that conference predictably served as an arena for anti-Israel slogans and made no attempt whatsoever to examine honestly and objectively the causes of the Arab-Israel conflict.
247.	Arab-Israel reconciliation can and must emanate from direct negotiations without outside interference. There is place neither for dictated nor for imposed solutions. Any overt or covert attempts to circumvent free and direct negotiations between the States of the region can only delay the peace process. A blatant example of such attempts is the so-called Fez "peace plan" with its calculated ambiguity and double-talk. It is intended to serve those who wish to evade direct negotiations and seek to impose long-standing and extreme Arab demands, thereby undermining the cause of peace. Any equitable and realistic solution will have to take into account the basic fact that on the territory of the former Palestine Mandate two national States have now been in existence for over three decades, one Arab and one Jewish. I refer, of course, to the Kingdom of Jordan and the State of Israel.
248.	The contribution of the United Nations and the world community at large should be to encourage discourse and dialogue rather than attitudes and trends which perpetuate and continued hostility to my country. Regrettably, the United Nations has allowed itself to be drawn into a biased position, has become entangled in a mushrooming web of unbalanced resolutions, has put itself into a straitjacket of partisan committees and has squandered vast resources and funds for dubious purposes. The time has surely come for-all to realize that a solution to the Arab-Israel conflict will be possible only if it takes full account also of the rights, interests and needs of Israel. First and foremost among these is the inalienable right of the Jewish people to self- determination and sovereignty in its homeland, the land of Israel.
249.	The Camp David accords reached after intensive direct negotiations with Egypt, with the participation of the United States of America, show what can be achieved if the parties involved approach the problem in a spirit of conciliation. These accords which fully take into account the legitimate rights and interests of the parties involved, have also set the stage for a future treaty with Jordan and have offered the Palestinian Arabs living in Judea, Samaria and the Gaza district an active role in shaping their own future, initially within the framework of autonomy and afterwards during the negotiations to determine the final status of the areas in question. Anyone sincerely interested in the well-being of the Palestinian Arabs, as well as in a true peace which would take into account both the interests of Israel and those of its Arab neighbours, should welcome the progress exemplified by Camp David. By contrast, those who wish to perpetuate the Arab-Israel dispute for selfish political reasons will no doubt continue to support one-sided resolutions in this body and will seek to undermine those initiatives which have brought us closer to a genuine Arab-Israel peace.
250.	Israel welcomes the voices of reason that have come out of African capitals declaring that their contribution towards the promotion of dialogue in the Middle East will be more credible and effective when their relations with both Israel and its neighbours are normalized. In the past, the potential inherent in the relations between Israel and the developing countries in Africa and elsewhere was realized in achievements which have proved useful and of significant mutual benefit.
251.	Israel would welcome the resumption of ties and expansion of co-operation and friendship with all those who/believe, as we do, that all nations, whether or not they agree on every issue, should engage in mutual relations and dialogue. In our opinion these are elementary requirements if we are to advance the prospects of peace and co-operation in our world, The purposes of the United Nations, as defined in Article 1 of the Charter, are to maintain peace, to develop friendly relations between nations, to achieve international co-operation in the solution of international problems and to act as a centre for harmonizing the actions of countries. These noble purposes, to which the founders of the United Nations dedicated themselves in 1945, are ill served by the Organization's present unchecked drifting into their abandonment through impotence. Above all, the principle of the sovereign equality of nations has often been set aside in deference to the dictates of bloc politics and military and economic blackmail.
252.	Despite this regrettable trend, Israel remains prepared actively to support a new, positive approach. An initial step in this direction could be the jettisoning of the heavy burden of politicization in the specialized agencies, thus rendering them as useful and efficient as they were meant to be.
253.	Israel still believes that the dim record of the past must not cloud our belief in the future. The Government of Israel is prepared today as it has always been to negotiate with the neighbouring Arab States an equitable solution to the Arab-Israel conflict.
254.	From this rostrum I wish to address myself to the Arab peoples of our region and to inquire whether 36 years of war and bloodshed have solved any problems. Are we better off as a result of so many years of conflict than we would have been had our nations lived side by side in peace? Could not the billions squandered on arms procurements have been put to better use in solving urgent domestic problems, such as poverty, hunger, illiteracy and a widening social gap between rich and poor? For how long will your governments be able to divert your legitimate concern with social injustice by pursuing hostile policies against my country, policies which can only perpetuate the violence which has cost our societies so much? Indeed, for how long will your Governments be prepared to sacrifice the flower of youth on the bloody altar of war?
258. Continued hostility and war have brought our region much grief and suffering. Would it not behave us to begin a new chapter in the history of our troubled region? Would it not be better for us to turn the Middle East into an area marked by co-operation and progress? Thousands of years ago from our region went forth a vision of universal peace. Together we could fulfil that vision in our region and be a source of inspiration to the rest of the world. Therefore let us meet in a spirit of reconciliation. Let us replace tension with tranquillity, misery with prosperity, hatred with friendship. Above all, instead of war, let us have peace.
﻿266.	 Sir, may I begin by congratulating you on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly. This is an appropriate recognition both of your own personal achievements and of the important role your country is playing in international affairs. New Zealand will fully support you in your endeavour to make this session a productive one, just as we fully support the Secretary-General in his efforts to make the United Nations more effective in the search for peace and development.
267.	Less than two weeks ago I had the pleasure of representing New Zealand at the independence celebrations of the new State of Saint Christopher and Nevis. Today I join others in congratulating the international community's newest Member in being represented for the first time at the United Nations. It is a salutary reminder to us all that one of the first acts of such a young and small country has been to register, in a formal sense, its interest in this Organization. We in New Zealand have no difficulty understanding that. By most counts, we are ourselves a young and small country. Our welfare can be profoundly influenced for better or worse by external developments very largely outside our control. Some four decades ago, when the Charter of the United Nations was negotiated, we held high hopes that through international co-operation we would achieve a measure of political and economic security which a country like New Zealand could not hope to realize alone.
268.	Time and experience have tempered our earlier expectations. In recent years we have seen the Soviet Union invade Afghanistan in flagrant violation of the Charter. Similarly, the invasion of Kampuchea by Viet Nam has been followed by nearly five years of occupation, thereby preventing the political settlement that the Assembly has urged repeatedly. The essential character of the apartheid system remains intact, in spite of the strongest condemnation by the international community. Day by day we witness the continuing suffering of various peoples and countries in the Middle East, indicating to us once more that peace and security cannot be achieved by force of arms alone. In one of those areas of conflict- Lebanon—New Zealand welcomes the cease-fire and hopes that it paves the way for a more lasting settlement among the parties involved.
269.	The Antarctic region stands in sharp contrast to these troubled areas throughout the world. For over 20 years the Antarctic Treaty" has succeeded in making Antarctica an area of international co-operation and preventing it from becoming the object of international dissension. The Treaty is open to any Member of the United Nations and it remains in force indefinitely. It makes a very effective contribution to achieving the purposes of the United Nations. We assume that any study carried out by the Organization will fully recognize this fact and seek to reinforce the Treaty rather than to weaken it.
270.	Antarctica is one example of what can be achieved by practical international co-operation. The South Pacific is another. At least once a year the heads of all the independent Governments in our region meet together in the South Pacific Forum to talk over common problems and to work out ways of dealing with them. So far we have succeeded in keeping our part of the world peaceful. We are, however, concerned about the continuation of nuclear testing in the South Pacific. We appreciate the offer made by the French Government to allow qualified experts from countries in the area to visit the testing site and check the effectiveness of the safety precautions followed by the French authorities. But the question is not merely one of safety precautions; it is about the use of a relatively peaceful part of the world for an essentially warlike purpose.
271.	We realize that this problem cannot be dealt with on a purely regional basis, and that is why New Zealand, like other countries in the South Pacific and elsewhere, attaches great importance to the negotiation of a comprehensive test-ban treaty. To be effective, such a treaty would need to be fully verifiable. Given good will and effort on all sides, we believe this problem can be overcome. The conclusion of a comprehensive test-ban treaty would do much to strengthen the 1968 Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and to limit the nuclear arms race.
272.	The part of the world in which New Zealanders live is one of the few areas of relative tranquillity. Nevertheless we are from time to time sharply reminded of the limitations both of international law and of normally accepted standards of civilized behaviour. The ruthless and totally unjustified attack by the Soviet Union on a civilian airliner has provided such a reminder. The Soviet Union must accept full responsibility for this act of brutality. What is truly outrageous is that the Soviet Government claims this action was fully in accordance with Soviet law. In plain language they seem to be saying that if tomorrow a civilian airliner from any one of our countries mistakenly flew over Soviet territory then they reserve the right to shoot it down.
273.	The limits to international co-operation are thus plain—all to plain—to see, yet the membership of the United Nations remains intact, and we welcome to the fold a new Member from the Caribbean region.
274.	The reason, I suggest, is obvious. However difficult it has been to develop habits of international cooperation on these major political issues, there is no practical alternative for the overwhelming majority of countries.
275.	I believe that today this applies with equal force to the international economy. International economic linkages are such that in practical terms no single country any longer has freedom of action. That is the consequence of several decades of sustained growth in world trade, production and investment. The interdependent world economy has arrived on our doorsteps, and the world has little idea how to manage it.
276.	The theory behind economic interdependence is not new. We always knew that the health of any individual economy was linked in no small measure with the health of its major trading and investment partners. There is nothing novel in pointing to the close connections between, say, trade and financial flows.
277.	What is new is that the practical significance of those linkages has increased to such an extent and with such rapidity that we have failed to adapt sufficiently our institutions and our thinking so as to be able to cope with those linkages.
278.	New Zealand respects the competence of the principal economic institutions such as IMF, the World Bank and GATT. As originally conceived after the war, they each had their role—IMF was concerned principally with short-term balance of payment adjustment and maintaining exchange rate stability, the Bank was concerned with development and GATT dealt with trade.
279.	The growth of interdependence has totally blurred these tidy dividing lines. The long-term resolution of the debt burden built up over recent years is inextricably linked with the resolution of the problems of protectionism. The old phrase that debt is deferred trade sums up the reality that it is only through increased exports that the interest and principal repayments can ever be met.
If protectionism chokes off that possibility, then the debt problem assumes very different proportions.
280.	It is not just a question of interdependence between issues such as debt and trade, development and growth. It is also a question of the interdependence between countries, between regions, between North and South.
281.	The current economic crisis facing many less developed countries has obscured the fact that until recently the growth performance of many of those countries was particularly strong. It has been estimated that in the 25-year period 1950 to 1975 the per capita gross Rational product of the developing countries as a whole grew at an average rate of 3.5 per cent per annum. Even though we knew this left a number of countries with unacceptable levels of poverty, this was a remarkable historic achievement. It was matched by creditable progress in such crucial indices as a steady rise in life expectancy and adult literacy.
282.	Because of these developments it was clear by the beginning of the 1980s that it was no longer accurate to see the concept of dependence flowing one way only. By the 1980s the economic health of developed countries was beginning to be influenced profoundly by the economic performance of their less developed neighbours.
283.	This is what interdependence means. It was visibly demonstrated last year when the expected recovery of the developed and affluent countries members of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development [OFCD] did not eventuate in the second half of 1982 very largely because of a sudden downturn in the demand for their exports to the less developed world. Faced with acute financing difficulties caused by a contraction in commercial bank lending, many of the more heavily indebted countries had no option but to pursue adjustment policies based largely on slashing imports. This impaired their own development needs. It impaired the OECD's recovery.
284.	From the suffering of the Second World War a system for international economic co-operation was developed. Those who designed that system had in mind a world economy that was very different from the interdependent world economy we live in today. In many respects those post-war arrangements achieved their central objectives. Many of the key elements, such as currency convertibility, are still as relevant today as they were then. The successes of that system of trade and payments created the global economy we have today. I believe the international community must now move on to the next phase of international economic co-operation and begin the task of managing that interdependence.
285.	To describe the scope and magnitude of that task I have used the term "a new Bretton Woods". For over a year, at a variety of international forums, I have urged the international community to initiate the comprehensive examination of the world's trade and payments system that is the first necessary step towards a new Bretton Woods. The conference as such should be regarded as the last step, the culmination of the most careful preparatory process of analysis and discussion.
286.	During that time there has been considerable debate over the future of the trade and payments system. There have also been unmistakable signs of a recovery in the United States economy, and the immediate danger of default by the most heavily indebted countries has been averted by various rescue operations.
287.	The key question, I believe, is whether the recovery and these rescue operations will in practice set back the growing consensus in favour of a comprehensive examination of the underlying structural difficulties facing the world economy. There is a serious danger that this will be the case. The remedy, however, lies entirely in our own hands.
288.	Let me first summarize the international debate as I believe it has evolved over that period. In February 1983 the Brandt Commission's second report proposed a major review of the world's trade and payments system." In March the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries endorsed the Indian Prime Minister's call for a conference on money and finance for development. Following the meeting of OECD ministers in May, at which I repeated my call for a Bretton Woods-type conference, the French President made a very similar proposal. Then, at the Williamsburg Summit the leaders of the industrialized countries issued a somewhat tentative call for their ministers of finance to work with the Managing Director of IMF to prepare the groundwork for what might develop into a high-level international monetary conference. However qualified that endorsement may have been, it was a response from the developed world to the growing weight of opinion favouring a careful examination of these international economic issues. The middle ground, if not clearly delineated, was at least becoming visible.
289.	Finally, at the meeting of Commonwealth finance ministers, which concluded in Trinidad and Tobago less than two weeks ago, ministers of finance from 44 countries, representing the diversity of wealth, population and size that is the key characteristic of that grouping, commended the general thrust of a major report entitled "Towards a New Bretton Woods".
290.	This was a report compiled by eminent experts from nine Commonwealth countries. Its work on conditionally, liquidity problems, the role of special drawing rights, protectionism and sovereign debt, to mention only a few of the issues covered in the report, will, I hope, be sifted and refined. As the first attempt by an international institution to outline the agenda for such a fundamental examination of the trade and payments system, it deserves careful consideration by the wider international community.
291.	Surveying the debate over the past 12 months as a whole, therefore, international opinion seems to have been evolving in a promising direction. We were beginning to move away from the sterile confrontations that have been the hallmark of international economic debate even in recent years.
292.	However, we now face the possibility that the recovery—welcome as it is—may have the somewhat predictable result of unravelling a good deal of that growing consensus. If the international community has been increasingly ready to consider the scope for changes to the trade and payments system, it has no doubt been due to the long period of stagflation we have been through. Equally, now that the first clear signs of a recovery in the United States and certain other industrial economies are evident, some of the pressure to examine these long- term issues is off. It may be only realistic to expect that debate to be influenced by short-term fluctuation in the real economy. It would, I suggest, be reasonable to expect a little more vision.
293.	In spite of the misgivings of many Governors and the continuing, though privately expressed, disquiet of the international banking community, a message to emerge from the annual meetings of IMF and the World Bank was, regrettably, all too clear. With some of the major industrial countries there was a mood that can be expressed quite simply: now that the recovery is under way, let us put aside all this talk of changes to the trade and payments system.
294.	I believe that view is more than short-sighted; it is tragically misplaced. The recovery of industrial countries, in itself undoubtedly the best piece of economic news we have had for some years, will not come to grips with the deep-seated changes that have occurred in the world economy since the formation of the Bretton Woods institutions.
295.	In 1982 the world economy went backwards. World production declined by an estimated 2 per cent, and the volume of world trade declined by 2.5 per cent. Had this continued into 1983 I believe it would have put nearly impossible strains on world economic and political stability. The recovery certain developed countries are now experiencing has to be seen against that perspective. It has turned the tide against the forces of contraction of world output and trade unprecedented in our post-war experience. The recovery in demand will strengthen many commodity prices and thus may offer some relief to those countries which, like New Zealand, have suffered disastrous declines in their terms of trade during the last decade. Finally, however, the recovery is not a panacea for the problems of debt, protectionism and development.
296.	In the first place the recovery is cyclical in nature and confined to relatively few countries. Even for them the persistence of high interest rates is a serious threat to sustained recovery of their economies.
297.	Recovery will not tackle the underlying roots of protectionism, since clearly, the growth of protectionist action predates the recession. Protectionism, which is by no means confined to the OECD countries, will persist in the developed world if only because no one is predicting growth rates which will reduce the number of unemployed, roughly 35 million, in the OECD area.
298.	Recovery will not do much to alleviate the debt burdens of many developing countries. The Commonwealth study "Towards a New Bretton Woods" estimates that there are as many as 40 countries which have been reported to have agreed to debt reschedulings or to be in substantial payments arrears. In the 10-month period to June 1983 the value of cross-border debt being renegotiated with commercial banks has been calculated as being over 20 times larger than in any previous year. Debt of this magnitude is a powerful force for uncertainty, a threat to the recovery and a source of instability for these Governments, whatever their political system.
299.	Nor can I see any reason why the recovery should reverse the mood—so obvious in most countries—which has been aptly described as "aid weariness". The New Zealand political system is no more immune to that than any other democratic country. However, my experience with our small but highly effective aid programmes in the independent countries of the South Pacific has convinced me that the prevailing modem view of aid is profoundly misplaced.
300.	I have advocated putting aid on a firmer basis, possibly by issuing special drawing rights to the countries in greatest need. In any such distribution there may be a useful role for the World Bank, in part because that would put the Bank's finances on a more assured basis.
301.	These are only some of the medium- and longer- term issues which I believe the modest recovery in the OECD area will do little to address.
302.	The ideas, the issues involved, although technical in nature, have profound political implications. Many countries represented in the Assembly have witnessed directly the political consequences that flow from economic dislocation. Economic growth and stable financial markets will not of themselves preserve the fabric of world peace, but they are powerful positive forces all the same. Many of the elements of the post-war system of economic co-operation are under strain. I believe we, as an international community, now need to develop new political levers to tackle some of the underlying difficulties. We must move beyond the ad hoc responses that have developed to cope with severe, long-term current account deficits. We must reassure heavily indebted countries that there will be adequate financing available while they pursue the long-term process of structural adjustment. The original political mandate of GATT, which is now all but exhausted, must be renewed.
303.	The difficulty in all this is to move beyond general expressions of concern to initiate a process which might come to grips with some of these fundamental issues facing the world trade and payments system.
304.	Of course, if the complacent mood prevalent in some countries persists there is little that can be done. In that case, the middle ground that I believe was becoming visible until very recently will quickly disappear. We will quit the field and leave it to extremists of varying points of view. We will return to the dubious pleasure of the sterile confrontations of past years.
305.	I do not pretend to have a blueprint for the process that might lead to a comprehensive examination of the trade and payments system. There are many possible approaches, involving different timetables and different combinations of people and institutions. The study "Towards a new Bretton Woods", to which I referred earlier, has one such proposal worthy of the Assembly's consideration. Ultimately, the process must be tailored to the needs of the main participants so as to command their support.
306.	It is not hard, however, to describe in general terms the criteria for a successful examination of the trade and payments system.
307.	First, the basic work must be undertaken by experts of the highest standing, otherwise its analytical competence would be subject to easy and probably fatal challenge.
308.	Secondly, these experts must enjoy the confidence of major Governments and have ready access to their political advice. In that way, we might avoid proposals that are completely outside the limits of political possibility.
309.	Thirdly, any such group must be of manageable size. In my view this implies a small group of around 15 to 25 members broadly representative of the international community and working closely with the major international economic institutions. We would probably end up with something analogous to the structure of the Interim Committee and the Executive Board of IMF. Unlike the Interim Committee, however, it would be concerned with all the fundamental long-term trade and payments issues, rather than simply determining the current policy of IMF.
310.	Fourthly, a conference, involving participation on a far wider international basis, should be seen as a conclusion rather than a beginning. The Commonwealth finance ministers saw a Bretton Woods-type conference in this context very much as an end to the process rather than a commencement.
311.	It is more difficult to be definitive about the timetable when agreement on the process described above still escapes our grasp. I believe there is an urgent need to begin the task now, and I believe that the general proposition has wide support. If we accept the projections which imply an annual rate of growth in the key industrial countries of 3 to 4 per cent into 1984, then this gives us some flexibility to implement any changes agreed at what we might call the study group level. If we delay the start of our examination too long, then we face the possibility of yet another cyclical downturn in the world economy. A return to an even less auspicious macro-economic climate could sound the death-knell to the implementation stage of the exercise.
312.	The point requires no labouring. There is a real and pressing need to get on with the job of re-examining the system and working out how to adapt it to the needs of the period we live in. Delay is dangerous. To avert the threat, we should aim to have broad international agreement to implementing changes in the trade and payments system by, say, 1985. The process of preparing for it should begin straight away, certainly by the beginning of 1984. The time for action is now.
 




﻿58.		First of all, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your election to the important post of President of this session of the General Assembly. Your wealth of experience, including your profound knowledge of the Organization, is an excellent guarantee of the effectiveness of the work of the General Assembly.
59.	I should like to take this opportunity to convey our gratitude to our friend and comrade Mr. Imre Hollai, the representative of the fraternal Hungarian People's Republic, for his skilful conduct of the proceedings of the General Assembly last year.
60.	We would also like to welcome the entry into the United Nations of a new State, Saint Christopher and Nevis.
61.	There are today 158 Member States of the United Nations. It is worth recalling that this reality of the contemporary international scene has quite a definite political meaning.
62.	The solution to the crucial problem—the problem of war and peace—depends precisely on the States Members of the United Nations, on the way they construct relations among themselves and on the way they act in the world arena.
63.	Under the Charter of the United Nations these States have pledged to "live together in peace with one another as good neighbours".
64.	If only all of them abided by that Charter provision It would not then be necessary so vehemently to voice the urgent need to defend peace and to dispel the storm clouds gathering over it.
65.	That is what the Soviet Union is once again doing today.
66.	Our planet is practically caving in under the unprecedented burden of arms with unheard-of destructive power. Should it happen that those arms are actually used, the very survival of human civilization will be in question.
67.	The situation is compounded by the fact that the forces heating up the international atmosphere in order to further their pathological ambitions have now sharply intensified their activities.
68.	The reckless actions of those forces, combined with the enormous potential of lethal weapons, have produced, figuratively speaking, an explosive mixture which has added an entirely new dimension to the threat to peace.
69.	Given the present situation, the task of preventing war has now acquired particular urgency.
70.	At a time when all mankind is threatened with a nuclear catastrophe it is the duty of all those who have anything to do with the political decision-making process to put concern for peace above all else.
71.	This is what the peoples of the world are entitled to demand of their political leaders, their Governments and parliaments and, of course, international organizations, above all the United Nations, which is designed to be "a centre for harmonizing the actions of nations" in maintaining international security.
72.	On all continents the people's anti-war movement is growing and its activities in the struggle to preserve peace are increasing. This is only natural, for people cannot and will not live today in a permanent state of anxiety about tomorrow.
73.	The course pursued by some Members of the Organization is contrary to the age-old human yearning for a peaceful life embodied in the purposes and principles of the Charter and to the interests of the peace-loving majority of States. The credo of the architects of this course is revealed by the Washington-imposed decisions of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization bloc. Their policy is aimed at achieving military superiority, a vantage point from which they wish to dominate and dictate to others.
74.	It would appear that the nuclear arsenals of the United States and NATO are filled to capacity, and yet the assembly lines continue to chum out military hardware in a kind of frenzy. Every item of military hardware that exists is being either increased or replaced by another even more destructive.
75.	Armaments programmes costing many billions are being approved one after another. Whatever objections are raised—and they are being raised in this regard by sober-minded politicians and authoritative public figures in the United States itself—the United States Administration has but one thing to say: there is not the slightest doubt that we must arm and preferably two or three times over.
76.	There have been fierce clashes over deployment of the MX strategic missile and, indeed, as to whether it is necessary at all, but the decision was both to deploy the MX and to develop the Minuteman—yet another intercontinental missile.
77.	There were arguments over whether or not to build the B-l bomber. The decision was to go ahead with two new types of strategic bomber, at the same time.
78.	Other kinds of nuclear and other systems are also being put into mass production. The barbaric neutron weapon and new chemical weapons are being stockpiled. Next on the list is the development of systems for waging warfare in and from outer space.
79.	Under the pretext of an alleged shortage of nuclear weapons in areas where they already exist, attempts are being made to add to them, and where they do not exist, attempts are being made to deploy them.
80.	The intention has been expressed to move nuclear weapons as close as possible to the borders of the Soviet Union and its allies, to introduce into Western Europe new American medium-range missiles, that is to say Pershing II and cruise missiles.
81.	To the south and to the east the land and waters are also being saturated with nuclear weapons. A11 this is taking place over a wide geographic area, from Diego Garcia to Okinawa, across the vast expanse of the Indian Ocean and the Pacific.
82.	In order to justify the unchecked escalation of their militaristic preparations they are deliberately whipping up war hysteria and do not stop short of staging the crudest provocations.
83.	We, for our part, have already set forth our view, based on principle, of the incident involving the intrusion of the South Korean aircraft into Soviet airspace.
84.	It is impermissible for anyone to infringe the sovereignty of States, and this includes the inviolability of their borders. This is a universally recognized rule of international law and is fully consistent with the Charter of the United Nations. Anyone that attempts to violate our borders must know that he will have to bear the full responsibility.
85.	We have expressed our regret at the loss of human life. The initiators of this anti-Soviet act of provocation are entirely to blame for this tragedy. No matter what scurrilous slander or dishonest devices they resort to, they will never be able to cover up their tracks and conceal the true aims of their crime.
86.	To the impartial observer there cannot and should not be the slightest doubt as to the nature of these aims. An act of sabotage against peace was committed to further militaristic policies and the inflation of military budgets.
87.	In an attempt to change in their own favour the military-strategic situation in the world they invoke the security interests of the United States and its allies.
88.	It is the right and duty of each country to protect its own security, just as it is its right and duty to work for the strengthening of universal peace.
89.	But nowadays international and national security are interrelated to a greater extent than ever before. Neither can be reliably ensured when the United States and NATO are spurring the arms race and pursuing a policy based on a "position of strength".
90.	Such a policy, however it may be packaged, is the exact opposite of a policy which ensures international security.
91.	Certain quarters in the United States have become partial to ringing phrases. Of late a formula that has gained currency at the highest level is "peace through strength", which means, of course, the strength of the United States. This has been proclaimed as its policy.
92.	In both ancient and modern history there have been quite a few attempts to be the strongest and to rule the world. It is common knowledge how these all ended.
93.	Through costly experience mankind has distilled a different notion of what should be the basis of peace and security: the renunciation of the threat or use of force and peaceful co-operation among States. That is what inspired the creation of the United Nations. That is the one and only foundation upon which peace can rest.
94.	The myth of the "Soviet threat", invented to deceive the peoples, is being used on a particularly wide scale today. In his own time V. I. Lenin aptly characterized those who "shout about red militarism . . . pretend that they believe this absurdity and throw charges of this kind right and left", making use of their "skill in concocting false arguments and in throwing dust in the eyes of the masses".
95.	Since the Great October Revolution peace and friendship among peoples has been the sign of our socialist State. We remain faithful to that sign.
96.	There has been a great deal of talk about the USSR being "excessively armed" and having military superiority. It has been claimed that the West needs to dose the existing gap. Yet the facts—and the West is just as well aware of them as we are—confirm beyond doubt that in all areas—strategic nuclear arms, medium-range weapons in Europe, the conventional armed forces of NATO and of the Warsaw Treaty—there is approximate equality between the two sides.
97.	Statements about national security interests are riddled with falsehoods. They are turned inside-out so that those interests conflict with the security interests of other countries and peoples.
98.	Those who like to hold forth about the sanctity of international obligations and to preach morality in relations among States are violating elementary norms of decency, showing disrespect not only for statesmen and States but also for the United Nations. Moreover, as was pointed out in a recent statement by Mr. Andropov, this question as to whether this international Organization, whose task it is to maintain peace and security, can be located in a country in which an unbridled militaristic psychosis is spreading and the good name of the Organization is being insulted.
99.	The contenders for the role of master of the destinies of the world brazenly proclaim as a sphere of their vital interests any particular area of the world they take a fancy to, an area perhaps that is even thousands of miles away from the United States. They are prepared to stake such claims all over the globe.
100.	Thus, the sphere of the United States "vital interests" includes for example, the Middle East, where new anti-Arab deals and designs violating the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people are being pushed through. Step by step the United States is forcing its presence, including its military presence, on that region.
101.	Israel is being encouraged to continue its policy of aggression. Tel Aviv has absolutely no wish to end its adventure in Lebanon. Palestinian refugees in that country are being subjected to acts of genocide. Lebanon has been forced into accepting a capitulation agreement. Attempts are being made to turn the State of Lebanon into a United States-Israeli protectorate and virtually to dismember that country.
102.	Constant pressure is being exerted on Syria to make it change its steadfast course in Middle East affairs.
103.	As a result, the Middle East continues to be a focal point of the danger of war, while a peaceful settlement remains out of reach. All this is damaging to both the vital interests of the peoples of the region and the interests of international security.
104.	The Soviet Union consistently advocates the elimination of the consequences of the Israeli aggression, supports the legitimate rights of the Arab peoples, including the right of the Arab people of Palestine to establish a State of their own, and advocates a just and comprehensive settlement and the convening of an international conference on the Middle East with the participation on an equal footing of all the parties concerned, including the PLO, the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people.
105.	The hegemonistic policy of "vital interests" is well matched by the tools used to implement it. They include the "central command" set up to carry out interventionist operations against almost 20 sovereign States in the Middle East, in South-West Asia and on the African continent.	
106.	The "rapid deployment force", whose mission is to prevent internal changes in various countries if such changes are not to Washington's liking, is in a constant state of readiness. It can be said that the creation of such forces has become a vogue among NATO powers. The events in Chad show where this can lead.
107.	What about the extensive worldwide network of United States military bases? They too are being equipped for use against peoples and countries fighting for their freedom and defending their sovereignty. The areas where this struggle is going on are being surveyed for sites for new military bases.
108.	Aircraft carriers and battleships are being dispatched to the shores of those who are unwilling to submit to foreign diktat. Modern "gunboats" ply the waters off the coasts of many independent countries.
109.	Libya has been chosen as a target for a show of force in the Mediterranean.
110.	A United States armada is stationed in the Indian Ocean. It is no accident that Washington is opposed to the proposal of the non-aligned countries to turn that region into a zone of peace and is impeding the convening of an international conference on the Indian Ocean.
111.	The Soviet Union cannot ignore the threat to its security emanating from that quarter, especially since the United States has broken off and refuses to resume the Soviet-American talks on the limitation and subsequent curtailment of military activities in that region. Our country has been and remains in favour of the withdrawal from that area of all naval forces not belonging to the littoral States and supports the idea of creating a zone of peace in the Indian Ocean.
112.	Large United States naval contingents are concentrated off Central American countries, along both the Atlantic and the Pacific coasts. Land and air forces are being concentrated.
113.	The purpose of all this must be clear to everyone. The whole policy of the United States serves but one purpose: that of containing the liberation movement of the peoples, to obstruct the process of the strengthening of national independence and democratic change in Latin American countries.
114.	At the same time the United States authorities dismiss the very idea that they assume the overt role of policeman. They prefer to call it "assistance to fiends". Yet their friends include anti-popular regimes steeped in blood and infamy.
115.	They are shielding the military junta in El Salvador from the wrath of the people by supplying it generously with money and weapons. They are sending their military advisers there to supervise repressive operations being carried out by the puppet regime.
116.	Brutal pressure is being brought to bear on Nicaragua, whose people have taken a strong stand in favour of the progressive development of their country. Nicaragua is being threatened from the sea, gangs of mercenaries and pirate aircraft are infiltrated into its territory, and neighbouring States are incited to hostility against it.
117.	Washington will not succeed in concealing the fact that it is organizing aggression against Nicaragua, thus posing a threat to peace in Central America and exacerbating the international situation in general.
118.	No amount of demagoguery about the  'scheming of Moscow and Havana" will hide the true causes of the growth of the liberation movement in the countries of the region: imperialist oppression and the poverty of the masses. Do they really expect anyone to swallow their bait? Latin America and the world at large are fully aware of the actual state of affairs.
119.	Washington does not like the fact that the Cuban people are following the path of socialism they themselves have chosen. Cuba's independent policy and its role in the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries go against the grain. Cuba is being subjected to open threats and subversive actions.
120.	Interference in the internal affairs of Central American States must be unconditionally stopped. The proposals put forward by Nicaragua and supported by Cuba open up the possibility of easing tensions and bringing about a political solution of the existing problems. The course pursued in particular by Mexico and other countries of the Contadora Group also appears to be positive in that respect.
121.	There has been much effort to make things look as if the current aggravation of the international situation dates back to well-known events in Afghanistan.
122.	One might assume that even those who were inclined to take that assertion on trust are now beginning to see through its absurdity. The enemies of the Afghan people will not reconcile themselves to the fact that the Afghan people have decided to rid themselves of medieval darkness and have begun building a democratic society.
123.	The situation around Afghanistan—and I am stressing the external aspects of the problem—can be settled on the basis of the proposals made by the Government of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, which proposals the Soviet Union fully supports. Military incursions into Afghanistan as well as any outside interference in its affairs, must be stopped.
124.	The talks being conducted through the representative of the Secretary-General are of positive significance. They would be more fruitful if the Pakistani side were to display greater political foresight.
125.	The policy pursued by outside forces is behind the aggravation of the situation in South-East Asia. That policy is aimed primarily against Viet Nam, Laos and Kampuchea, whose peoples are defending their independence and are engaged in building a new and peaceful life. There have been persistent attempts to pit against the countries of Indo-China their neighbours, the States of the Association of South-East Asian Nations.
126.	The Soviet Union has been and remains on the side of the people of Viet Nam, Laos and Kampuchea. We support the proposals to turn South-East Asia into a zone of peace, good-neighbourliness and co-operation, and we support the initiatives of the three countries of Indo China to open a political dialogue among the States of the region. 
127.	Those who are blowing the so-called Kampuchean question out of proportion are not acting in good faith. The people of Kampuchea have chosen the political system for their country and they themselves choose the ones to make friends with and to rely upon.
128.	Alarming shifts are taking place in the policy of Japan, whose ruling circles seem to be pleased with the role currently assigned to it as NATO's partner in the Far East. The accelerated militarization of that country adds to tensions in the Far East.
129.	This policy can hardly be in the interests of Japan itself and it certainly does not help Japan to develop good relations with neighbouring States.
130.	Our country stands for the development of Soviet- Japanese relations on the basis of the principles of good- neighbourliness and cooperation, but of course this presupposes reciprocity.
131.	The fact that the Korean question remains unresolved does not enhance the stability of the situation in the Far East. The proposals of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea providing for the withdrawal of United States troops from South Korea and the creation of the conditions for the reunification of that country by peaceful means, without outside interference, offer a suitable basis for the settlement of this question. The USSR is in sympathy with this position and supports it.
132.	With the connivance of Western Powers and in the shelter of their neo-colonialist policies, the racist regime of Pretoria has been making aggressive moves against neighbouring States in southern Africa. These include, primarily, the undeclared war being waged against the People's Republic of Angola. Such criminal acts should be condemned and stopped.
133.	The United Nations and the Security Council must bring to bear the weight of their authority in favour of the early decolonization of Namibia, which is still being blocked by South Africa and its protectors. We are confident that the Namibian people will throw off the fetters of colonialism and win freedom and independence for their country, under the leadership of the South West Africa People's Organization their patriotic vanguard.
134.	The people of Micronesia, which the United States is unlawfully attempting to hold on to and to convert into a United States military springboard in the western Pacific, are entitled to express their will freely.
135.	Britain is pursuing a course aimed at the entrenchment of the colonial status and the militarization of the Falkland (Malvinas) Islands, while refusing to negotiate in accordance with the decisions of the United Nations.
136.	A consistently realistic analysis leaves no doubt that the source of the increasingly alarming trends in the international situation resides, as pointed out in a recent statement by Mr. Y. V. Andropov, in the militaristic policy of 6he United States, which is posing a grave threat to peace. The essence of that policy is to try to ensure dominant positions in the world for the United States without taking into account the interests of other States and peoples and to block and reverse the objective process of the world's development.
137.	Such a policy is bound to destabilize the world situation still further and to disrupt normal relations among States. Indeed, what guarantee is there that such an adventurist course will not have irreparable consequences?
138.	The conclusion that must follow is that practical steps are needed to prevent the worst from happening. The dangerous shift in world developments must be redressed so as to bring about an improvement in international relations.
139.	The Soviet Union and the countries of the socialist community are doing everything in their power to achieve that goal.
140.	The socialist society, as one which is confident of its creative potential, has no need of an arms race or war. It has demonstrated and will continue to demonstrate its advantages in the process of peaceful competition with capitalism, and it is our conviction that the future belongs to socialism.
141.	However, we do not seek to impose our world view on anyone, and we believe that ideological differences should not be allowed to affect relations among States. This is a behest of Lenin, and our country will continue to abide by it.
142.	In his statement of 28 September Mr. Andropov said:
"The transfer of ideological contradictions to the sphere of inter-state relations has never benefited the one who resorted to it in external affairs. This is simply absurd and inadmissible at present, in the nuclear age. Transformation of the battle of ideas into military confrontation would be too costly for the whole of mankind." 
Those forces in the United States and some other NATO countries which shape their foreign policies shrink from nothing in painting a distorted picture of the international situation and laying the responsibility for the exacerbation of that situation at the door of the Soviet Union.
143.	Every possible propaganda means has been mobilized to that end. Statements have been pouring forth in torrents from platforms large and small, spewing out uncivilized invective and insults. That technique is used to camouflage their own policy, which is against the interests of the peoples.
144.	They will not succeed in casting aspersions on the socialist system and on our civic, social and moral values. No amount of malicious slander can possibly lessen the honest and peaceful policy of the USSR and of the entire socialist community. We and our allies firmly repudiate these calumnies and will give them the response they deserve.
145.	The development of friendly relations among States, the peaceful coexistence of countries with different social systems, strict respect for the right of peoples to independence and social progress—these are the immutable principles upheld by the socialist countries in their foreign policy.
146.	On the basis of a common world outlook and unity of purpose, these States fully co-operate and co-ordinate their policies in the interests of strengthening the foundations of international peace. They are asserting themselves as a powerful factor which has had a positive impact on world events.
147.	The countries of the socialist community have made the prevention of nuclear war the centrepiece of their foreign policy.
148.	Who among responsible leaders and sober-minded, thinking people in general could fail to agree that this is the most urgent task of our time?
149.	There have already been so many speeches made on this subject, here in the United Nations and elsewhere, since the advent of nuclear weapons, but a solution has yet to be found.
150.	The degree of progress in limiting and reducing nuclear arms will largely determine the nature of the international situation in the forthcoming period.
151.	The present moment is particularly crucial with regard to the situation developing in the matter of the limitation of nuclear arms in Europe.
152.	The plans of the United States to deploy, under cover of a NATO decision, new nuclear missiles in some Western European countries have long been poisoning the political atmosphere on that continent and beyond. The implementation of these plans would have an adverse effect on the entire European and international situation and would significantly exacerbate nuclear confrontation.
153.	We believe that plans and ideas with regard to what is to be done with nuclear weapons—both in their totality and as regards nuclear systems in Europe—should be reversed.
154.	The Soviet Union has supported the most radical solution, that is, that all such nuclear systems, both medium-range and tactical, should be removed from Europe. This would really be the zero option. However, NATO has pointedly made it clear that it is not ready to accept this.
155.	We have proposed that the deployment of any new medium-range systems in Europe be cancelled and that all existing systems, both of the USSR and of NATO, be reduced by approximately two thirds; in other words, two thirds of the road towards totally ridding Europe of these weapons would have been covered.
156.	Surely, it is quite clear what the Soviet Union is calling for in proposing this far-reaching step, which it is of course understood would not be the last word in the solution of this problem.
157.	Why, then, has such a furor been created around the supposed desire of the USSR to gain the advantage in medium-range nuclear systems?
158.	Why has it been concealed that the Soviet side is prepared, as has been repeatedly stated at the very highest level, not to have in Europe a single missile, a single aircraft or a single warhead in excess of what NATO countries would have? _
159.	Where is the objectivity in this approach? Any politician who claims to be objective is supposed to know at least the basic relevant facts and to make an honest assessment of them.
160.	Recently the Soviet Union demonstrated once again its desire to reach agreement. Our initiative envisages that once a mutually acceptable agreement has been reached, including the renunciation by the United States of the deployment of new missiles in Europe, the USSR, while reducing its own medium-range missiles in the European part of our country to a level equal to the number of missiles possessed by Britain and France, would eliminate all the missiles affected by that reduction, including a considerable number of SS-20 missiles.
161.	This renders totally groundless allegations that the USSR intends to retain the SS-20 missiles which are affected by the reduction, merely relocating them from Europe to the East.
162.	Progress at the talks is being held up by the United States position, which in practice amounts to a demand for unilateral disarmament by the Soviet Union while the arsenals of medium-range nuclear weapons of the NATO countries would remain intact.
163.	This position is merely disguised by talk about some flexibility on the part of the United States at the Geneva talks, Another instance of this so-called flexibility
has just materialized, and the deception contained in it has become clear this time too. Mr. Andropov has stated: "To leave aside details, the essence of the so-called new move in the United States position, which is billed as 'superb', boils down to a proposal to agree, as before, on how many Soviet medium-range missiles should be eliminated and how many new American missiles should be deployed in Europe in addition to the nuclear potential already possessed by NATO.
"In brief, it is proposed that we talk about how to help the NATO bloc to upset to its own advantage the balance of medium-range nuclear systems in the European zone. And this move is presented brazenly as something new." 
164.	The unacceptability of such an approach is so obvious as to indicate only one thing: a persistent reluctance on the part of our negotiating partners to search for a solution based on equality and equal security and their intention to station their missiles on European soil at any cost.
165.	Whether or not agreement is to be reached depends on the United States and on NATO as a whole. The current round of Soviet-American talks on the limitation of nuclear weapons in Europe is crucial in this sense.
166.	If Washington's position remains so unconstructive, if Washington goes so far as actually to deploy new United States missiles in Europe, then we of course will have to take countermeasures to preserve the balance of forces on both a European and a global scale.
167.	It is to be hoped that Washington and other NATO capitals will ponder again and again the existing situation and the grave consequences which would result from another twist in the arms race.
168.	The Soviet Union and the Warsaw Treaty States do not seek military superiority, but they will not allow anyone to acquire military superiority over them. They have invariably advocated equality, and equality at the lowest possible level.
169.	The USSR proposals in the negotiations on the limitation and reduction of strategic arms are also based on the same approach. They call for, among other measures, a substantial reduction—a reduction by more than a quarter—of the total number of strategic delivery vehicles with a concurrent reduction to agreed equal limits of the aggregate number of nuclear weapons carried by these delivery vehicles. Our proposals arise from an interest in strengthening overall military strategic stability while strictly observing the principle of equality and equal security.
170.	In the negotiations on the limitation of reduction of strategic weapons the United States has taken a one-sided approach. The position of the Washington Administration is actually aimed at promoting, rather than halting, the strategic arms race in areas where the United States sees advantages for itself.
171.	The fatal consequences of a nuclear war are not to be regarded as fictional conjectures. Its flames would not spare a single country or people.
172.	This is the unanimous view of the most eminent scholars and competent military and civilian experts.
173.	There is and can be no justification for any actions that push the world towards the abyss, or for doctrines and designs based on the admissibility of a nuclear war and the possibility of winning it.
174.	Guided by these considerations, the Soviet Union proposes the inclusion in the agenda of this session of the General Assembly of an important and urgent item entitled "Condemnation of nuclear war". 
177. Such war must be condemned resolutely, unconditionally and for all time as the most hideous of crimes that can be committed against the peoples. We propose that States Members of the United Nations declare as criminal acts the formulation, promotion, dissemination and propagating of political and military doctrines and concepts designed to substantiate the "legitimacy" of the first use of nuclear weapons and in general the admissibility of unleashing nuclear war.
178. The USSR is submitting a draft declaration on this point to the Assembly for its consideration. Its adoption would contribute to generating a political climate which would make more difficult the actions of those who are devising plans calling for the first use of nuclear weapons.
179. The approval of this declaration, following the Declaration on the Prevention of Nuclear Catastrophe adopted in 1981 on the initiative of the Soviet Union, would be a major move by the United Nations towards removing that threat.
180- The condemnation of nuclear war should be effectively backed up by practical steps to curb the nuclear arms race.
181.	In this context a freeze on nuclear weapons by all States which possess them would be an extremely timely and truly tangible measure. The idea of such a freeze has been winning ever-increasing support in the world, in both nuclear and non-nuclear countries.
182.	Our country proposed some time ago, in the course of negotiations on the limitation and reduction of strategic arms and on the limitation of nuclear weapons in Europe, that both strategic weapons and medium-range weapons in Europe be immediately frozen for the duration of the negotiations.
183.	Now the Soviet Union is submitting an urgent and important question entitled "Nuclear arms freeze" to this session of the General Assembly for its consideration.
184.	Our proposal is for a cessation, under effective verification, of the build-up of all components of nuclear arsenals, including all kinds of delivery vehicles and weapons, a renunciation of the deployment of new kinds and types of such weapons, the establishment of a moratorium on all tests of nuclear weapons and of new kinds and types of delivery vehicles, and a halt in the production of fissionable materials for the purpose of creating arms.
185.	A simultaneous quantitative and qualitative freeze on nuclear weapons by all nuclear Powers is the best way to achieve this goal. Our country is prepared to agree that initially this be done by the USSR and the United States on a bilateral basis as an example to other nuclear States.
186.	Giving practical effect to this initiative would markedly raise the degree of trust among the nuclear- weapon countries and would make it possible to move decisively towards breaking the vicious circle of the arms race. This would also promote the reduction and, eventually, the complete elimination of nuclear weapons.
187.	We express the hope that States Members of the United Nations, above all the other nuclear Powers, will take a responsible and constructive stand on our proposal and will support it.
188.	The Soviet proposal entitled "Conclusion of a treaty on the prohibition of the use of force in outer space and from outer space against Earth" submitted to the current session for consideration, has been prompted by concern for preventing the militarization of outer space, an issue which is becoming extremely important.
189.	Positive action on this initiative, which is a follow- up to our 1981 proposal made here at the United Nations for a treaty on the prohibition of the stationing of weapons of any kind in outer space, would be in keeping with the urgent task of ensuring peaceful, and exclusively peaceful, use of outer space in the interest of and for the benefit of all people.
190.	Specifically, the idea is to have a comprehensive ban on the testing and deployment of any space-based weapons designed to destroy targets on Earth, in the air or in outer space.
191.	At the same time, provision is made for the complete renunciation of the development of new anti-satellite systems and the elimination of existing systems. If it would be of any help, we are also prepared to conduct separate talks on anti-satellite systems, including talks with the United States on a bilateral basis.
192.	The obligation assumed by the USSR not to be the first to place any kind of anti-satellite weapons in outer space is yet a further manifestation of its desire to see the problem of such weapons solved in a radical way. This unilateral moratorium declared by our country is to last for as long as other States, in particular the United States, refrain from placing anti-satellite weapons of any kind in outer space.
193.	The initiatives we are taking at this session are a logical extension of our foreign policy, based as it is on principle, and of the convincing peace-oriented proposals that the Soviet Union has been putting forward in recent years.
194.	Among the many other steps taken by the Soviet Union in the key areas of international life, I would like to single out the following.
195.	There is the obligation by the USSR not to be the first to use nuclear weapons. If such an obligation were assumed by all the nuclear Powers, this in practice would be tantamount to a prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons. Our appeal for this remains in force.
196.	There is also the proposal for a treaty on the complete and general prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests. This is consistent with the task of preventing the possibility of developing new kinds of nuclear weapons and of strengthening the non-proliferation regime. The Committee on Disarmament should as a matter of priority take measures with a view to producing the draft of such a treaty.
197.	Furthermore, there are proposals for banning neutron weapons as well as for preparing an international convention on the prohibition and elimination of chemical weapons.
198.	These and other Soviet initiatives aimed at limiting the arms race and bringing about disarmament deserve the most serious attention.
199.	I would like to make special mention of the joint proposal of the socialist countries for a treaty on the mutual non-use of military force and the maintenance of peaceful relations between the States of the Warsaw Treaty and the North Atlantic alliance. The obligation not to use weapons of any kind—nuclear or conventional—that is to say, not to use force at all, would help to dispel mutual fear and distrust. The initiative is gaining increasing prominence in European and world politics.
200.	It has always been our view that the problem of security on the European continent should be treated with particular circumspection. It is precisely here in Europe that the two militarily most powerful groupings of States —the Warsaw Treaty and NATO—are facing each other. 
201.	In view of all this, not a single move in Europe leading to the easing of tensions and the positive development of relations among States could be redundant or superfluous.
202.	It is time to break the deadlock in the talks on the mutual reduction of armed forces and armaments in central Europe, where the level of military confrontation is particularly high. The draft agreement submitted at Vienna by the socialist countries creates real conditions for narrowing the gap between the positions and for reaching agreement.
203.	The Conference on Confidence- and Security- building Measures and Disarmament in Europe scheduled for next January at Stockholm will play an important role in enhancing European and international security. The USSR, to the extent it can, will seek to ensure that the work of the Conference is fruitful and lives up to the expectations placed in it by political circles and broad sectors of public opinion in European and other countries.
204.	The Soviet Union attaches great importance to preserving and expanding its diverse ties with the countries of Western Europe. We intend to continue to maintain relations with them along the lines traced by the. Helsinki Final Act in a spirit of trust and co-operation.
205.	The successful conclusion of the Madrid meeting of representatives of States participating in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe is quite rightly viewed as an indication that the policy of detente, which has been so beneficial for all the peoples of Europe, has a great deal of vitality.
206.	Even though there has been a coolness in relations in the current international situation, this proves that despite considerable divergences in their policies, States with different social systems are capable of solving together problems that are not at all easy to solve, and of searching for and finding areas of agreement.
207.	We would like to believe that appropriate conclusions will be drawn from this, and not only as regards Europe and relations among European States.
208.	This November marks the fiftieth anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between the Soviet Union and the United States. The whole history of Soviet-American relations makes it abundantly clear that whenever these two States have followed a course of mutual understanding and co-operation, their peoples as well as universal peace and security have gained thereby.
209.	It has been our invariable view that the maintenance of normal stable relations between the Soviet Union and the United States is in their mutual interest, and we are in favour of their overall improvement and peaceful co-operation.
210.	It is not through any choice of ours that Soviet- American relations are currently marked by tensions which also affect the international situation.
211.	Today, the urgency of the problem of preventing the threat of war requires that each State be fully aware of the degree of its responsibility and to reaffirm, both in word and in deed, its commitment to the policy of peace. The Soviet Union is in favour of combining our efforts on the broadest possible basis in order to achieve this noble goal.
212.	In the service of peace there is room for action by every country, regardless of its social system, its level of economic development, its size or its geographic location.
213.	Such an important State as the People's Republic of China can do a great deal to ease international tension and eliminate the danger of nuclear war.
214.	The Soviet Union is ready for a political dialogue with China on questions of bilateral relations, as well as on central problems connected with strengthening peace and international security. The positive development of Soviet-Chinese relations, which should be constructed with due account being taken of and mutual respect for the interests of each side and, naturally, without detriment to third countries, would benefit our two peoples and promote a better political climate in the world arena.
215.	We welcome the growing activity of the countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America in defending international peace. They need lasting peace to solve the difficult problems of their national and social development.
216.	The results of the non-aligned forum held this year at New Delhi have once again demonstrated the anti-war and anti-imperialist orientation of the Movement of Non- Aligned Countries.
217.	The policy of peace of India, the current Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement, enjoys well-deserved prestige. The Soviet Union and India are linked by bonds of friendship and close co-operation which are highly valued by both sides.
218.	The Soviet Union pursues a course of principle with regard to the elimination of all manifestations of inequality and exploitation, the building of confidence in economic ties between States and the establishment of just international economic relations.
219.	The peoples of developing States have a real awareness of the magnitude and nature of our assistance in helping them to overcome their economic backwardness. In this area the Soviet Union is doing more than any developed capitalist country.
220.	The Soviet Union supports the demand for the early launching, within the United Nations, of "global negotiations" on major economic problems, as envisaged in decisions of the General Assembly, and also the idea of the convening, within the framework of the United Nations, of an international conference on these subjects.
221.	We have been and we remain sympathetic to the developing countries which are striving to do away with the tyranny of monopoly capital and free themselves from neo-colonialist exploitation.
222.	Our country is firmly on the side of those who, to this very day, are fighting for their freedom and independence, those who are being forced to repel the aggressor or being threatened with aggression. This stand is inseparable from our struggle for lasting peace on Earth.
223.	In the present alarming international situation there is also need for the mobilization of the entire impressive potential of the United Nations as an instrument for maintaining international security. The Soviet Union has supported and will continue to support consistently and resolutely United Nations efforts to remove the threat of nuclear war, curb the arms race, eliminate the existing hotbeds of international tension and prevent the emergence of new ones and to develop relations of peace and co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
224.	No matter how complicated the situation, real possibilities exist for overcoming the difficulties of this period in international relations. Mr. Andropov stressed in his statement of 28 September:
"The Soviet leadership does not hesitate about which line to follow in international affairs in the present critical situation . . . Our course remains aimed at preserving and strengthening peace, lessening tension, curbing the arms race and expanding and deepening co-operation between States. This is the unfailing will of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, of all Soviet people. These are, we are convinced also the aspirations of all peoples."
225.	We appeal to all States to draw sensible conclusions in the existing situation, conclusions that are in keeping with the most profound aspirations of the peoples, and above all to exert efforts urgently to solve the problem common to all mankind, that of eliminating the risk of nuclear war.
226.	People must feel secure about their future.
 

﻿1.	Thank you for granting me the honor of speaking today, on this first day of the general debate at the thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly. Once again I come before this body preoccupied with peace. Last year I stood in this chamber to address the special session on disarmament. I have come today to renew my nation's commitment to peace. I have come to discuss how we can keep faith with the dreams that created this Organization.
2.	The United Nations was founded in the aftermath of the Second World War to protect future generations from the scourge of war, to promote political self- determination and global prosperity, and to strengthen the bonds of civility among nations. The founders sought to replace a world at war with a world of civilized order. They hoped that a world of relentless conflict would give way to a new era, one where freedom from violence prevailed.
3.	Whatever challenges the world was bound to face, the founders intended this body to stand for certain values, even if they could not be enforced, and to condemn violence, even if it could not be stopped. This body was to speak with the voice of moral authority. That was to be its greatest power.
4.	But the awful truth is that the use of violence for political gain has become more, not less, widespread in the last decade. Events of recent weeks have presented new, unwelcome evidence of brutal disregard for life and truth. They have offered unwanted testimony on how divided and dangerous our world is, how quick the recourse to violence.
5.	What has happened to the dreams of the founders of the United Nations?
6.	What has happened to the spirit which created the United Nations?
7.	The answer is clear: Governments got in the way of the dreams of the people. Dreams became issues of East versus West. Hopes became political rhetoric. Progress became a search for power and domination. Somewhere the truth was lost that people do not make war, governments do.
8.	And today, in Asia, Africa, Latin America, the Middle East and the North Pacific, the weapons of war shatter the security of the peoples who live there, endanger the peace of neighbors, and create ever more arenas of confrontation between the great Powers. During the past year alone, violent conflicts have occurred in the hills around Beirut, the deserts of Chad and the Western Sahara, in the mountains of El Salvador, the streets of Suriname, the cities and countryside of Afghanistan, the borders of Kampuchea, and the battlefields of Iran and Iraq.
9.	We cannot count on the instinct for survival to protect us against war. Despite all the wasted lives and hopes that war produces, it has remained a regular, if horribly costly, means by which nations have sought to settle their disputes or advance their goals.
10.	And the progress in weapons technology has far outstripped the progress toward peace. In modern times, a new, more terrifying element has entered into the calculations—nuclear weapons. A nuclear war cannot be won and it must never be fought. I believe that if governments are determined to deter and prevent war, there will not be war. Nothing is more in keeping with the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations than arms control.
11.	When I spoke before the twelfth special session, devoted to disarmament. I affirmed the United States Government's commitment, and my personal commitment, to reduce nuclear arms, and to negotiate in good faith toward that end.
12.	Today, I reaffirm those commitments. The United States has already reduced the number of its nuclear weapons worldwide and, while replacement of older weapons is unavoidable, we wish to negotiate arms reduction; and to achieve significant, equitable, verifiable arms control agreements. And let me add, we must ensure that world security is not undermined by the further spread of nuclear weapons. Nuclear non-proliferation must not be the forgotten element of the world's arms control agenda
13.	At my last visit here, I expressed hope that a whole class of weapons systems—the longer-range intermediate nuclear forces—could be banned from the face of the earth. I believe that to relieve the deep concern of peoples in both Europe and Asia, the time was right, for the first time in history, to resolve a security threat exclusively through arms control. I still believe the elimination of these weapons—the zero option—is the best, fairest, most practical solution to the problem. Unfortunately, the Soviet Union declined to accept the total elimination of this class of weapons.
14.	When I was here last, I hoped that the critical Strategic Arms Reduction Talks would focus, and urgently so, on those systems that carry the greatest risk of nuclear war—the fast-flying, accurate, intercontinental ballistic missiles which pose a first strike potential. I also hoped the negotiations could reduce by one half the number of strategic missiles on each side and reduce their warheads by one third. Again, I was disappointed when the Soviets declined to consider such deep cuts, and refused as well to concentrate on these most dangerous destabilizing weapons.
15.	Despite the rebuffs, the United States has not abandoned and will not abandon the search for meaningful arms control agreements. Last June, I proposed a new approach toward the START negotiations. We did not alter our objective of substantial reductions, but we recognized that there are a variety of ways to achieve this end. During the last round of Geneva talks, we presented a draft treaty which responded to a number of concerns raised by the Soviet Union. We will continue to build upon this initiative.
16.	Similarly, in our negotiations on intermediate-range nuclear forces, when the Soviet leaders adamantly refused to consider the total elimination of these weapons, the United States made a new offer. We proposed, as an interim solution, some equal number on both sides between one and 572. We recommended the lowest possible level. Once again, the Soviets refused an equitable solution and proposed instead what might be called a "half zero option"—zero for us, and many hundreds of warheads for them. That is where things stand today, but I still have not given up hope that the Soviet Union will enter into serious negotiations.
17.	We are determined to spare no effort to achieve a sound, equitable and verifiable agreement. For this reason, I have given new instructions to Mr. Nitze at Geneva, telling him to put forward a package of steps designed to advance the negotiations as rapidly as possible. These initiatives build on the interim framework that the United States advanced last March and address concerns that the Soviets have raised at the bargaining table in the past.
18.	Specifically, first, the United States proposes a new initiative on global limits. If the Soviet Union agrees to reductions and limits on a global basis, the United States for its part will not offset the entire Soviet global missile deployment through United States deployments in Europe. We would, of course, retain the right to deploy missiles elsewhere.
19.	Second, the United States is prepared to be more flexible on the content of the current talks. The United States will consider mutually acceptable ways to address the Soviet desire that an agreement should limit aircraft as well as missiles,
20.	Third, the United States will address the mix of missiles that would result from reductions. In the context of reductions to equal levels, we are prepared to reduce the number of Pershing II ballistic missiles as well as ground-launched cruise missiles.
21.	I have decided to put forward these important initiatives after full and extensive consultations with our allies, including personal correspondence that I have had with the leaders of the Governments of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and Japan and frequent meetings of the NATO Special Consultative Group. I have also stayed in close touch with other concerned friends and allies. The door to an agreement is open. It is time for the Soviet Union to walk through it.
22.	I want to make an unequivocal pledge to those gathered today in this world arena. The United States seeks and will accept any equitable, verifiable agreement that stabilizes forces at lower levels than currently exist. We are ready to be flexible in our approach—indeed, willing to compromise. We cannot, however, especially in light of recent events, compromise on the necessity of effective verification.
23.	Reactions to the Korean airliner tragedy are a timely reminder of just how different the Soviets' concept of truth and international co-operation is from that of the rest of the world. Evidence abounds that we cannot simply assume that agreements negotiated with the Soviet Union will be fulfilled. We negotiated the Helsinki Final Act,' but the promised freedoms have not been provided and those in the Soviet Union who sought to monitor their fulfillment languish in prison. We negotiated a biological weapons convention, but deadly yellow rain and other toxic agents fall on Hmong villages and Afghan encampments. We have negotiated arms agreements, but the high level of Soviet encoding hides the information needed for their verification. A newly discovered radar facility and a new inter-continental ballistic missile raise serious concerns about Soviet compliance with agreements already negotiated.
24.	Peace cannot be served by pseudo-control of arms. We need reliable, reciprocal reductions. I call upon the Soviet Union today to reduce the tensions it has heaped on the world in the past few weeks and to show a firm commitment to peace by coming to the bargaining table with a new understanding of its obligations. I urge it to match our flexibility. If the Soviets sit down at the bargaining table seeking genuine arms reductions, there will be arms reductions. The Governments of the West and their peoples will not be diverted by misinformation and threats. The time has come for the Soviet Union to show proof that it wants arms control in reality, not just in rhetoric.
25.	Meaningful arms control agreements between the United States and the Soviet Union would make our world less dangerous; so would a number of confidence- building steps that we have already proposed to the Soviet Union.
26.	Arms control requires a spirit beyond narrow national interests. This spirit is a basic pillar on which the United Nations was founded. We seek a return to this spirit. A fundamental step would be a true non-alignment of the United Nations. This would signal a return to the true values of the Charter, including the principle of universality. The Members of the United Nations must be aligned on the side of justice, rather than injustice; peace, rather than aggression; human dignity, rather than subjugation. Any other alignment is beneath the purpose of this great body and destructive of the harmony that it seeks. What harms the Charter harms peace.
27.	The founders of the United Nations expected that Member nations would behave and vote as individuals, after they had weighed the merits of an issue—rather like a great, global town meeting. The emergence of blocs and the polarization of the United Nations undermine all that the Organization initially valued.
28.	We must remember that the Movement of Non- Aligned Countries was founded to counter the development of blocs and to promote cooperation between them. Its founders spoke of the right of smaller countries not to become involved in others' disagreements. Since then, membership in the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries has grown dramatically, but not all the new members have shared the founders' commitment of genuine non- alignment. Indeed, client Governments of the Soviet Union which have long since lost their independence have flocked into the Movement and once inside have worked against its true purpose. Pseudo non-alignment is no better than pseudo-control of arms.
29.	The United States rejects as false and misleading the view of the world as divided between the empires of the East and the West. We reject it on factual grounds. The United States does not head any bloc of subservient nations, nor do we desire to. What is called "the West" is a free alliance of Governments, most of which are democratic and all of which greatly value their independence. What is called "the East" is an empire directed from the center, which is Moscow. 
30.	The United States today, as in the past, is a champion of freedom and self-determination for all peoples. We welcome diversity; we support the right of all nations to define and pursue their national goals. We respect their decisions and their sovereignty, asking only that they respect the decisions and sovereignty of others. Just look at the world over the last 30 years and then decide for yourselves whether the United States or the Soviet Union has pursued an expansionist policy.
31.	Today, the United States contributes to peace by supporting collective efforts by the international community. We give our unwavering support to the peacekeeping efforts of this body, as well as to other multilateral peace-keeping efforts around the world. The United Nations has a proud history of promoting conciliation and helping keep the peace. Today, United Nations peace-keeping forces or observers are present in Cyprus, Kashmir, on the Golan Heights and in Lebanon.
32.	In addition to our encouragement of international diplomacy, the United States recognizes its responsibilities to use its own influence for peace. From the days when Theodore Roosevelt mediated the Russo-Japanese War in 1905 we have a long and honorable tradition of mediating or dampening conflicts and promoting peaceful solutions. In Lebanon, we, along with France, Italy and the United Kingdom, have worked for a cease-fire, for the withdrawal of all external forces, and for restoration of Lebanon's sovereignty and territorial integrity. In Chad, we have joined others in supporting the recognized Government, in the face of external aggression. In Central America, as in southern Africa, we are seeking to discourage reliance upon force and to construct a framework for peaceful negotiations. We support a policy to disengage the major Powers from third-world conflict.
33.	The Charter of the United Nations gives an important role to regional organizations in the search for peace. The United States efforts in the cause of peace are only one expression of a spirit that also animates others in the world community. The Organization of American States was a pioneer in regional security efforts. In Central America, the members of the Contadora Group are striving to lay a foundation for peaceful resolution of that region's problems. In East Asia, countries of the Association of South-East Asian Nations have built a framework for peaceful political and economic co-operation that has greatly strengthened the prospects for lasting peace in their region. In Africa, organizations such as the Economic Community of West African States are being forged to provide practical structures in the struggle to realize Africa's potential.
34.	From the beginning, our hope for the United Nations has been that it would reflect the international community at its best. The United Nations at its best can help us transcend fear and violence and can act as an enormous force for peace and prosperity. Working together, we can combat international lawlessness and promote human dignity.
35.	If the Governments represented in this chamber want peace as genuinely as their peoples do, we shall find it. We can do so by reasserting the moral authority of the United Nations.
36.	In recent weeks, the moral outrage of the world seems to have reawakened. Out of the billions of people who inhabit this planet, why, some might ask, should the death of several hundred shake the world so profoundly? Why should the death of a mother flying toward a reunion with her family or the death of a scholar heading toward new pursuits of knowledge matter so deeply?
Why are nations which lost no citizens in the tragedy so angry?
37.	The reason rests on our assumptions about civilized life and the search for peace. The confidence that allows a mother or a scholar to travel to Asia or Africa or Europe or anywhere else on this planet may be only a small victory in humanity's struggle for peace. Yet what is peace if not the sum of such small victories?
38.	Each stride for peace and every small victory are important for the journey towards a larger and lasting peace. We have made progress. We have avoided another world war. We have seen an end to the traditional colonial era and the birth of 100 newly sovereign nations. Even though development remains a formidable challenge, we have witnessed remarkable economic growth among the industrialized and the developing nations. The United Nations and its affiliates have made important contributions to the quality of life on this planet, such as directly saving countless lives through its refugee and emergency relief programmes. These broad achievements, however, have been overshadowed by the problems that weigh so heavily upon us. The problems are old, but it is not too late to commit ourselves to a new beginning, a beginning fresh with the ideals of the Charter.
39.	Today, at the beginning of this thirty-eighth session, I solemnly pledge my nation to upholding the original ideals of the United Nations. Our goals are those that guide this very body. Our ends are the same as those of the founders of the United Nations, who sought to replace a world at war with one where the rule of law would prevail, where human rights were honored, where development would blossom, where conflict would give way to freedom from violence.
40.	In 1956 President Dwight Eisenhower made an observation on weapons and deterrence in a letter to a publisher. He wrote:
"When we get to the point, as we one day will, that both sides know that in any outbreak of general hostilities, regardless of the element of surprise, destruction will be both reciprocal and complete, possibly we will have sense enough to meet at the conference table with the understanding that the era of armaments has ended and the human race must conform its actions to this truth or die."
He went on to say,
". . .we have already come to the point where safety cannot be assumed by arms alone . . . their usefulness becomes concentrated more and more in their characteristics as deterrents than in instruments with which to obtain victory . . .".
41.	As we persevere in the search for a more secure world we must do everything we can to let diplomacy triumph. Diplomacy, the most honorable of professions, can bring the most blessed of gifts, the gift of peace. If we succeed, the world will find an excitement and accomplishment in peace beyond that which could ever be imagined through violence and war.
I want to leave you today with a message I have often spoken about to the citizens of my own country, especially in times when I have felt they were discouraged and unsure. I say it to you with as much hope and heart as I have said it to my own people. You have the right to dream great dreams. You have the right to seek a better world for your people. A11 of us have the responsibility to work for that better world and, as caring peaceful peoples, think what a powerful force for good we could be. Let us regain the dream the United Nations once dreamed.
﻿77.	 In the name of the Chinese delegation, I would like to extend to Mr. Jorge Illueca warm congratulations on his election to the presidency of the thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly. His outstanding talent and rich experience have won wide admiration, and I am convinced that under his guidance the session will conduct its work efficiently and handle all its tasks appropriately.
78.	I also wish to take this opportunity to express our thanks to his predecessor, Mr. Imre Hollai, for the positive contribution he made to the thirty-seventh session.
79.	This is the first time I have attended a session of the General Assembly as chairman of the Chinese delegation. I am very pleased to have this opportunity to exchange views with my colleagues here on international issues of common concern.
80.	The Chinese delegation extends its warm congratulations to Saint Christopher and Nevis on its recent achievement of independence and cordially welcomes it to the United Nations.
81.	Safeguarding world peace is the most important task facing mankind today and the primary concern of all peoples in the world. Working hard for the modernization of their country and the improvement of their living standards, the Chinese people eagerly desire a lasting peaceful international environment. Like other peoples of the world, we are deeply concerned about the maintenance of international peace and security. However, we are compelled to face the harsh realities. The present-day world is far from tranquil and is beset with tensions and turmoil.
82.	The fierce arms race between the super-Powers and their wrangling over the question of deployment of medium-range nuclear weapons have kept Europe in a state of tense confrontation. The hegemonists aggression against, and rivalry in, the third-world countries have given rise to frequent wars and emergencies in Asia, Africa and Latin America. Certain developed countries are shifting the consequences of their economic crises onto others, plunging many developing countries into great economic difficulties. All this has caused disasters in many countries and posed a serious threat to world peace.
83.	People of all countries have come to realize more and more clearly that world peace can be effectively maintained only be resolutely opposing hegemonism. The numerous third-world countries and the people of the world have strengthened their united struggle against expansion, aggression and power politics, so that the super-Powers have met with ever-stronger opposition and constraints in pursuing their hegemonist policies. We are confident that it is possible to maintain world peace, so long as the people of the world become truly united and wage a resolute struggle against alt manifestations of hegemonism.
84.	All the peace-loving countries and people ardently wish to see disarmament realized, and they have expressed this wish in various ways. The massive peace movement that has emerged in some countries in recent years reflects in its main trend the strong aspirations for peace of the people who suffered the havoc of two world wars and are now faced with the increasing threat of a nuclear war. Their aspirations are completely understandable and deserve sympathy.
85.	Historical experience shows that a genuine desire for disarmament is essential to real progress in disarmament. Twenty years have passed since the 1963 signing of the Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under Water. During this period the two super-Powers have held many disarmament talks and reached some agreements. But what is the result? Their armaments, especially nuclear armaments, have increased in quantity and improved in quality despite all the talks on reduction. Their annual military expenditures amount to more than half of the world's total. More than 95 per cent of the world's nuclear weapons are in the hands of the two super-Powers, which admit that they have long possessed what is commonly known as "overkill" capabilities, and it is always the people of the world who are to suffer once these capabilities are put to use. The arms race between superpowers has extended from the land, sea and air to outer space. And the reality is that, for all the disarmament talks, the arms race is intensifying, with each super-Power trying to gain the upper hand over the other. One cannot but question their sincerity for disarmament. Will they give up their nuclear threats and nuclear blackmail to let others live in peace for a while? Without good faith, their words and proposals, however high-sounding and numerous, would in essence only serve to cover up their continued efforts to expand their nuclear arsenals and hoodwink world opinion.
86.	As matters now stand, it is only natural that people should ask the two nuclear super-Powers, which possess the largest arsenals, to be the first to reduce their arms, drastically cut their nuclear and conventional armaments and destroy the reduced armaments before there can be any reduction of arms by other countries.
87.	China desires peace and favours disarmament. We are for genuine disarmament and against sham disarmament, that is, arms expansion under the camouflage of disarmament talks. The Chinese Government has, together with other third world countries, made unremitting efforts to promote real progress in disarmament.
88.	China has always stood for complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons. China declared explicitly, in 1964, on the occasion of the successful test of its first atomic bomb, that China was developing nuclear weapons for defence purposes and that at no time and in no circumstances would China be the first to use nuclear weapons. China was the first country to propose that nuclear-weapon States should undertake not to use nuclear weapons against each other and was the first country to undertake the commitment not to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon States or nuclear-free zones. China respects and supports the proposals of non-nuclear-weapon countries for the establishment of nuclear-free zones or zones of peace. China is in favour of reducing conventional armaments as well as nuclear arms. China stands for the early conclusion of a convention on the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of chemical weapons.
89.	At the twelfth special session of the General Assembly, which was devoted to disarmament, China put forward proposals on the question of the nuclear-weapon States ceasing to develop, and reducing, nuclear weapons,'" calling on the two super-Powers to take the lead in adopting practical measures to cut their nuclear weapons and means of delivery by a wide margin. With a view to promoting progress in disarmament, we are prepared to make a further effort by proposing that, after the Soviet Union and the United States have taken practical action to stop testing, improving and manufacturing nuclear weapons and have agreed to reduce by half their nuclear weapons and means of delivery of all types, a widely representative international conference should be convened, with the participation of all nuclear-weapon States, to negotiate the general reduction of nuclear weapons by all nuclear-weapon States. We hope that this proposal will receive a positive response. Thirty years ago, during the Sino-Indian talks in December 1953, the late Premier Zhou Enlai of China, for the first time put forward the five principles of peaceful coexistence; namely mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence. Those principles give expression to the common desire of the peoples of the world to defend their national independence and sovereignty and promote world peace. They are in full accord with the purposes of the Charter of the United Nations. Over the past 30 years, these five principles have been accepted by the international community as basic norms guiding the relations between States and have played an important role in maintaining international peace and security. Regrettably, however, peaceful coexistence among States, particularly the independence and security of the third world countries, has constantly been subjected to grave threat and violation by imperialism, hegemonism and colonialism.
90.	The Kampuchean issue is, in essence, one of undisguised armed aggression against and military occupation of Kampuchea by the Vietnamese authorities, with the support of a super-Power, in gross violation of Kampuchea's independence and sovereignty. Viet Nam's invasion and occupation of Kampuchea is now more than four years old. It has not only brought untold sufferings to the Kampuchean people but has also posed a grave threat to peace and stability in South-East Asia. Viet Nam has so far refused to withdraw its troops, thus blocking a settlement of the Kampuchean issue which is long overdue. In an attempt to extricate itself from its predicament, Viet Nam has made all kinds of excuses and even described the Kampuchean question as "an issue between China and Viet Nam". This is sheer sophistry and slander.
91.	The General Assembly has at four successive sessions adopted resolutions by an overwhelming majority, and the International Conference on Kampuchea, held in July 1981, issued a Declaration," all calling for the total withdrawal of the Vietnamese troops from Kampuchea so that the Kampuchean people may decide their own destiny free from outside interference. How can the Kampuchean issue be described as one involving differences only between China and Viet Nam? Talking about differences, they could be accurately stated as those between the Vietnamese authorities who crudely trample upon the Charter of the United Nations and the international community which firmly upholds it.
92.	A number of countries have tried more than once to break the deadlock on the Kampuchean question and bring about a political settlement. On 1 March of this year the Chinese Government put forward its proposal for resolving the Kampuchean question and improving Sino-Vietnamese relations. Like the ASEAN countries and all other peace-loving and justice-upholding countries, China hopes that after the Vietnamese withdrawal Kampuchea will become an independent, peaceful, neutral and non-aligned country and that free elections will be held under United Nations supervision for the Kampuchean people themselves to choose their political system and government leaders. We are prepared to join the other countries concerned in an international guarantee. We also hope that the South-East Asian countries will achieve peace and stability in the region on the basis of mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity and non-interference in each other's internal affairs. We are willing to develop friendly and good-neighbourly relations with all countries in the South-East Asian region, including Viet Nam. The heart of the matter is that Viet Nam must implement the resolutions of the General Assembly and the Declaration of the International Conference on Kampuchea, undertake to withdraw unconditionally all its troops from Kampuchea and act accordingly. This is the prerequisite for a political settlement of the Kampuchean issue.
93.	The question of Afghanistan is also a matter of great concern to the international community. Soviet armed aggression against Afghanistan constitutes a gross violation of Afghanistan's independence and sovereignty, which has turned millions of Afghan people into refugees. This is something rare in the modern history of international relations. The international community has strongly called for an immediate, unconditional and total withdrawal of foreign troops from Afghanistan and full respect for the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-aligned status of Afghanistan.
94.	The Chinese Government firmly supports this just demand. We are in favour of a political settlement of the Afghanistan question, and efforts have been made in many ways by some countries to promote indirect talks through the good offices of the United Nations. However, any political solution must accord with the relevant United Nations resolutions, especially the crucial principle of the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of all foreign troops. The formulation of "guarantee before withdrawal" is obviously putting the cart before the horse, and its purpose is none other than legalizing military interference and occupation and putting off withdrawal. We consider that an international guarantee is necessary, and China is prepared to join the other countries concerned in such a guarantee, but this can happen only after, and not before, the withdrawal of all foreign troops from the country and the restoration of Afghanistan's independence and sovereignty. At present, a genuine political settlement depend? on whether the Soviet Union will publicly undertake to withdraw its troops and set a timetable for the withdrawal. Failing this, no effort to reach a political settlement will achieve real progress.
95.	The situation in the Korean peninsula also arouses concern. The division of Korea into North and South has already lasted for more than years. This not only runs counter to the aspirations of the entire Korean people, but also prevents any easing of tension in this region. The Chinese Government and people wholeheartedly support President Kim 11 Sung's reasonable proposal for the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea and the establishment of a Confederal Republic of Korea. The United States should stop interfering in Korea's internal affairs and withdraw forthwith all its troops from South Korea in accordance with the relevant resolution adopted at the thirtieth session of the General Assembly, so that the Korean question may be settled by the Korean people themselves free from interference by outside forces.
96.	The situation in the Middle East has been tense and turbulent for years. The crux of the matter is that the Israeli authorities are carrying out wanton aggression and expansion against Arab countries and trampling upon the national rights of the Palestinian people and that their arrogance is inflated by United States partiality. On the eve of the commencement of the General Assembly session last year, Israeli aggressor troops massacred innocent Lebanese and Palestinian civilians in cold blood. As the current session meets here, Lebanon is confronted with the danger of being divided. To justify its aggression and expansion, Israel has kept harping on the need to guarantee its "security and survival". But the present reality is that Israel not only arbitrarily frustrates the restoration of the Palestinian people's national rights, but also wilfully threatens the security of Arab countries.
97.	The key to safeguarding peace in the Middle East is to stop Israeli aggression. Israel must withdraw from Lebanon and all the Arab territories it has occupied, and the Palestinian people must regain their national rights.
98.	Unity among the Arab countries is the fundamental guarantee of success in checking Israeli aggression and expansion and of the settlement of the Middle East question. As a Chinese saying goes, "Brothers may quarrel at home, but they unite to resist outside attack". We sincerely hope that the Arab countries and all the Palestinian groups will seek common ground on major issues, while setting aside minor differences, and strengthen their unity in the joint struggle against the enemy. The Chinese Government and people will as always firmly stand by the Arab people and support their just struggle. We are deeply convinced that all aggressors will be punished in the long run. Final victory will definitely belong to the united Arab people.
99.	The South African authorities have persisted in their racist policies, continued their illegal occupation of Namibia and carried out repeated armed incursions and military provocations against neighbouring countries. Here lies the root cause of the turbulent situation in southern Africa. Peace and tranquillity in that region require resolute sanctions against the racist South African authorities and the achievement of Namibian independence in compliance with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council. It is totally unjustified to attempt to link Namibian independence with the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola, as those are issues of different natures. What ground is there for obstructing the independence of one country by citing the presence of foreign troops in another? The people of Namibia strongly demand independence at an early date. They have carried out a prolonged struggle under the leadership of the South West Africa People's Organization No force on earth can block the independence and liberation of Namibia.
100.	The conflict in Chad is becoming more and more complicated because of the meddling of external forces. The majority of African countries are in favour of seeking a settlement through the OAU. They want to eliminate intervention by external forces and call for a settlement of the internal dispute in Chad through negotiations. The Chinese Government supports this justified position. We believe the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Chad should be respected, its internal affairs should be settled by the people of Chad themselves and all foreign intervention must cease forthwith.
101.	The tension in Central America has further escalated in the past few months. It is impermissible to attempt either to use military Muff to restrict the struggle of the people in Central America for democracy and social reform or to carry out infiltration by exploiting the national and democratic movements there. We consistently hold that the problems of the Central American countries should be solved by the people of the respective countries, that disputes between Central American States should be settled peacefully on the basis of mutual respect for sovereignty and non-interference in the internal affairs of other countries and that no external forces should be allowed to intervene. The Chinese Government supports the Contadora Group and the Latin American countries in their position against the super-Powers' attempt to involve Central America in their rivalry and confrontation and in their endeavour to uphold the right of the Central American peoples to self-determination and ease the tension in Central America. The issue of the Malvinas Islands remains a matter of public concern. We maintain that Argentina's claim to sovereignty over the Malvinas Islands must be respected by the international community and that resolution 37/9, adopted at the last session of the General Assembly, must be implemented.
102.	In the face of the tense and turbulent world situation, we call on all States strictly to observe the basic principles of peaceful coexistence in their mutual relations and resolutely condemn and halt any acts that violate these principles so as to uphold the purposes of the Charter and promote the noble cause of world peace and human progress.
103.	The question of development is one of the most important issues of our time. It has a direct bearing not only on the effort of the developing countries to safeguard their national independence and develop their national economy but also on the world economy as a whole and international pence and security. Many countries in Asia, Africa and Latin America have now entered a new historical period of bolstering their political independence with economic independence. Although they have achieved some gratifying results in their economic development, they have also come across serious difficulties. In particular, under the impact of the world-wide economic crisis, some developed countries have tried to get rid of their own troubles by shifting the consequences of the crisis on to others. This has wrought havoc among the developing countries, and many of them are faced with economic situations grimmer than any since their independence. We hope that these developed countries will become more farsighted, for all countries are closely linked in their economies, and the economies of the developing countries constitutes an important part of the world economy. If their economic difficulties are not resolved or, worse still, are aggravated, the entire world economy is bound to suffer. In trying to harm others these developed countries will end by harming themselves and will find it difficult to achieve a steady recovery and growth in their own economies.
104.	Last April it was pointed out at the Fifth Ministerial Meeting of the Group of 77, held at Buenos Aires, that the crisis confronting the world economy today is structural as well as periodic. The Group called on the international community to make the maximum effort to seek a global settlement and work out a set of mutually complementary and coordinated policies and measures on a short-term as well as a long-term basis. The Chinese Government supports the series of concrete proposals put forward by the Group of 77 for this purpose. It has become an increasingly urgent task to take emergency measures in the fields that are vital to the developing countries and carry out the necessary reforms in international economic relations. We always maintain that the long-term objective of establishing the new international economic order should be linked with the solution of the immediate urgent problems. In order to promote North- South dialogue and break the present deadlock, it was proposed at the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi in Match, that global negotiations be carried out in phases and that some problems in specific fields be chosen as the basic content of the first-phase negotiations. This proposal is quite reasonable, but it has not been accepted by the major developed countries. The just proposal of the Group of 77 also failed to win positive response from the developed countries at the sixth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development held not long ago. We hope that the major developed countries, and the United States in particular, will change their rigid position in response to the wishes of the developing countries and display sagacity and goodwill in promoting North-South negotiations and improving North-South relations.
105.	While North-South dialogue is at a stalemate, South-South co-operation is making steady progress. This co-operation is new in international economic relations. A sure way to economic prosperity and greater economic strength for the developing countries is to expand South- South co-operation, embark on collective self-reliance, build up independent national economies and reduce dependence on developed countries. The strengthening of South-South co-operation, of course, does not replace North-South dialogue, nor is it intended to lighten the commitments of the developed countries towards the developing countries. But it can serve as a stimulus to North-South dialogue. China, being a developing socialist country and a member of the third world, has had historical experience similar to that of other third world countries and is faced with a similar task.
106.	For the purpose of developing China's economic relations with foreign countries and strengthening South- South co-operation, Premier Zhao Ziyang, in his recent visit to Africa, put forward four principles, namely, "equality and mutual benefit, stress on practical results, diversity in form, and attainment of common progress". We are prepared, in accordance with these principles, to explore with other developing countries ways for active co-operation.
107.	China is ready to work together with other countries for the defence of world peace, in the interest of smooth progress in its modernization programme and of its national security and in the fundamental interests of the people of the world. We will steadfastly pursue an independent foreign policy. We are opposed to all acts of hegemonism. We are striving to maintain and develop normal relations with all countries on the basis of the five principles of peaceful coexistence and will persist in a long-term policy of opening to the outside world on the basis of self-reliance. We attach special importance to strengthening our unity and co-operation with the other third-world countries. We support the Movement of Non- Aligned Countries, which is playing an increasingly important role in maintaining world peace. With unflagging interest we have done our best to develop good-neighbourly and friendly relations with our neighbouring countries. We are steadily promoting our good relations with the developed countries in Western Europe, North America and Oceania. We are striving to improve and strengthen our relations with the East European countries. As for the United States and the Soviet Union, we also hope that the obstacles in our relations with them can be removed and normal relations maintained and developed in accordance with the five principles of peaceful coexistence. We believe that this will not only benefit the people of various countries but is also in the interest of world peace.
108.	As a founding Member, China has always attached importance to the role of the United Nations. We have noted that, thanks to the joint efforts of Member States and particularly those of the third world, the United Nations has in recent years played a positive role in the maintenance of international peace and security, in decolonization and the promotion of economic development. However, we cannot but point out that many of the correct resolutions adopted by the United Nations have not been implemented; as a result, it has become rather weak in the settlement of many important issues. The permanent members of the Security Council have a special responsibility to remedy this regrettable state of affairs. We appreciate the suggestions made by the Secretary-General in his annual report for the strengthening of the role of the United Nations. We support the views put forward by the Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries regarding the democratization of international relations. Together with other countries, we will strive to enable the United Nations to play a more positive and useful role in realizing the purposes and principles of its Charter.
 


28.	 I wish first of all, Sir, to take this opportunity to convey to you the congratulations of the Federal Republic of Germany on your election to the high office of President of the General Assembly. You are a person with exceptional qualities and wide experience, among other things in the work of the United Nations, as well as the representative of a country and a continent with which friendly relations are for us traditional.
29.	I wish also to extend my country's thanks to your predecessor, Mr. Hollai, the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Hungary, whose presidency of the thirty-seventh session bore the stamp of commitment and balance.
30.	I am grateful to the Secretary-General and his staff for their dedicated work in the past year in the service of the Organization and in the cause of world peace.
31.	On behalf of the Federal Republic of Germany, I extend a warm welcome to Saint Christopher and Nevis as the newest Member of the United Nations.
32.	Ten years ago the Federal Republic of Germany became a Member of the United Nations. On that occasion, speaking from this rostrum, our then Foreign Minister, Waiter Scheel, said:
"Peace takes first place. The times have gone when the family of nations allowed a single State or a political group to upset the coexistence of the whole family through the use of force.
"In our time there is no longer any room for the law of the jungle.'" Today those words ring more true than ever. All Members of the United Nations have solemnly undertaken not to use force of any kind. Yet what do we see around us? Afghanistan, Cambodia, South-West Asia, the Middle East, Chad, southern Africa, Central America and other regions of the world are scenes of ghastly wars and civil strife.
33.	This year the world will have spent the staggering sum of $800 billion on arms. How ruthlessly force is resorted to is shown by the shooting down of a South Korean passenger aircraft by a Soviet military aircraft. That must never happen again. I appeal to all nations to participate in the efforts of ICAO to work out rules that will make a repetition of such a tragedy impossible.
34.	The peoples of the earth long for peace and the absence of force, and they look to the United Nations in the hope that the Organization will accomplish its most noble task, which is to promote world peace. It was the desire to participate in this global task of fostering peace that motivated my country in joining the United Nations. We reaffirm our commitment to the United Nations and we shall do all we can to help it accomplish its task of safeguarding peace.
35.	We laid the foundations of our policy for peace in the 1950s when we joined the European Community and the Western alliance.
36.	The treaty policy with our neighbours in the East and with the German Democratic Republic followed. With our accession to the United Nations we assumed our full responsibility within the community of nations.
37.	In 1973, the year of our accession, the efforts to achieve the goals of detente and co-operation between East and West were in full swing. No doubt all Members of the United Nations then hoped that the international community would from then on be able to concentrate its political energies and economic resources more and more on the three great global tasks of mankind: disarmament, the elimination of hunger and want, and protection of the natural environment.
38.	This year 1972 was that of the first United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, and 1975 saw the commencement of the North-South dialogue. But hopes for the progressive, constructive development of East-West relations were dashed. Detente and co-operation have suffered severe setbacks since the end of the 1970s through the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, the events in Poland and the destabilizing arms build-up by the Soviet Union.
39.	Today once more international discussion focuses on East-West tensions rather than on comprehensive North-South co-operation in pursuit of development in the third world. Once again the East-West confrontation is preventing the United Nations from doing its job of f serving world peace.
40.	Yet we must not give up. Proceeding on the basis of its membership in the European Community and in the Western alliance, the Federal Republic of Germany will continue to work for the maintenance of peace in Europe. The European Community, the core of which is Franco-German friendship, is an organization of
European democracies which have pooled their energies to shape their future together, as equals, in peace and freedom.
41.	Referring to the goals of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization's defence alliance, the heads of State and Government declared at Bonn on 10 June 1982: "Our purpose is to prevent war and, while safeguarding democracy, to build the foundations of lasting peace. None of our weapons will ever be used in response to attack."
42.	Europe must be a continent of peace, must become a force for the peace of the whole world.
43.	We shall continue to pursue detente and co-operation with our neighbours in the East. We shall continue to do everything in our power to help build a world order of peace in which nations, conscious of their interdependence, will work together as partners and human rights, the civil and political just as much as the economic, social and cultural rights, will be enjoyed by all.
44.	At this moment the eyes of the whole world are on Geneva, the venue of the negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union on strategic arms reduction and intermediate-range nuclear forces.
45.	My Government welcomes the new American proposals for the intermediate-range negotiations which President Reagan outlined in his address to the Assembly on 26 September. We hope they will make possible at least an interim result in those negotiations before the end of the year. The United States has proposed the total renunciation of all American and Soviet land-based intermediate-range missiles. That remains our goal. Only such a result could render superfluous the deployment of Western missiles scheduled for the end of 1983. The key to that lies in Moscow. The Government and citizens of the Federal Republic of Germany and all nations of Europe and Asia long for nothing more ardently than the attainment of that goal.
46.	We do not want to be constantly exposed to the threat of Soviet intermediate-range missiles. We shall not accept a Soviet monopoly of land-based missiles. As the Soviet Union does not at present seem willing to forgo that weapons system completely, we pin our hope on an interim agreement that would limit Soviet and United States missiles of this type to the lowest possible number.
47.	The new Western proposals have opened up that possibility. They take account of Soviet interests and considerations. I appeal to the Soviet Union not to let the opportunity to achieve a concrete result pass. I appeal to the Soviet Union not to block the intermediate-range nuclear forces negotiations any longer by insisting that the British and French systems be included.
48.	The Soviet Union should take careful note of what has been said by President Mitterrand and the British Foreign Secretary and also the Chinese Foreign Minister about taking into account and limiting strategic systems in terms of arms control policy.
49.	We must view these disarmament negotiations at Geneva in the overall context of East-West relations. The fact that today the West and East are engaged in such intensive and comprehensive negotiations on confidence- building, arms control and disarmament is encouraging. We have never doubted that the military aspects of security pose the most difficult problems in the detente process, but the settlement of these issues is indispensable for real detente and for the development of a durable peace order in Europe.
50.	Chancellor Kohl has reaffirmed that we recognize the Soviet Union's need for security in the light of history. We want for ourselves no more, but also no less, than equal recognition of our own security interests.
51.	The process of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe offers one of the most promising opportunities for resolving or reducing East-West problems through mutual understanding and compromise and for carrying out common tasks through co-operation. That Conference has linked human rights and human contacts with the process of detente and economic cooperation. It has become a matter which concerns not only governments but peoples as well. We made every effort to ensure that the follow-up meeting at Madrid took place in spite of critical international developments and that it was assiduously continued and eventually concluded at the ministerial level.
52.	The result of that meeting shows our endeavours to have been worth while. The net woven by the Final Act of Helsinki2 has held up under many heavy strains. Now the Concluding Document of the Madrid meeting has brought important progress. It makes allowance for the interests of the people and for questions of co-operation, security and confidence-building. Now the aim must be to translate these results into practice and to let the positive impulses generated at Madrid give impetus to the disarmament negotiations also.
53.	The Conference on Confidence- and Security-building Measures and Disarmament in Europe due to begin at Stockholm on 17 January 1984 will for the first time open the whole of Europe, from the Atlantic to the Urals, to arms control. Military stability in the field of conventional forces in Europe can become a reality only if confidence-building measures and arms control encompass all European territory. Thus that Conference is a necessary complement to the Vienna negotiations on mutual and balanced force reductions, which cover only central Europe.
54.	In the first phase of negotiations the Conference will seek agreement on verifiable confidence-building measures to reduce the danger of a conventional surprise attack in Europe. A further phase of the Conference could lead on to disarmament negotiations proper. The sooner stability in the conventional sphere is established at the lowest possible level of forces, the sooner it will become possible also to reduce nuclear capabilities in Europe step by step on the basis of agreements. We must remain constantly aware of this broad perspective. Disarmament directed towards the establishment of equilibrium is the aim of German peace policy. We want to achieve peace with ever fewer weapons.
55.	Speaking on behalf of the new German Government formed after the March elections, Chancellor Kohl said that we would consistently pursue the policy of understanding, detente and co-operation with our Eastern neighbours on the basis of the treaties concluded in the seventies. That policy is designed for the long term. We shall continue our efforts to infuse those treaties with life.
56.	We are convinced that positive developments in the political and economic relations between West and East can facilitate the settlement of the difficult security issues. Economic co-operation brings stability to East-West relations. We want neither a trade war nor any misuse of economic relations as a disciplinary instrument. That applies in relation to all countries.
57.	We want to expand consistently our relations with the Soviet Union in the long term and improve their quality. We are conscious of the importance of German- Soviet relations for East-West relations. But this policy cannot be a one-way street. Chancellor Kohl said in his policy statement on 5 May 1983 that we judge the will for co-operation of the Soviet Union's leaders by the extent to which they actually help to reduce and eliminate all impediments.
58.	We wish to keep on developing our relations with our other Eastern neighbours also. Europe does not stop at the Elbe. Europe has a common history and a common future. All of us in Europe can gain from progress in detente and in co-operation, but we can all only lose through confrontation.
59.	Constructive development in East-West relations is greatly influenced by the relationship between the two German States. The Germans in West and East have a common responsibility towards peace in Europe, and the Governments of the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic must constantly be aware of that responsibility. We share the conviction that Germany must never again be a source of war but that it should rather generate impulses for peace.
60.	The treaty between the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic laid the foundation for the development of comprehensive cooperation. We Germans in West and East must have the ambition not to be outdone by anyone else when it comes to putting into practice the Final Act of Helsinki and the declaration of Madrid. A peaceful and stable situation in and around Berlin is crucial both for German-German relations and for East-West relations as a whole.
61.	Co-operation between the two German States strengthens the cohesion of the nation. Our aim is to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will regain its unity through free self-determination. Our aim is to work for a peace order in the whole of Europe that is characterized by trust and comprehensive cooperation.
62.	All countries concerned must make their contribution to detente and co-operation between West and East. This means the following. The political dialogue between West and East must not stop; indeed it must be intensified precisely when the going is rough, and this applies in particular to the dialogue between the two super-Powers. My Government regrets that Foreign Minister Gromyko is not attending this session of the General Assembly. We strongly advocate a summit meeting between President Reagan and General Secretary Andropov and welcome the readiness of the United States to attend such a meeting.
63.	Co-operation in all spheres consolidates peace. Disarmament negotiations cannot bear fruit in a climate of confrontation, nor can they be conducted in a vacuum. They need to have a place in the framework of constructive East-West relations. This calls for a willingness to see and appreciate the other side's interests, needs, fears and problems. Presenting each other as demons poisons the international atmosphere. Reason, clear-headedness and cool calculation are indispensable.
64.	All nations, in the West and in the East, must adhere strictly to the principle of the renunciation of force, as they have promised in the Charter of the United Nations and in the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, to the extent that they are signatories. This includes the exercise of moderation in the pursuit of one's own interests. Referring to the further development of the concept of the renunciation of force, Chancellor Kohl, during his visit to Moscow on 4 July 1983, said that a further binding renewal of the prohibition of the use of force "can help improve the international situation if it actually prevents the threat of force and stops it where it is still being used",
65.	We do not want war, either a nuclear or a conventional one. President Reagan is right; a nuclear war cannot be won and must never be fought.
66.	All countries must contribute to arms control and disarmament directed towards the establishment of an equilibrium, and all countries must be willing to help establish tangible confidence-building measures. Transparency and verifiability must be translated into concrete measures.
67.	All nations, in the West and in the East, must discharge the obligation to keep the East-West confrontation out of the third world. There is no longer any future in hegemony or in spheres of influence, either in Europe or elsewhere in the world. We must all contribute to a peaceful settlement of the conflicts in Asia, Africa and Latin America. Economic development and the elimination of hunger and want in the third world brook no further delay. It is not the export of weapons but development co-operation that is urgently needed. Only if disarmament produces a stable equilibrium between East and West at the lowest possible level of armaments will East and West be able to make the necessary contribution to the global tasks of the future: the development of the third world and the preservation of the natural basis of life on our planet. My country is conscious of its responsibility concerning peace, development and environmental protection. We are playing our part in the efforts to accomplish these tasks.
68.	The principles guiding our co-operation with third world countries are clear: we respect the right of all nations to independence and self-determination; we support genuine non-alignment, which we see as a stabilizing element of international relations; we plead the cause of the renunciation of force world-wide and support the peaceful settlement of conflicts; we are helping to eliminate hunger and want everywhere in the world; and we are striving for progress in the global exercise of human rights, since without this nations will find no lasting peace, internally or in their external relations.
69.	At its thirty-eighth session the General Assembly will be debating a number of crises. The most urgent problem to be solved in safeguarding world peace is unchanged: that of a comprehensive and equitable peace settlement in the Middle East. In Lebanon the bloodshed and the suffering of the civilian population must be ended without delay and the way to national reconciliation reopened. Reconciliation is essential for the independence, sovereignty and unity of Lebanon. The peace process in the wider Israeli-Arab Middle East conflict must be resumed. The right of self-determination of the Palestinian people must be recognized, as must the right of all nations in the region, including Israel, to live within secure and recognized boundaries.
70.	We appeal to Iraq and Iran to stop the war in the Gulf that has claimed so many lives on both sides.
71.	The Cyprus question exemplifies attempts by the United Nations to help resolve conflicts by peaceful means. My Government supports the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus. It supports all efforts by the Secretary-General to ensure the regular pursuit of intercommunal talks.
72.	The continuing Soviet occupation of Afghanistan and the Vietnamese intervention in Cambodia place a particularly heavy strain on international relations. The Soviet Union and Viet Nam must cease their resistance to the demand of the entire world that they withdraw their forces. Concerning the Cambodian question, we support the recent appeal by the members of the Association of South-East Asian Nations in all respects. Afghanistan is a touchstone of Soviet will do to recognize the independence of third world nations, to respect their desire for non-alignment and not to seek a position of dominance.
73.	The peaceful settlement of the conflicts in the Horn of Africa, Western Sahara and southern Africa is urgently needed. International efforts to secure Namibia's independence must at long last be brought to a successful conclusion on the basis of Security Council resolution 435 (1978). As a member of the Western contact group, the Federal Republic of Germany has been playing an active part in these efforts for a number of years and will not relax its efforts. We welcome the Secretary-General's initiative in this respect and promise him our full support. In the Republic of South Africa, the policy of apartheid, which is inimical to the very notion of human rights, must at long last be ended.
74.	It is only by peaceful means that the political, economic and social conflicts currently convulsing Central America can be resolved. Here too we are ready to help in so far as we can to bring stability to that region. We see a possibility for regional co-operation between the European Community and the nations of that region. We strongly support the peace initiative of the Contadora Group.
75.	The worsening conflicts in Asia, Africa and Latin America are accompanied by an increasing arms build-up in those parts of the world. Military spending in the third world has quadrupled over the past 20 years and today accounts for one quarter of the global military expenditure. Thus arms control and disarmament are becoming increasingly urgent tasks for many regions of the third world also. Confidence-building measures are indispensable for the third world too. An international symposium held in the Federal Republic of Germany in the spring called for such measures in order to defuse tensions in the third world. Within the Disarmament Commission our work on the list of guidelines for confidence-building measures continues.
76.	Regional co-operation is an effective and promising concept for the promotion of peace and stability in the world. My Government sees tit as the best way of safeguarding and strengthening the political and economic independence of the developing countries. The European Community is a model for a regional grouping in which all members have equal rights. It has long been a factor of stability in Europe and in the world. Through cooperation agreements with regional groupings in the third world it has created a model for future co-operation between industrial and developing countries. The Lom6 Convention which links the European Community with African, Caribbean and Pacific States, and the successful co-operation between the European Community and ASEAN testify to this.
77.	According to the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, international co-operation should also serve to ensure the protection of human rights. Innocent people are still being held, tortured and murdered in prisons. Individuals are still the object of discrimination merely on account of their colour or their religion. Many millions of people, principally in the third world, are still having to live in conditions of poverty that are unworthy of the human race. These pictures of violence, injustice and misery illustrate the challenge. They show how much still has to be done to make human rights a reality.
78.	The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights must not remain mere declarations. They must become a reality. We support the proposal for the appointment of a high commissioner for human rights. We call upon the family of nations, conscious of the good done by the European Court of Human Rights, to agree on the institution of a court of human rights of the United Nations. We hope that the next session of the General Assembly, acting on the basis of the report submitted by the Commission on Human Rights, will approve our proposed optional protocol for die abolition of capital punishment. A convention affording protection against torture is urgently needed.
79.	Among the important creative tasks of the United Nations in the Held of law is that of formulating the right to development. We support the current work of the Commission ca Human Rights in this field.
80.	The refugee situation is one of the most pressing problems of our time. It demonstrates how closely human rights are tied up with peace. Millions of refugees mean not only human misery a million times over. This trend endangers the political and economic stability of the overburdened receiving countries and is a threat to peace.
81.	As the Secretary-General explained in his report on the work of the Organization the refugee problem can only be resolved if the underlying political causes are removed. It was  mark of progress when, at the initiative of my country, the General Assembly included in the agenda of its thirty-fifth session an item concerning international preventive measures to avoid new flows of refugees. We must now develop a system of concrete measures so that the United Nations can take timely action to prevent new flows.
82.	The economic and social development of the third world is only possible if world peace is safeguarded. Development needs peace, but, conversely, peace needs development. For the sake of world peace all energy must be devoted to the task of economic development in the third world. That is also a vital self-interest of the industrialized countries. The world economy is gradually overcoming the worst recession since the thirties. Nowhere has that recession had such devastating consequences as in the third world. In the African countries with low incomes, the situation of many people has become desperate. And even in Latin America, per capita incomes have dropped sharply in the past two years.
83. The development process now needs to be started up again and accelerated everywhere in the third world. The international community as a whole must help. The industrialized countries of the East, too, must finally meet their responsibilities. Belief in the success of the development process needs to be revitalized. 86. How great the difficulties are is reflected in the discussions at the annual meeting of the World Bank and IMF in Washington. But neither can we afford to resign ourselves to the situation, nor would such resignation be justified. The incipient upswing in the industrialized countries must be harnessed to the needs of the third world. Energy prices have become more stable. Interest rates, though still high, are distinctly below the 1981/82 peak. Every per cent less in Eurodollar interest rates saves the developing countries over two billion dollars in interest payments a year. World trade is showing signs of picking up again. Rising commodity prices mean bigger export earnings for many developing countries. The industrial democracies must maintain their economic growth without rekindling inflation. This still cannot be done without reducing budget deficits. One per cent or less growth in the industrialized countries can be instrumental in determining the success or failure of the developing countries' own efforts.
87.	This places an additional responsibility on the industrialized countries to ensure lasting, non-inflationary growth. Widespread North-South co-operation must afford direct support to the development process. The international flow of capital to the developing countries must now scrupulously be maintained and extended. Development requires—and this applies at any time—an inflow of capital and foreign exchange. To the least developed countries, official development aid is crucial. In recent years this aid has accounted for 84 per cent of capital inflows.
88.	In the case of the advanced developing countries, on the other hand, the problem of easing the external debt is the prime concern. With a volume of some 700 billion dollars and an annual interest burden amounting to 50 billion dollars, the debt of the developing countries has assumed dramatic proportions. Co-operation between IMF and development and commercial banks, as well as between the governments of debtor and creditor countries, must be intensified. The commercial banks must be ready to provide even more loans. The World Bank, IMF and the regional development banks must make their contribution, and to do so they must receive the necessary funds from their member countries. The ability of these proven institutions to function must be preserved if the basic conditions for the economic recovery of the third world and of the world as a whole are not to be placed in jeopardy.
89.	Rescheduling must allow for special individual circumstances and take place within the scope of sensible stabilization programmes. More effective measures are needed to counter protectionism. Commodity markets and the earnings from commodity exports must be stabilized. By means of such measures, coupled with resolute adjustment policies on the part of the developing countries, the present crisis can be overcome and the development process consolidated and energetically continued.
90.	To ensure the success of development efforts, the industrial countries must not only keep their markets open to exports from developing countries, but widen them. Protectionist policies in relation to the developing countries are tantamount to refusing development. East-South trade must also be intensified. The industrialized state- trading nations of Eastern Europe account for only four per cent of exports from developing countries, whereas the market economy industrial countries absorb 67 per cent. Thus, the Western industrialized countries import more than sixteen times as much from the developing countries as the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance countries, although they have only about twice their population. CMEA's economic planning is therefore, obviously, of a protectionist character.
91.	It is time the East European industrial countries created wider possibilities for imports from developing countries. Only thus will they meet their responsibility towards the third world. Helping those countries in their development is a dictate of peace and, especially in relation to the poorest nations, an expression of global solidarity.
92.	Yet it can never be more than an aid towards self- help. The key to successful development lies ultimately in the economic and social policies of the third world nations themselves. Here it will be important to draw on the experience of three development decades.
93.	The economic co-operation of the Federal Republic of Germany is concentrated on four main areas: rural development; the development of conventional and renewable sources of energy; education, particularly vocational and primary education; and environmental protection. 
94.	We attach special importance to support for UNFPA. It is now widely recognized that too rapid a population growth can be too great a burden on the development process; it can drag it down and stifle it. Official development aid must be complemented by private direct investment in the third world and by cooperation between companies in the developed and industrialized countries. In the third world, too, private in vestment must become one of the hubs of growth.
95.	The mutual desire of North and South to re-establish stable growth and development calls for a continuous dialogue between North and South at all levels. The sixth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, at Belgrade, proved disappointing in some ways, yet the many resolutions adopted indicate that North and South place their faith in co-operation. That consensus must be the basis for further co-operation. The launching of global negotiations must not be put off any longer. The participants in the International Meeting on Co-operation and Development, at Cancun, came out in favour of them. Now words must be followed by deeds. Global negotiations must be complemented by smaller but, at the same time, representative bodies. The Cancun meeting clearly brought more objectivity into the North- South dialogue. It will continue to require impulsion at the highest political level.
96.	Preserving the natural basis of life on an Earth that has become smaller is a task that will be crucial for the future of mankind.
97.	In Europe the forests are dying. In other regions of the world the deserts and steppes are spreading; the land is becoming barren. The air is becoming more and more polluted; the ecological balance of lakes and rivers, even of the oceans, is in jeopardy. The ecosystems of tropical regions, too, are particularly sensitive, and many developing countries have suffered environmental damage, which at the same time does great harm to the economy. Therefore, environmental protection must already be an integral part of any development strategy.
98.	Long-term damage resulting from the indifferent- worse, irresponsible—use of natural resources spells danger for the existence of the whole of mankind.
99.	Global environmental problems can be solved only through close international co-operation. Protection of the environment is a major objective of the Federal Republic of Germany, both at home and in other parts of the world. We are co-operating for the protection of the environment with other industrial countries in the European Community, the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development and the Economic Commission for Europe. In 1984 a conference is to be held at Munich at which all nations of Western and Eastern Europe, as well as the United States and Canada—that is, all members of the Commission—will tackle the problems connected with dying forests and the ecosystems of national and international waters.
100.	Part of our bilateral development co-operation is to help the third world countries solve their environmental problems. Our aim is to bring all development projects into harmony with their respective environments.
101.	In regard to the environmental protection programme of the United Nations it is important to note the following.
102.	There must be no lasting North-South gap in terms of environmental protection.
103.	Environmental pollution must not be transferred to the third world.
104.	Environmental protection and economic co-operation must be linked in such a way that ecological aspects are always taken into account when implementing development projects.
105.	A pool of experts must be available to third world countries, which can request their assistance through UNEP in the planning, implementation and evaluation of environmental projects.
106.	The training and advisory services available to nations of the third world must be expanded to cover environmental aspects. This applies in particular to food and water supply problems.
107.	The community of nations must use the world's natural resources rationally and in a manner compatible with the environment.
108.	We want all men to be able to live in a world without fear, without force, without want. We realize that in order to build such a world we require a strong world organization. Hence we must all, together, give the United Nations that strength.
109.	We say to the Secretary-General: "We stand by your side. We support your efforts to make the United Nations the focal point of global co-operation through which conflicts can be resolved by peaceful means and the great common tasks accomplished."
110.	The world is at the crossroads. It must decide between international anarchy, confrontation and the use of force, and co-operation between equals for the sake of peace, freedom and progress.
111.	Only if we all act in accordance with the principles of the Charter, only if the right to the self-determination of nations and human rights are realized everywhere, only if the renunciation of force, disarmament, development and protection of the natural environment are seen as our common task, will mankind survive.
 


 Mr. President, thank you very much for your kind words of welcome. For the first time since the Federal Republic of Germany became a Member of the United Nations its President has the great privilege of addressing this world forum.
3.	Ten years ago the Federal Republic of Germany became a Member of the United Nations. My visit today is a mark of the high esteem which the United Nations enjoys in the Federal Republic of Germany. At the same time it underscores a great importance which my country attaches to close co-operation with the United Nations in the pursuit of peace and justice.
4.	From the very outset the goal of the Federal Republic of Germany has been peace. This policy is an expression of our political conviction, which stems from the bitter experience of two world wars in one century.
5.	This policy also has its roots in the tradition of German philosophers and thinkers who saw peace as the basis for the well-being of every nation. Two hundred years ago one of the great German philosophers, Immanuel Kant of Koenigsberg, described the preconditions for a world order in a treatise which reflects his deep insight into man's nature. The citizen of the world, as Kant called him, is the starting point and the goal, as it were, the subject and the object of politics and law. Kant saw a close link between a State's internal constitution and its foreign policy. A State's internal constitution, its legal system, is also bound to affect its conduct in relation to others. By the same token, injustice in matters of foreign policy poses a serious threat to the State's internal structure.
6.	Throughout history mankind has longed for and dreamed of peace and justice, but to this day the reality is, unfortunately, different. Throughout the centuries, right down to the present day, the world has been torn by war and conflict. Today, the United Nations is the great hope of mankind. Imperfect though it may be, there is no alternative to the United Nations. My country has learnt from the terrible experience of two world wars. We have chosen the path of reconciliation and mutual understanding.
7.	Today, the Federal Republic of Germany is a member of the European Community. The enemies of yesterday have become the friends and partners of today. The European Community is a unique example of what common ideals and common aims can achieve for the benefit of more than 300 million Europeans and all the 62 third world countries that are linked with us within the framework of the Lome Convention.
8.	The Federal Republic of Germany is also a member of the Atlantic alliance which links Western Europe with the United States and Canada. This community safeguards peace in our part of the world, which so often in the past has been the battlefield of conflicting power interests. The Atlantic alliance differs from the military pacts of former times by virtue of its defensive character and the identity of shared values, such as peace, equality, democracy and respect for the rights of the individual.
9.	For over 30 years we have owed peace and security in Europe to this alliance. Peace in Europe, may I add, is not an exclusively European affair. The state of peace we Europeans have been able to enjoy for more than three decades has also placed us in a position to develop and extend our economic relations with the nations of the third world, with the objective of promoting the economic and social development of those countries for the sake of their citizens.
10.	The treaties which the Federal Republic of Germany has concluded with its Eastern neighbours have helped to reduce tensions in Europe and opened the way for new forms of co-operation on our continent. The Federal Republic of Germany attaches great importance to continuing dialogue and peaceful co-operation with the countries of Eastern Europe. The 1975 Final Act of Helsinki' and the process it initiated have revitalized the concept and the ideal of human rights, the desire for closer human contacts and the intent to reduce tensions between East and West.
11.	The agreements between the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic have paved the way for closer co-operation between the two States on German soil. We see that co-operation as an element of and a means of strengthening the bonds between the people in divided Germany. It remains our political aim to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will regain its unity through free self-determination. The boundary which cuts Germany in two, the wall that runs right through our old capital of Berlin, cannot be the final word of history.
12.	Disarmament and arms control leading to balance at the lowest possible level are one of the foremost objectives of the German peace policy. At many conference tables our Governments are striving for a reduction of armaments. To achieve this what we need above all is mutual confidence. That is why the Federal Republic of Germany sets so much store by confidence-building measures that lead to greater transparency and control. The first significant results to this end were achieved in the Final Act of Helsinki. The Conference on Confidence- and Security-building Measures and Disarmament in Europe, as envisaged in the Concluding Document of the Madrid follow-up meeting to the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe and scheduled for Stockholm early in 1984, will be another important step in this direction. My country hopes and works for real, substantial results in this Held which is so important to us all. Positive results will make peace safer throughout the world. The Federal Republic of Germany, for its part, renounced many years ago the production and possession of nuclear, biological and chemical weapons. I wish others would follow this example.
13.	Since the 1950s, close co-operation with the nations of the third world has been one of the pillars of our foreign policy. We believe in solidarity and partnership. We respect the right of every nation to choose its own path into the future and to safeguard its independence. It was from a sense of responsibility that the Federal Republic of Germany took part in the International Meeting on Co-operation and Development at Cancun in October 1981. We had hoped it would produce more than it has so far. One of the reasons for the unsatisfactory progress in this sphere is no doubt the critical world economic situation. However, we shall not relax our efforts in pursuit of a constructive North-South dialogue.
14.	My country's accession to the United Nations ten years ago was a question of political logic and a result of our conviction that we would thus be serving the cause of peace. It was also an expression of our willingness to participate in global co-operation and to assume worldwide responsibilities. This is exemplified by our membership in the Security Council in 1977 and 1978.
15.	From the very beginning the Federal Republic of Germany conceived its membership of this world Organization as service for human rights. We strongly support efforts to reinforce the protection of human rights and to ensure that they can be exercised. This was the purpose of our proposals for the universal abolition of the death penalty, the adoption of preventive measures against the emergence of new flows of refugees and for a convention against the taking of hostages. The reality which we experience every day is depressing and is a long way from the goals to which we all feel committed. Yet we must not relax our efforts to secure respect for the inalienable rights of every individual, irrespective of his religious or political convictions, his origin or race. Here is an important task for the world Organization. The respect which a State enjoys must depend on the freedom of its citizens and not on the strength of its weapons.
16.	There is also a deep gulf between the idea of global peace and the reality of a world full of conflict and violence. In his last annual report as Secretary-General, in 1961, Dag Hammarskjold said:
"A failure to gain respect for decisions or actions of the Organization within the terms of the Charter is often called a failure for the Organization. It would seem more correct to regard it as a failure of the world community, through its Member nations and in particular those most directly concerned, to co-operate in order, step by step, to make the Charter a living reality in practical political action as it is already in law."
17.	It is not sufficient for us simply to regret that not much has changed since those words were spoken. You, Mr. Secretary-General, indicated in your report on the work of the Organization to the thirty-seventh session how the instrument of the United Nations can be used more effectively to achieve the goal of collective security. The Federal Republic of Germany supports your proposals.
18.	We continue to have an obligation to mankind not to spare any effort to achieve the goals of the Charter of the United Nations, no matter how difficult and toilsome the path may be. The moral leadership of the United Nations and the universal acceptance of its decisions and resolutions will be decisively enhanced the more they are seen as an expression of justice and political wisdom.
19.	The United Nations plays a major role in the elaboration of new rules of international conduct and in the further development of international law. International law binds everyone, weak and strong alike. There is a natural tension between sovereignty of the individual States and the concept of universality. Here lies one of the major tasks of the world Organization, namely to seek a balance between the interests of the individual Member State and the well-founded rights of the whole international community.
20.	I firmly believe that the course of history will lead away from short-sighted, egocentric power politics. Hegemonic aspirations, the desire to dominate others, have no future in this world. Ever more countries regard themselves as members of a world community with equal rights and equal opportunities. It is politically wise to promote this development with energy and patience.
21.	We Germans endeavour to understand other nations, their culture and their history and to establish links with them. This applies not only to North and South America, to which millions of Germans emigrated and with whose new home countries we today have many economic and cultural ties. It also holds true for the Far East, whose languages and cultures have fascinated our writers and philosophers no less than the languages and cultures of the Near and 'Middle East, where the origins of European civilization are to be found. Equally, it holds true for Africa with whom we have close bonds of friendship. Tolerance is the key word for international co-operation and for understanding among nations.
22.	Many years of experience in public life and inter-national affairs have convinced me that, as in private life, tolerance is also indispensable in relations between States. Tolerance in the international sphere implies respect for the historical and cultural identity of every nation and its political, economic and social needs. The Federal Republic of Germany, in whose name I have the honour to speak today, is willing, as the Charter says, "to practice tolerance and live together in peace with one another as good neighbours".
23.	I wish the United Nations endurance and success in its pursuit of peace. The aim of preserving peace and the hopes which mankind places in the world Organization deserve our every effort.


﻿30.	It is a great honour for me to address the Assembly.
31.	Since the United Nations was founded—and I have not forgotten that France was at San Francisco as one of the founding Members—it has filled an essential role. Whatever results it may or may not have achieved, it has remained the one place where, in spite of set-backs and the eternal temptation to use force, peaceful solutions have been tirelessly sought. Through the testimony of that search and that perseverance it has become the symbol of all that is best in the international community .
32.	I should like to pay a tribute, Mr. President, to the wisdom of the thirty-eighth session which, in electing you to preside over it, has underlined the important place occupied today by Panama, and also by Latin America.
33.	It is my pleasure to reaffirm here the confidence of France in the Secretary-General; I have already met Mm several times in Paris, and my country has had the opportunity to appreciate his impartiality and talent and the high-minded approach he takes to his duties. The report he presented to the Assembly last year remains fresh in our memories. Like this year's report, it contained suggestions concerning the role of the Security Council, the reduction of tension, regional conflicts, disarmament, human rights and economic and social development, suggestions which I would solemnly endorse. It is on the subjects of disarmament and development that I shall now address the Assembly.
34.	For more than 30 years a de facto peace based upon deterrence has prevailed between the great Powers of the northern hemisphere, whereas in various corners of the world conflicts have proliferated. There have been more than 100 such conflicts during this period. However, up to the 1970s, the world had the feeling that it was making progress—difficult progress, uncertain progress, but nevertheless progress towards a less chaotic universe where, it was thought, underdevelopment would be overcome and peace would gain ground in the south as in the north. We now see that the gap is growing wider between the rich, who are growing ever richer in spite of the crisis, and the poor, who are growing ever poorer because of the crisis. Passing from one state of imbalance to another, the arms race is accelerating. Human rights are still being trampled under foot. All too many conflicts remain unresolved. One crisis succeeds another and each gives rise to another—economic, monetary, strategic and cultural. Before our very eyes the world is being remade by blood and the sword; might responds to might, and weakness entails further weakness.
35.	Are we to despair of the efforts that have been made to find solutions for the problems of our world other than domination, violence or war? If the words uttered from this rostrum have any meaning, we cannot resign ourselves to that. Poverty and war are not inexorable, but the inevitable result of a false logic that we must join together to defeat. More than ever we need to realize that this must be done, at a time when fate is making a dramatic choice between peace and war.
36.	Yet, what could be more simple than the hopes of the peoples of the world—hopes centred on food, clothing, shelter, a free life, freedom from fear, access to knowledge, security of ownership and the ability to pass possessions on to one's children? However legitimate such hopes may be, are they, I should like to ask, too much to ask for?
37.	Each of us, I believe, is convinced that the consequences of a new world war would be incalculable, perhaps irrevocable. But peace between nations can be maintained only on the basis of a genuine equilibrium. That is the lesson of history. It is through respect for this golden rule that the rights of all to independence and security are reconciled. To establish these equilibriums, or to re-establish them when they have been disturbed, to guarantee their stability, to reduce forces gradually to a lower and lower level, and to provide for continuous monitoring of the information provided—that is the only possible approach to the problems that confront us.
38.	In the recent past the negotiations between the Soviets and Americans on strategic arms limitation, known as SALT, have made it possible to limit certain technological developments and to slow down the qualitative strategic arms race, but at the same time we have seen a rapid development of the destructive capacity of these weapons, multiplication of the number of their warheads and improvements in their accuracy.
39.	Thus the two great Powers, which each possess a central nuclear system of 2,000 to 3,000 delivery vehicles carrying 8,000 to 9,000 warheads, can attack each other and destroy each other—if I may so put it—seven to eight times over.
40.	One set of negotiations under way at Geneva is attempting to bring about a reduction of strategic intercontinental weapons with a view to bringing about a balance between American and Soviet armaments. France hopes that these negotiations will be successful, but for the time being world attention is focused on another set of negotiations, those dealing with what are known as intermediate nuclear forces. I should like to make my views on this subject absolutely clear.
41.	As a result of continuous escalation on both sides on the ground in Europe, a new situation has come about in which today in our continent the Soviet Union alone possesses a considerable intermediate nuclear force of three-headed missiles which are mobile and accurate, with a range of about 5,000 kilometres, which, since they cannot cross the Atlantic, consequently have as their only possible target the nations of Western Europe. The same reasoning applies to the missiles installed in the Asian part of the Soviet Union, aimed at the States bordering on that region. France welcomed as a very positive act the opening at Geneva of negotiations between the Soviet Union and the United States on weapons of this type, after the latter, in compliance with the twofold decision taken by the member States of the integrated North Atlantic Treaty Organization command—a body to which France does not belong—made plans to install Pershing II missiles and cruise missiles in various European countries at the end of this year.
42.	I shall not here go into all the aspects of a debate which I have dealt with elsewhere and which does not involve France directly even if it concerns it. But I should like to make my country's position clear in the face of the request that its nuclear weapons be included with a view to a Euromissile balance of some kind. In this respect I recall that France, for a quarter of a century now, has possessed a nuclear deterrent force, defensive by its very nature, against any possible nuclear aggressor. That force forms a whole and constitutes for my country a central defence system essential to its security. A few figures will demonstrate its defensive character: each of the two major Powers today possesses 8,000 to 9,000 Warheads; France, for its part, possesses 98.1 am sure that is enough for our own deterrent, but it excludes the possibility of any other use. These 98 missiles are, furthermore, part of a strategic concept and not a tactical one, nor an intermediate concept, if we are to use the extremely precise vocabulary used by the Soviets and the Americans when discussing their own affairs.
43.	Moreover, it would be paradoxical to have my own country depend on the results of a conference in which it is not participating and which, without its consent, would be debating strategic weapons, particularly underwater weapons, which neither the Americans nor the Russians, who possess many more of them, are debating among themselves, at least in that conference.
44.	We can only compare what is comparable. The idea of weighing the central weapons system on which the independence and survival of my country rest against the intermediate nuclear forces of the two major Powers, which for them constitute a mere supplement to their formidable strategic arsenal, is unacceptable. Since in fact this is a request by the Soviet Union, on what grounds can that country expect France to give up something essential, namely its own national defence? Of course we are told—and I am prepared to believe it—that this is not the aim of the request. Of course we are promised that the inclusion of the French force at Geneva will in no way lead to its reduction. But if France were to enter into a calculation it has nothing to do with, would it not be running the risk of having the modernization of its means of defence placed under the control of others? Would it not be taking on a responsibility which it rejects, that of disrupting the world balance?
45.	My country is independent. Its deterrent force obeys the orders of the President of the Republic alone. Its loyalty to the Atlantic alliance does not affect its autonomy. It respects the great Russian people and wishes to maintain the age-old good relations linking us. It has neither the intention nor the means—and it does not wish for them—to impose its law by force of arms. It possesses weapons for its own defence, no more, no less. It would not understand a monopoly of intermediate nuclear forces in Europe being agreed to for the Soviet Union in particular, which is the case today, and it hopes that mutual concessions between the two Geneva partners will make it possible to end that monopoly, while creating conditions for a new balance, which I fervently hope for. This presupposes a continued tireless search for a midpoint from which we shall be able to see whether preference has been given to reduction of tensions rather than to their exacerbation.
46.	However, since we must consider the whole picture, we must not forget that several conflicts, the direct or indirect results of the policy of blocs, or stirred up or aggravated by such a policy, are giving rise to concern.
47.	The unjustifiable destruction of a South Korean civilian aircraft by a Soviet military aircraft leads us to deplore the contempt for moral standards and the tragic absence of laws strong enough to make the perpetration of such an act impossible. I hope that France's proposals to ICAO will finally be heeded.
48.	But beyond this event, how many unacceptable situations exist, how many countries are occupied or threatened by foreign armies and how many peoples on all continents are prevented from choosing their own destiny, from Central America to South-East Asia, through Africa, the Middle East, central Asia and not forgetting Europe Let us stop; the list would be long. I am also thinking of these men and women throughout the world, in exile, refugees, political prisoners, victims of torture, those whose most elementary rights are flouted. On this latter point, surely the international community has been too sparing in its protests and sanctions, and finally has it not resigned itself to these crimes?
With regard to the former point, has it shown enough intransigence whenever a people has been threatened or has lost the right to self-determination? This is a principle which brooks no exception. Where it is possible, why do we not envisage a process of disengagement which would confer a status of neutrality, once these three conditions are met—the will of the State concerned, the evacuation of foreign forces and the solemn undertaking not to interfere in other countries—under the supervision of the Security Council?
49.	But I should like to dwell on two conflicts in which France is involved: the conflict in Lebanon and the conflict in Chad. In Lebanon, the French are present as soldiers of peace, first within a United Nations force, the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, and later with three other countries at the request of the Lebanese Government, as part of a multinational force in Beirut to act as a buffer between the opposing forces there. Has it been forgotten that France contributed to the dignified departure of the Palestinian soldiers and then to protecting the survivors of the tragic Sabra and Shatila camps? We regarded this mission as an honour and we fulfilled it. As for the situation recently created by the partial withdrawal of the Israeli Army and by the new increase in lethal fighting involving civilian and foreign forces, we have tackled this task by placing ourselves at the service of peace. I proclaim loudly from this rostrum: France has no enemy in Lebanon. It is protecting its nationals, as it must. That is all. Its wish is for the Lebanese to manage to overcome their divisions within the framework of their institutions and respect for their legitimate authorities, for Lebanon to regain its independence, sovereignty and unity and for the United Nations to broaden its mission as soon as possible, if necessary, in line with the proposals of relevant leaders. Departure of the foreign armies will make it unnecessary to maintain an international security force.
50.	As regards Chad, we went to that country at a time when it was the victim of external aggression, at the request of the Government recognized by the international community and in accordance with Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations and Security Council resolution 387 (1976). Our efforts today are aimed at mediation, and as a matter of priority mediation by the Organization of African Unity making possible a cease-fire between the opposing parties and the opening of negotiations the primary purpose of which would be to guarantee the integrity of Chad and the withdrawal of foreign armies. Then, I assure the Assembly, France will not delay by one hour the repatriation of its troops. I have mentioned the OAU, thus indicating France's interest in regional efforts, which are an excellent way of dealing with the conflicts. I could have praised, in this regard, the action undertaken in another part of the world by the Contadora Group, and I can think of many other examples.
51.	It is time, at this stage of my statement, to come back to strategic nuclear armaments in the world. We cannot reject the idea—and I do not—that the five nuclear Powers should together debate, when the time comes, a permanent limitation of their strategic systems. We must therefore set out clearly the conditions for progress in this field.
52.	The first of these conditions is the correction of the fundamental difference, in terms of type and quantity, between the armaments of the two major Powers and those of the others, and the difference between a country that might use them to assert its power and a country which might be forced to make use of them for its own survival.
53.	The second condition flows from the wide gap between conventional forces, particularly in Europe, a gap which has become even wider, I fear, because of the existence of chemical and biological weapons, the manufacture and stockpiling of which must be prohibited by a convention.
54.	The third condition is the cessation of the escalation in anti-missile, anti-submarine and anti-satellite weapons.
55.	It is also essential to safeguard peoples against threats from space. Is space to become an additional Held for the limitless development of the old earthly antagonisms? Space is surely by its very essence the common heritage of mankind, as the Earth itself should be. It would be a betrayal of the interests of our peoples if we were to fail to define, in time, a code of law which would preserve it.
56.	Now there is no curb on the development of antimissile weapons in space, no limit to the number of satellites, because only weapons of mass destruction—that is, nuclear weapons—are banned by the 1967 Treaty.' An amendment to that Treaty which banned the placing in orbit of any type of weapon, brought about the gradual withdrawal of arms already in orbit and provided for effective verification would give it its proper scope.
57.	In another field which concerns us, and whatever may be the controversies about its tests—controversies with which I am familiar—I wish to stress that France has decided to open its underground nuclear test sites next month to a fact-finding visit from foreign scientists from the South Pacific. I hope this example will be followed.
58.	I shall end this part of my statement as I began it, that is, with Europe. If peace has reigned in this continent since the Second World War, it has been in a Europe divided, rent asunder, and which has barely invented ways and means of protecting its future and its own security. No true European will renounce the possibility of doing away with the consequences of this division, renewing the ties that were Oroken and repairing the situation born in Yalta. It was with this in mind that France worked for the success of the Madrid meeting of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe and will continue to work for the success of the conference in Stockholm. Only good mutual knowledge of military activities throughout the region stretching from the Atlantic to the Urals will restore the conditions for greater trust.
59.	I would recall that the relations between France and Germany were very important in laying the foundations for the European Community, thus making war unthinkable among the 300 million West Europeans. This commitment and this experience explain our support for any process which would ensure increased security for all Europeans. Believe me, the contagion of peace can overcome the consequences of war.
60.	The States represented here are going through the worst recession afflicting their economies in the last 50 years. The crisis affects us all. The upsurge, sometimes remarkable and always difficult, experienced by the developing world has been halted. While in certain industrialized countries there are signs of a recovery, the difficulties are getting worse for the majority. The burden of the past—that is, the burden of debt—is being added to the uncertainties of the present to impose upon the fragile societies efforts at austerity and discipline which are exceptionally severe.
61.	Of course, we must improve public finances. Of course, we must reduce deficits which are too high. But When the solution to the economic crisis only exacerbates it, where are the signs of a cure? When the increase in poverty and hunger sows the seeds of social and political crises, surely the difficulties are increasing. When the North is content with its own recovery, does it believe for a moment that it can find lasting well-being alone? What does it propose to those who are living today and what does it propose for the 2 billion men and women who will be born within the next 15 years? Silence has become the ally of the worst. Let us all resume dialogue between the two hemispheres. Let us urgently respond and lay down firm foundations for the future.
62.	A transfer of resources from the countries of the North to those of the South is a natural course and is desirable for the well-being of all. The present levels of aid should be considered irreversible. The principal donors should undertake not to reduce their aid as long as the recipient countries show no sign of economic growth. The banking sector must be encouraged not to slacken its efforts.
63.	But these immediate actions will not spare us damage to our societies if the currencies in which the third world debt is payable and the interest rates on this debt reach excessive levels. It is up to each industrialized country to shoulder its responsibilities.
64.	France, for its part, is making steady progress towards the aid target it has fixed for itself: 0.7 per cent of its gross national product for the third world, 0.15 per cent for the least developed countries. We intend to do everything possible to see to it that the seventh replenishment of the International Development Association represents a significant increase. We snail continue to give our support to the Paris Club to seek ways of dealing with the most critical situations of indebtedness. We support the idea of an increase in the resources of IMF to be assigned as a matter of priority to the developing countries.
65.	We have to attack the deep-rooted causes of the instability and disarray which mark international economic relations. For my part there are three major priorities: currency, primary commodities and technology.
66.	If I begin with currency it is because, after all, it is the main primary commodity. A few months ago I put forward the idea of a new Bretton Woods. This was a symbolic reference, as far as I was concerned, to stress the need to recreate the conditions of an ordered monetary system with currencies sufficiently stable and reflecting the actual evolution of economies. That is a need felt by us all. The Prime Minister of India and the Prime Minister of New Zealand were right to issue an appeal for international monetary co-operation. The seven industrialized countries decided at Williamsburg to consider the role that could be played at the right time by a monetary conference with a view to improving the international monetary system. This, I know, is something that will take a great deal of time and requires very thorough preparation, and all the countries interested must be involved in this enterprise. Consideration of stricter rules for the establishment of exchange parities, diversification of reserve instruments, agreement on a rate of evolution of international liquidities, definition of the necessary disciplines in the light of the specific economic and social situations of each country—these are the principal subjects to which thought should be given.
67.	With regard to primary commodities, the path was laid by the sixth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, held at Belgrade last June. But the matter cannot rest there. France proposes improvement of the functioning of private commodity markets by regularizing futures markets, which too often by .their erratic and speculative movement mislead economic agents instead of informing them. Stricter discipline Li the area of competition would return those markets to their proper role. And I stress that vital primary commodity, energy. The current stabilization of the oil markets in no way diminishes the importance of encouraging the financing of investment in non-renewable energy sources, whether through the World Bank or any other specialized agency.
68.	Over and above the difficult situations it has created, the crisis has made it possible for us to understand the growing role of technical progress. It is certainly necessary to make constant efforts at adaptation, but it also offers exceptional opportunities for the development of the South and the progress of the North. This fact seems obvious, and yet too often some countries tend to consider that this is their own business, as if technical progress were a privilege reserved for the richest, the cleverest or the most advanced. We are well aware that nothing is more ambivalent than technical progress—a source of growth but also a decisive element in the arms race. Are we to remain content with this finding? Are we to concede that the major efforts of the biggest countries must be devoted to military technology? Are we to concede that the overwarming of the planet should prevail over its development? This is the most important question, and it is becoming ever more acute from one generation to the next. It is something which has been unceasingly asked in and by France, and not France alone. From the beginning of the century Jean Jaures, Albert Thomas, Eduard Herriot, Aristide Briand and Leon Blum each in turn tried to banish the threat of a modern war and to work for disarmament. They carried further the inextinguishable hope, hope that has resisted all set-backs.
69.	The world will recover its equilibrium and security only if solidarity—which today, unfortunately, is expressed in military terms—assumes another dimension, for solidarity is the higher form of security. But how are we to give expression to it? The General Assembly has already repeatedly reaffirmed the link between the tasks of development and the endeavour to achieve disarmament, between the rejection of poverty and the rejection of arms escalation. Our Governments, in spite of their differences on the approaches to disarmament and security, would surely subscribe to the disarmament-development link and the establishment of an international fund which would make it possible to give effect to this. France itself has put forward suggestions along these lines: as far back as 1955 by the Government of Mr. Edgard Faure, who is here today, and in 1978, on the initiative of my predecessor, during the first special session on disarmament.
70.	To deal with the problem of over armament at its roots and put disarmament at the service of development, it is not enough—although of course the idea may be supported—to seek to use for the benefit of the countries of the South a tax levied on military budgets or procurement expenditures. The prolonged crisis we have experienced leads us to adopt a global approach—or should lead us to adopt a global or, more precisely, a political approach. We have to go back to the origin of these expenditures, that is, the close and growing link between military insecurity and economic insecurity which characterizes the world today. By a series of paradoxes, the deregulation of the international economic system strengthens the need for security and by the same token fuels the arms race, which, in its turn, causes disequilibrium. In view of this, the following essential tasks must be tackled. First of all, we have to determine the true weight of armaments, and urgent questions arise: for example, how to overcome differences in terms of both data and estimates; how to work out a basis of evaluation acceptable to all. Next, we must assess the internal and external economic effects of the increase in military expenditures. Thirdly, how do we judge the relationship between the increase of military expenditure and the major factors of international economic disorder? Finally, while clarifying the above points, the essential issue is the possibility and the means of carrying out the tasks of interest to mankind as a whole, those concerning health, vocational training and agricultural development in the third world—to all of which we must devote the sizeable resources that would be released by a gradual but methodical reduction in military expenditures in the principal countries. And there is also the question of how we are to ensure favourable economic effects of these reductions and conversions in the contributing countries themselves, and how to devise mechanisms to assist in this switch to disarmament and development.
71.	Each country can provide only a partial response to these major questions, but no country can escape them. Indeed, what country today can deny that after 10 years— sometimes even longer—of crisis the patterns of military expenditure are creating increasing difficulties for it? What is the point of spending more for less security, whether military or economic? That is the fundamental question which everyone has to face. It is a question which I wanted to bring before you.
72.	All countries have an interest in this important debate which transcends our differences, but since what is essential in this Held depends upon a small number of States, I think it desirable that action should be taken in two stages. In the first stage there should be, as early as possible, a meeting on the problem posed by the link between disarmament and development and the creation of an international fund provided for by the General Assembly. When the major military Powers have announced their agreement, France is ready to be host to such a conference in Paris. As a second stage, representatives of the Governments participating in that meeting could set themselves the task of preparing a United Nations conference, which would be open to all Members of the Organization, and that preparatory meeting could, without delay, define an initial series of targets to be reached for transfers for the benefit of development.
73.	In the words and logic of the time, the Prime Minister of France, Mr. Pierre Mendes-France, appealed in 1954, at the 498th meeting of the General Assembly, for co-operation between the Eastern and the Western Powers. "By making them partners in life-giving tasks, it is bound to deflect them from the path of death. By facilitating and promoting exchanges among them, it may break down impassable barriers, clarify mysteries and dispel distrust."
74.	I myself, 30 years later—and the weight of facts having now become almost unbearable—wish to state that no country can avoid this debate.
75.	Let us begin now to free ourselves from our acquired reflexes, from fear, from mistrust, from habits of which we ourselves are the first victims, and embark on this common endeavour.
 


﻿150.	 Mr. President, may I begin by joining other speakers in congratulating you on your election to the presidency of the thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly. You have my best wishes for the difficult task which lies ahead of you. May I also express my thanks to the outgoing President, Mr. Hollai, who has so ably fulfilled his role on behalf of the Assembly.
151.	It gives me particular pleasure to pay a tribute also to the Secretary-General. We owe a great deal already to his careful authority and leadership. His report to last year's session' brought out in a striking way the gravity of the problems facing us in the United Nations. His report this year has again underlined the crucial problem of trust. He has also drawn our attention to the need for the Secretary-General, in the interests of all, to exercise tighter control over the administration of the Organization. It is now up to us to do something about these problems. As my predecessor said last year, the blame for the state of the world does not lie with the United Nations system or with the Charter, but with us, the Member States. I endorse that conclusion wholeheartedly, but I see absolutely no evidence that it has sunk in.
152.	This is my first year as a foreign minister. But it is a reflection of today's increasingly complex and interdependent world that this year has not by any means been my first taste as a minister of international affairs.
153.	My own particular experience has been in international economic and financial affairs, and I have learned from that one very clear lesson: the problems which face us can effectively be tackled only through close international co-operation and, of course, with the necessary determination and patience. If that is true, as it is, of economic and social questions, it must be even more so in the political field, where major questions of peace and security are at stake.
154.	Economic and political problems are, of course, often interlinked. Indeed, the former can cause, or exacerbate, the latter. That is why foreign ministers, even if they were so minded, cannot fail to concern themselves with economic questions. These are, of course, questions which require effective action at the national level, and national determination to solve, but the need for action on the international plane is no less clear.
155.	So, as a foreign minister, I remain very interested in what is happening—and what is not happening—in the world economy. There are signs of recovery in my country and in others, but complacency and over-confidence would be equally damaging to the prospects of sustained non-inflationary growth: complacency because there will not be much growth if we rest on the laurels of our achievements so far; and over-confidence because growth will not be sustained if we abandon the fight against inflation. The consequences of inflation, of inflated expectations and of over-ambitious and over-promising governments, are still very much with us, in particular, the problems of debt and the pressures to resort to quick and wrong solutions, like protectionism. It will take patience as well as energy to ensure that they are safely overcome.
156.	On the whole, I am optimistic. While vast problems remain, there have been encouraging signs that many members of the international community recognize that we are all affected by the same economic conditions and are ready to respond to the challenge of joint action. For example, the Interim Committee of the International Monetary Fund was able to reach agreement in February on an increase in quotas and a parallel enlargement of the General Arrangements to Borrow—an agreement which would not have been possible if all parties had not been willing to show considerable flexibility. It remains vitally important for countries to take legislative action necessary to implement their increased quotas so that IMF can be more effective.
157.	Some of these problems are technical, or perhaps it is just that they are made to sound that way by the economists who propose solutions in a language which does not always make for easy understanding. But the underlying reality shines through any amount of jargon: we need to restore the balance and vitality of the world economy in order to provide a rising standard of living, and above all to meet the basic human needs of the people of the world for food, shelter and a decent standard of life.
158.	For the last decade, the world has been proving Malthus wrong, but only just—world agricultural production has kept slightly ahead of population increase. But this conceals the fact that in many countries agricultural production per capita has stagnated or declined. Experience shows that the opposite can be achieved where policy is directed to encouraging individual enterprise and more widespread use of appropriate technology.
159.	Population policy must be part of the answer, and progress has already been made. But much more needs to be done. We should give a high priority to this since it is the poorest people who will benefit most. Aid too has a vital part to play, but food aid is only first aid. The main requirement is for aid to increase production where it is most needed, and it is on this that the international community should concentrate.
160.	Production alone is not enough. We cannot afford not to make the best use of the resources at our disposal, and therefore we cannot afford to relent in the fight against protectionism. Barriers to trade are barriers to economic efficiency and the creation of wealth. We all need to fight more resolutely against them. There must be no new upward twist to the spiral of protection. Instead, I should like to see a vigorous programme of commercial disarmament.
161.	I have mentioned the word' 'disarmament'' in an unusual context. That is not because I underrate its importance in the more normal one. Indeed, nothing could illustrate more vividly the link between the economic and the political world. 
162.	Without security there can be no lasting prosperity; arms control and disarmament can contribute to both by reducing at the same time the risks of war and the burden of defence costs.
163.	It would, of course, be madness to turn our backs on such a prospect, or to reduce our efforts to achieve so obviously beneficial a result. In theory, there is no doubt that agreements can be reached which will bring lasting economic and military benefit to both sides.
164.	Over the last two decades there have been practical examples of successful agreements between East and West, which should encourage us to persevere in our efforts. But history shows also that the road is not an easy one: confidence is hard to build up and all too easy to destroy; secrecy inevitably breeds suspicion; and the stake: are high enough to underline the need for caution.
165.	But caution should not prevent movement, and on the Western side, at least, it has not. President Reagan has proposed major cuts in strategic missiles and the elimination of a whole class of intermediate range missiles. Speaking from this podium only two days ago he revealed a further package of steps designed to advance the negotiations as rapidly as possible. These are radical measures by any standards, and they have our support. So do the Western proposals to reduce the forces facing each other in central Europe to a common ending. We have put forward proposals of our own trying nearer a ban on chemical weapons. It is dear that the West means business over disarmament. It is now up to the Russians to respond.
166.	Our objective in these and other negotiations is simple: we want realistic, balanced and verifiable measures of arms control and disarmament which will enhance peace and security—not just for ourselves, but for all participants. We do not seek unilateral advantage, nor shall we give in to those who seek it at our expense.
167.	That, for the moment, is what the Soviet Union is trying to do by claiming that British and French systems should be included in the intermediate-range nuclear force negotiations. The two participants in the negotiations, the United States and the Soviet Union, have agreed that their own strategic systems should be excluded. There can be no reason in equity or logic why the strategic systems of non-participants should be included. The Soviet attempt to suggest otherwise should perhaps be dismissed as a smokescreen designed to hide what I hope is only a temporary unwillingness to negotiate seriously.
168.	Taken literally, what the Soviet leaders are asking for is either the unilateral strategic disarmament of Britain and France or a monopoly of intermediate-range missiles in Europe at the expense of the United States and its allies. These demands are unacceptable and will remain so— not because British weapon systems would be affected, but because what is proposed is unbalanced and inequitable and would benefit one side at the expense of the other.
169.	When it comes to arms control and disarmament, we in Britain claim no special privileges and no sanctuary. The record makes this clear, and we remain ready to play a full part in the arms control and disarmament process.
170.	As far as the British deterrent is concerned, we must naturally take into account that our force is a strategic one and that it represents less than 3 per cent of the strategic nuclear forces available to the United States or to the Soviet Union. It would be absurd as things stand for us to seek to trade reductions with a superpower. But we have never said "never". On the contrary, we have made it clear that, if Soviet and United States strategic arsenals were to be very substantially reduced and if no significant changes had occurred in Soviet defensive capabilities, Britain would want to review its position and to consider how best it could contribute to arms control in the light of the reduced threat. That remains our position.
171.	I have spent some time on the subject of arms control and disarmament because it is one which is rightly at the centre of the international stage and rightly of concern to the United Nations and its Member States. But, as Mrs. Thatcher made clear when she addressed the twelfth special session of the General Assembly in June 1982 the causes of war do not lie in the existence of particular weapons, whether nuclear or conventional, or even in particular numbers of weapons. They lie in the disposition of States to ignore international law and to seek to impose change on others by resort to force.
172.	We in Britain had direct experience of this last year, when Argentina invaded the Falklands in flagrant violation of one of the most fundamental principles of the Charter of the United Nations. That invasion has not faded into history. We, for our part, have upheld and will continue to uphold the principles of the Charter. We will defend the Falkland Islands and their inhabitants against the possibility of renewed attack; our military dispositions are designed solely for this purpose. We will continue to defend the right—the inalienable right—of the people of the Falkland Islands to self-determination, a right to which they are no less entitled than other small island peoples, and we will carry forward economic and constitutional development in close consultation with the islanders.
173.	At the same time, we shall continue to seek a more normal relationship with Argentina and a reduction of tension in the South Atlantic. We have played a constructive part in international efforts to help with the problem of Argentine debt. It was very much at our initiative that progress has been achieved in the removal of bilateral financial restrictions. We look to Argentina to honour the agreement that has been reached. We would like to do the same in the commercial and economic fields and have supported the initiative of the European Community to this effect. We have also taken other initiatives intended to promote the development of a more normal bilateral relationship.
174.	The return for these efforts, I regret to say, has not been encouraging. The Argentine authorities have shown no regret at their resort to the use of force, no interest in reducing tension and no response to these various initiatives from the British side aimed at restoring a better relationship between our two countries. They continue to see negotiations purely as a means for transferring sovereignty without regard for the wishes of the islanders. A radical change of approach is required in Buenos Aires.
175.	The lengthy passage on the Falklands in the statement of the Foreign Minister of Argentina consisted of rhetoric which is as unhelpful as it is tendentious. His reference to respecting the existing cessation of hostilities has yet to be translated into a convincing and dependable renunciation of the use of force. The whole world knows who stands rightly convicted of deception and of dangerous military adventures. The Argentine invasion, launched without warning when we were negotiating in good faith, cannot be wished away. I can understand why the Argentine representative found it too embarrassing to mention. To accuse us of threatening the security of the Latin American region is lurid nonsense; we have done and will do no more than is necessary to protect the Islands and their population against a threat which recent history has shown to be all too real and which the current pattern of Argentine arms purchases seems designed to keep alive.
176.	As for the charge of colonialism, the answer can be seen by looking round this chamber. Britain's record speaks for itself. Only a few days ago, in response to the freely expressed wishes of the people exercising their right to self-determination, we gave independence to the Federation of Saint Christopher and Nevis. I congratulate Saint Christopher and Nevis on becoming, last week, the 158th Member of this Organization and the 48th member of that unique association of nations, the Commonwealth. The strength of the Commonwealth will once again be reaffirmed when its heads of Government meet in November at New Delhi.
177.	It is sad that so many of the political problems which confronted us last year are no less acute now. The Middle East is a prime example. Violence and the rule of force are the order of the day. There is not much time left for peaceful change. The United Kingdom was greatly disappointed, especially after the initial response from the Twelfth Arab Summit Conference, held at Fez on 25 November 1981 and 9 September 1982, that the proposals put forward by President Reagan on 1 September 1982' were not taken up by the parties. They offered a realistic starting point for negotiations aimed at reconciling the right of Israel to live within secure and recognized borders with the right of the Palestinian people to determine their own future.
178.	Only through negotiation will there be a just and lasting solution to the Arab-Israel dispute. But we are a long way from a negotiation, and we shall stay a long way as long as the parties do not take the first steps to build mutual confidence and trust. On each side there is a long-canvassed step which could transform the picture: for Israel, to halt its policy of building illegal settlements in occupied territory; for the Arabs, including the Palestinians, to show that they are ready to accept Israel's right to live in peace and security.
179.	Efforts to tackle the central issue of the future of the occupied territories of the West Bank and Gaza have been diverted by events in Lebanon. This is a tragedy for Middle East peace, but it is a greater tragedy for the people of Lebanon. Let us be honest about this: Lebanon has internal problems which would be difficult enough to solve in conditions of peace. It has no chance of solving them as long as it is at the mercy of foreign forces. That is why we shall continue to support all efforts to restore Lebanon's sovereignty and independence and to secure the withdrawal of all foreign forces from that country. The presence of a small contingent of British troops in Beirut is a symbol of that support.
180.	Israel's invasion of Lebanon last year has, predictably enough, solved nothing. On the contrary, it has led only to more suffering, while making even more difficult the essential process of national reunification. Meanwhile, the Syrian refusal to withdraw, despite the clear wishes of the Lebanese Government, only prolongs the agony and increases the risk of partition. I warmly welcome the declaration of a cease-fire and the intention of all parties to pursue a dialogue aimed at reconciliation of the various communities. The important thing now is for this to be implemented fully and faithfully by all concerned.
181.	Sadly, conflict in the Middle East is not an isolated phenomenon. In the Gulf we shall support all efforts to end the bloody war between Iran and Iraq. The work of the Secretary-General's mission of inquiry provides a starting-point for a consensus. Meanwhile, members of the international community should avoid any action which could extend or increase the level of conflict in the area.
182.	This is an appropriate place to mention also two other issues with which the United Nations remains closely concerned: Korea and Cyprus. The best prospect of peaceful reunification in Korea lies in direct talks between the two sides. The Republic of Korea has made clear its positive approach. It is high time that it received a constructive response from Pyongyang. In this context let me repeat my Government's total condemnation of the shooting down by the Soviet Union of a South Korean civilian airliner. What is essential now is full redress and effective arrangements to avoid such incidents in future. We will work strenuously to this end in ICAO.
183.	In Cyprus the United Nations has been tireless in its efforts to promote a settlement. The Secretary-General has this year increased his personal involvement. My Government welcomes this and stands ready to help in every appropriate way. Despite some limited progress in the intercommunal talks held under United Nations auspices, a peaceful and lasting settlement regrettably still seems to be a long way off. I cannot believe that it is in the interests of any of the parties that the current situation should become frozen, still less that it should deteriorate.
184.	That conclusion applies overwhelmingly also in southern Africa. Violence cannot be the solution. Human rights must not be trampled upon or ignored. South Africa will not succeed in the end in coercing its neighbours into a change of heart through the use of military force or subversion. Nor, on the other hand, will bomb attacks against innocent people incline the South African Government to change its course.
185.	The only hope for a peaceful future in southern Africa lies in political change and the creation of greater trust through regional co operation and international support. We believe these can be achieved and achieved peacefully. The independence agreement for Zimbabwe was an important first step. A settlement in Namibia has still to be reached, but I am confident that, with so many of the difficult issues now settled, it can be reached, and on the basis of Security Council resolution 435 (1978). My country is committed to such a settlement and will continue to use its weight and influence to help bring it about, both through our own efforts and in conjunction with the other members of the Western contact group. We have no doubt that the front-line States will be using their influence in the same direction.
186.	We do not see or seek to present all the problems and conflicts in the world in terms of East against West. It would be factually wrong to do so wrong also in terms of policy. Problems like those in southern Africa and the Middle East are quite hard enough to deal with as it is. To introduce an element of East-West rivalry, or to add to it where it already exists, could only make things worse. And it is indeed the case that problems are worse where tension is exploited from outside and where international efforts to promote peaceful change are thwarted.
187.	In Afghanistan the Soviet Union continues to use military force to suppress a small and non-aligned people. But after nearly four years of brutal military occupation in support of an unpopular and unrepresentative regime, the struggle of the Afghan people for national liberation continues to inspire widespread admiration. Only a complete and prompt Soviet withdrawal can open the way to the return of the Afghan refugees and to the establishment of an independent Government, in accordance with the true wishes of the people and with the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly. 
188.	The Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia is another example of a situation in which foreign military force is being used to deny the right to self-determination of a neighbour. We shall continue our full support for the efforts of the United Nations and the neighbouring countries of ASEAN to find a comprehensive political solution based on self-determination.
189.	In Central America there is no doubt that many problems stem from social, economic and political injustice. But there is no doubt also that these problems have been and are being exploited by those who seek, not to solve them for the good of the people of those countries, but rather to use them to bring about violent revolution. Our own position is clear. On the one hand we support all efforts to correct injustice by peaceful and democratic means, and we welcome efforts such as those of the Contadora Group to reduce tension and encourage dialogue. On the other hand, we condemn the action of all who use force to block the path to peaceful reform and evolutionary change.
190.	The conduct of the Soviet Union in these regional problems has contributed to the present state of strain in East-West relations. The Soviet military build-up, the situation in Poland and the disregard of human rights in the East have also played a part. The brutal destruction of the Korean Air Lines airliner and the murder of its passengers only a few weeks ago were a reminder of how far Soviet international behaviour can fall short of civilized standards. Britain has made plain to the new Soviet leadership that these are matters of grave and continuing international concern to the entire world. But together with our partners we have also said—and said repeatedly —that we are ready for a more constructive relationship, provided that the Soviet Union is prepared to adopt a new approach. What we are calling for is willingness by the Soviet Union to base its actions and its policies on respect for internationally accepted standards of behaviour. If the Soviet Union were ready to take real steps in this direction, I have no doubt that the international response would be overwhelming.
191.	I have already had occasion to mention human rights when speaking of southern Africa and East-West relations. I could equally have done so in relation to the Middle East, Afghanistan and elsewhere. This year is the thirty-fifth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Yet human rights continue to be widely disregarded in many parts of the world. It is an appealing comment on the failure of the international community to implement the commitments that its Members so readily proclaim.
192.	Personal freedom and individual rights are the foundation of national and international order. If they are absent, both national and international edifices, however imposing and monolithic, are a betrayal of those they serve and must ultimately crumble away. Where they are encouraged, international co-operation—and thus international security and prosperity—will grow on firm foundations. Let each country look honestly at its own performance in this field and resolve to do better. That, rather than speeches, will produce the improvements the people of the world demand.
193.	I have ranged widely in my speech and yet left many important subjects untouched. The challenge before us is indeed formidable, but it can be faced successfully if we are prepared to work effectively together. International co-operation is the key: it has worked in Antarctica and it can surely be made to work also nearer hope. We need to think more about our neighbours and to co-operate more with them. We need to take more seriously our international obligations, including respect for individual rights and freedoms and the need to settle problems by peaceful means.
194.	Confrontation is easy. Pursuit of national interest appears to be. But neither confrontation nor blind nationalism can provide the conditions of stability essential for peace to break out and the world economy to flourish. That is what our people want, and we owe it to them to make a reality of international co-operation under the Charter.
 

﻿1.	  I congratulate you, Mr. President, on your election to that august office. Your long association with the United Nations and your experience give us hope that during your tenure the Organization will gain strength. We are glad also to see the Secretary-General by your side. His analysis of the current world situation deserves serious reflection. We wish success to his patient and untiring labour in the cause of world peace.
2.	I welcome our newest Member, St. Kitts-Nevis.
3.	I am here on a quest of peace and co-operation. I have the privilege of addressing the Assembly not only on behalf of the people of India, one of the founder Members of the United Nations, but also on behalf of 100 other members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, which met at New Delhi in March at the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries and renewed their pledge to work for a world which would not be driven by distrust and hatred and for a truly international community where nations would grasp hands of friendship across geographical frontiers.
4.	For the last 20 years the non-aligned have customarily met once in three years, and the Chairperson has reported to the United Nations. Firm faith in the United Nations is central to the non-aligned. All members of the Non- Aligned Movement are Members, current or potential, of the United Nations. However, the United Nations is an institution, the non-aligned group a movement. The United Nations is, or ought to be, a forum for solving disputes; the Non-Aligned Movement eschews discussion of bilateral problems. But the aim is the same: to maintain peace by removing the sources of tension and to bring out the humanity in human beings.
5.	At the New Delhi Conference we adopted a comprehensive statement on the economic and political state of the world. Our views were summed up in what has now come to be called the New Delhi Message. The final paragraph says:
"The crisis which confronts our civilization today is unprecedented in history. Great tasks call for wise decisions. We appeal to the great Powers to give up mistrust, engage in sincere, forward-looking negotiations in a spirit of shared good faith to reach agreement on various disarmament measures and to find a way out of the deepening economic crisis which threatens all of us. United, the members of the Non-Aligned Movement are prepared to do everything in their power to assist in this process. The earth belongs to us all- let us cherish it in peace and true brotherhood, based on the dignity and equality of man." I am here to give this message to the entire world.
6.	When the non-aligned plead with the aligned to give up confrontation and conflict, it is not out of any presumption. We are only too keenly aware of our own weaknesses, of the unnecessary discords and disputes between ourselves. But, being militarily weak, we do not have to find justification for strength. We are familiar with pain and suffering, we do not want them to increase anywhere. Our plea for peace is not out of superior virtue but because peace is indispensable, because humankind now has the choice, the knowledge and the power to prevent the calamity of extinction.
7.	Scientists, scholars and some notable soldiers have vividly described the outcome of a future nuclear war. Imagine a hundred or a thousand Hiroshima at one time. Imagine a world with nowhere to hide and perhaps nobody left to hide. As more and more people in all countries comprehend the full implications of the monstrous stockpiles of nuclear death, peace movements grow in number and beyond political ideology, driven by peoples' inmost urge to live. We can all live only if we all combine in the struggle for peace.
8.	Some quarters believe that nuclear armaments can be controlled, and deployed with exact calculation of cost- effectiveness. Equally frightening is the preparation and willingness to use other deadly chemical, biological and other such devices. Even more disturbing is the talk in depersonalised terms of using outer space for future wars.
9.	This relentless search for ever increasingly barbaric weapons systems is undertaken in the name of security. India and other non-aligned countries are convinced that only general and complete disarmament can provide real and enduring security. Nuclear-weapon Powers owe it to humanity to renounce the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons in any situation whatever. As a first step they should resume negotiations for disarmament and ban the production and testing of all nuclear weapons.
10.	In four days we shall celebrate Mahatma Gandhi's one hundred and fourteenth birthday. There is renewed awareness of the continued relevance of his message of non-violence and tolerance. He said:
"Man as animal is violent, but as spirit is non-violent. The moment he awakes to the spirit within he cannot remain violent. Either he progresses towards non-violence or rushes to his doom. That is why the prophets and avatars have taught the lessons of truth, harmony, brotherhood, justice—all attributes of nonviolence."
11.	The other major theme of the non-aligned is development. We are largely poor and technologically backward. Even the handful of the rich amongst us are not technologically self-reliant. Most of us have become free from colonial rule only in the last 35 years. Our national freedom is new; our national unities need to be consolidated. Freedom itself releases long-pent-up hopes and yearning for rights. In this age of instant globe-encircling information technology, the media dazzle eyes and fill ears with images and reports of affluence. Even the modest expectations of our peoples are far beyond our present means. Besides, we are hard put to preserve our independence because of the many economic, political and military pressures.
12.	The present world economic order is based on domination and inequality. The basic aim of the programmes of action drawn up at New Delhi was to strengthen the economies of weak nations. We outlined a mechanism to pool our own technological resources, a South-South dialogue as a supplement to the North- South one. We also indicated some immediate measures, the most important of which was the convening of a conference on money and finance for development. To help developing countries is not mere largesse. It will directly benefit the industrialized because development in Asia, Africa and Latin America, and the enlargement of their incomes by removing obstacles to their export, will absorb industrial goods and machinery from advanced countries, stimulate economic activity and ease their unemployment problem. What better investment can the North make in its own future than by turning today's deprived of the South into tomorrow's consumers?
13.	Existing international institutions and those who have headed them have done valuable work, but these bodies are not wholly representative, nor do they reflect the changes that have occurred in the international economy. No country or set of countries is without dilemmas. The affluent ones which follow market economies have problems of production, unemployment and currency instability. Industrialized countries with planned economies, which do not formally belong to the international monetary system but participate in the global activities of commerce and technological exchange, also face problems of production and renovation. We the developing are caught between the inadequacies of internal and external resources. All these are parts of one global crisis. There is no way out except through dialogue among us all. Each country, however powerful, has more to gain by accommodation and co-operation than by withdrawal into individual isolation or adoption of policies to maintain the solidarity of the strong. That is why we advocate a new international economic order based on equality and justice. Unfortunately, over the past three years the procedural hurdles to the launching of global negotiations have not been overcome.
14.	The advanced countries have held consultations regarding their own problems and the accumulated burdens of the economically weakest. Nothing concrete has emerged. Intentions are offset by supposed domestic compulsions. The Summit of Industrialized Nations at Williamsburg in May and the sixth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in June and July have shown up once again the fear of the unfamiliar, of lowering easy, safe, existing protective barriers and releasing restrictive rules. Why should these countries be afraid of the demands of the weak? It is time for bolder moves in trade and in financial and technological cooperation and a daring new initiative to eliminate global poverty by the end of the century. The demand of the developing countries for a North-South dialogue is all too often seen as yet another plea of the have-nots which has to be resisted by the haves. The world today is too complex for such a simplistic division. Political independence is not an end to problems, but only a recognition of the realities of governance in adverse circumstances.
15.	Ideas and initiatives come through discussion, through collective counsel. At New Delhi the non-aligned felt the universal need for further communication and more informal discussions with one another, hence the suggestion that the current session of the General Assembly could be an occasion for heads of State or Government leaders of the developing and the developed countries, the non-aligned and the aligned, the North and South, West and East of common parlance, to be together for just a few days to think and talk about the great problems of peace and security, disarmament and development. We expect no dramatic results, but the immensity of our challenges calls for persistence. Every attempt may take us just a little further in promoting a climate of peace.
16.	It is gracious indeed of so many heads of State and Government to listen to this call of the Movement of Non- Aligned Countries. We are having informal meetings individually and collectively, joined by the President of the General Assembly and the Secretary-General. Could 1983 mark a watershed in the history of the United Nations? This great world body was founded as a group of nations united in a wartime alliance. With the entry of newly freed countries, the end of the decade saw its expansion into a much bigger body. The next 30 years have brought about near universality in its composition. Today, because of the unique authority entrusted to it in controlling military crises through its instruments and its influence on social and economic developments through its various specialized agencies, the United Nations is an integral part of the lives of nations and individuals. It has not yet come near the beginnings of a global approach. Its progress has to be halting and tentative, sometimes unavoidably ineffectual in facing up to immediate problems, because of the very nature of its origin and institutional structure, particularly the ideological divide, which was not envisaged by those who drew up the Charter. It is our task to improve this institution to make it capable of facing difficulties which were not foreseen 40 years ago.
17.	Some issues arouse intense feeling in individual nations, others our common indignation. One such is the persistence of racialism. How can the denial of freedom to the majority of the people of South Africa and the people of Namibia be condoned? I affirm our total support for the freedom struggle of the people of Namibia, under the leadership of the South West Africa People's Organization [SPK4PO], and to the Governments and peoples of the front-line States, which have to endure pressure and provocation. Almost my own first conscious thoughts were admiration for those who fought for freedom and concern for those who suffered. Nelson Mandela, a flaming symbol of freedom, and many others are behind prison bars, but their voices cannot be stilled; they resound the world over.
18.	The turmoil in West Asia remains the most serious threat to peace. Driven from their homes, the Palestinian people are in physical and mental agony. We support the valiant efforts of the Palestine Liberation Organization [PLO] to secure their legitimate rights. The occupation of the land of others will not guarantee Israel's security. The Palestinians must be masters in their home, and all States of the region should live within secure international frontiers. The voice of the non-aligned spoke out firmly at the New Delhi summit for a peaceful settlement which ensures justice. This call was endorsed and reaffirmed by the International Conference on the Question of Palestine, held at Geneva in August and September. All parties concerned should begin the process of reconciliation.
19.	The sufferings of the people of Lebanon, caused by the intervention of foreign forces, have been of great concern to all of us. Here again, the Israeli aggression triggered the crisis. We are relieved to learn of the ceasefire, which we hope will be maintained. All foreign forces should be withdrawn and the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Lebanon should be respected by all.
20.	The crisis in Central America must be urgently defused. We should demand and support efforts to create a climate of negotiation without external interference. India and the other non-aligned countries have welcomed the peace initiatives of the Contadora Group.
21.	The non-aligned have always stood for non-interference and non-use of force. The complex situation in Afghanistan can be solved only on the basis of these twin principles. We fully support the representative of the Secretary-General in working for a solution which takes into consideration the concerns of all the involved parties. The tragic and wasteful Iraq-Iran war harms both countries. Conflicts in other regions also, including Kampuchea, admit only of political solutions.
22.	Militarily, today's leading countries are incomparably more powerful than in the days when a single gunboat could silence and immobilize millions. The weak are not so weak, nor the strong so strong. The essence of the concept of non-alignment is peaceful coexistence and the promotion of constructive co-operation. The "non" in non-alignment relates to the importance of resisting attitudes of irreconcilable hostility. The positive aspects are the desire for friendship with other nations irrespective of patterns of government—which are their own business —and to strengthen the fabric of our own nations.
23.	In India we work for self-reliance in action and self- respect in thought, which Bertrand Russell called "the better half of pride". But this pride is for human achievement and human potential. Its justification would be our ability to discern the future beyond the gloom of the present.
24.	The safety of the weak is the strength of the strong. That is why the weakest and the poorest amongst us, within each society and in the international community, must be shielded from the inclemencies of the international climate. Continued disparities also aggravate political tensions and lead to instability. The strong, with the help of the rest of the international community, can think of measures to contain the enormous destructive potential which gives them illusions of strength but whose very power is troublesome. It is a welcome sign that the two most powerful nations are engaged in negotiations on vital strategic matters and have not allowed even serious incidents to deflect them. The myriad other problems concerning the environment, the optimum utilization of the resources of our planet and the reorganization of political and economic systems at the global and State levels need our co-operative endeavours.
25.	The Industrial Revolution gave a major turn to history. Out of it emerged industrial capitalism and, as a reaction to it, Marxism in its various forms. Together these have given rise to the great social upheavals of our time. The two have followed different paths but their ethos is basically materialistic. All that begins must end. And the seeds of the ending are present from the very beginning. What we have witnessed—the two world wars, the possible approach of a third, so much more destructive and disastrous, and the struggle for power—are the end of the road for the existing order of competing systems. Out of this chaos a new order is struggling to be born. This is our last chance of appealing to the old and entrenched not to infect the new with its diseases: neocolonialism, monopoly, economic oppression, class divisions and big-Power politics, as well as the idea that power is invincible and can feed on itself, with militarization as the ultimate tool.
26.	For us, the non-aligned, and for all who are deeply concerned with the future of humanity, the question is whether we help the birth of this new creation or throttle it before it can draw breath. The matter is not simple, because history has proved time and again that ideas and movements can be obstructed, but not stopped. How long can a few pockets of affluence continue to exert influence on the large populations, the natural resources, the cultural strength of the others? How long can allies and supporters, who may not have a base in their own countries and who are not in tune with the changing times, be perpetuated? You cannot kill an idea by killing its adherents. The newborn will not die; the birth can be delayed but the cost will be much higher and the affluent will have to pay. When peaceful change is thwarted, violent upheaval occurs. Previously, the end of a civilization brought destruction and trauma in its trail. If we keep to past trends, we too will be engulfed by circumstances. But today we have the opportunity, which may well be the first in human history, for humankind to bridge the transition from the old to the new in a conscious way, to build a new era, to move together to a new future.
27.	The barriers which have been put up to shut out the new are the different faces of colonialism—economic, technological and the powerful weapons of food and information. These are the walls at which we raise our voices. That is why we lay stress on a new economic order, a new information order, preserving cultural identities. Walls do not move and can be got around.
28.	Vast knowledge and technological advances concentrated in the hands of a few can lead to a new type of oppression, the barbarity inherent in technological excellence when it is monopolized by the powerful and used for their ends. What just a few years ago were considered as interesting fantasies are today perilously close to the facts of contemporary living. Brainwashing is not confined to any one system or one part of the world, to say nothing of the other cruelties of deprivation.
29.	The shape of this new order is not clear. What form the future will take is being moulded right now by our actions. When I speak of the new order, I am not talking merely of more effective and more widespread use of technology, however dramatic it may be, of which we read so much and about which there are many prognoses. I speak of entirely different thought processes and emotional reactions m the use of technology. We must imbue technology with deeper understanding of the difficulties of others and ensure protection against any further technological colonialism. The new order cannot be confined to the economic or social or cultural. It must encompass all of these and yet be much larger. We must create a new international order of humanity, where power is tempered with compassion, where knowledge and capability are at the service of all humanity.
 

﻿208.	 Mr. President, at the outset, permit me to congratulate you on your election to the presidency of the thirty-eighth session. Since this year marks the 200th anniversary of the birth of Simon Bolivar, the election of the representative of a Bolivarian country to the presidency is also an expression of esteem by the international community of the ideals of Bolivar, beyond being a tribute to your nation, Panama, and indeed to the Americas as a whole. We know that your vast experience and skill will stand us in good stead in our deliberations.
209.	I should also like to express our appreciation to your predecessor, the Deputy Foreign Minister of Hungary, Mr. Imre Hollai, for the able manner in which he carried out his tasks as President of the thirty-seventh session.
210.	Israel wishes to congratulate also from this rostrum Saint Christopher and Nevis on its accession to independence and to welcome it on its admission to the United Nations. We wish its people peace and prosperity.
211.	The official closing of the thirty-seventh session on 19 September marked the passage of yet another year of turbulence and incertitude. But as we begin this new thirty-eighth session, we see amply demonstrated once again the aspirations of Member States for peace and tranquillity, for equality and justice in our world. This, after all, should be the common denominator for all of us who have been meeting in this Hall. And yet it is a sad comment on the ingenuity of the human race that so little has been done in these last 38 autumns to go beyond the hopes invested in the United Nations in 1945.
212.	New wars have been erupting perennially, some more bloody than the greatest battles fought in the Second World War, and old conflicts have continued to smoulder without let-up. Significantly, the greatest problems which have faced mankind since the end of the Second World War have been dealt with outside this Organization, although it was founded on the belief that the concert of nations can and must stand up to its trials and travails together and out of common accord.
213.	It is indeed gratifying to observe the family of nations grow from year to year. We welcome new partners in our common endeavours, for the United Nations will either stand or fall on the principle of universality based on equal sharing of opportunities and burdens in a pluralistic world. But reality must not be cast aside; the United Nations is patently incapable of meeting its challenges, as it is, regrettably, an organization which has been hijacked to serve the narrow interests of those who would do anything to advance their particular and selfish causes, and theirs alone. The United Nations has become a forum of mercantile transactions of favours, of a complacent trampling of the principles and purposes of the Charter. These are the sad realities within which we live—realities which, however, we are not compelled to accept or adopt.
214.	There is today no evident correlation between the hopes of nations and the United Nations role in the realization of those hopes; no rational connection between the aspirations and expectations expressed at the beginning of each General Assembly session and the many acrimonious debates in committees and the flood of paper resolutions that emerge at the tail end of the sessions. This is not only the point of view of Israel; it has been dwelt upon by several Assembly Presidents in the past.
215.	Israel, of course, has had its own share of disillusionment with the United Nations. The persistence of Israel's adversaries' hatred and rejectionism has been largely tolerated here without prohibition or hindrance, primarily because of a great transfer of wealth, gratuitous and unprecedented, from the highly industrialized nations of the West to some Arab countries and the resultant concentration over the last decade of economic influence in the hands of the oil-producing Arab nations.
216.	Yet, however frustrating Israel's experience with the United Nations has seemed to be, my country has not relinquished the first flush of hope that the founding of the United Nations produced in the wake of the Second World War. Beyond its own political preoccupations at the United Nations, Israel has been observing with great concern those economic and social problems which consistently mar relations among nations.
217.	Economic issues, as well as those of war and peace and arms control, have given more cause for fear than for hope in the past year. Insecurity and distress continue to afflict the greater part of humanity.
218.	The deliberations on economic issues conducted between developed and developing nations, as well as those among the developing nations themselves, progress far more slowly than the rate at which these problems continue to grow. The gravity of these issues requires unrelenting endeavour.
219.	Israel, for its part, is willing, within the means at its disposal, to make its contribution to the advancement of international economic co-operation. In this spirit, we have recently presented our "transitional economy plan", already circulated at the thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly. The aim of the plan, which is based on Israel's own experience, is the application of low-cost improvements to the rural sectors of various societies. Dozens of developing countries and international economic organizations have already expressed their interest in advancing this programme and in implementing the ideas relevant to their needs and special circumstances. We are happy to note that some developed countries have shown eagerness to incorporate parts of this project into their own development strategy for the developing and least developed countries.
220.	Israel believes in both collective and individual efforts to fight hunger on this planet and has participated actively, through its international co-operation programme, in alleviating this scourge. The United Nations system should be the central vehicle for the required international co-operation. Its ability to carry out this role efficiently must depend to a large degree on its observance of the principles of universality in participation and adherence to genuine objectives of economic development.
221.	Unfortunately, we have been witnessing an ever growing attempt to politicize international economic efforts by the injection of elements of global and regional conflicts. The developing countries are ultimately the main victims of this attitude, as precious resources for development are channelled into futile and senseless exercises totally unrelated to the pressing economic needs of the greater part of mankind.
222.	No less disturbing is the insufficient progress in the international handling of the arms race and security- building measures. Israel has long been concerned about the danger posed by nuclear armaments. It has, therefore, consistently supported the objective of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons.
223.	Israel naturally examines these problems from the perspective of the Middle East. We have concluded that the most credible barrier to the proliferation of nuclear weapons in our region would be to make the Middle East a nuclear-weapon-free zone. To that end, Israel has made proposals based on the precepts of the Latin American model which had led to the conclusion of the Treaty of Tlatelolco.
224.	It is only logical that the initiative for the establishment of such a zone should originate with the States in the region, and the preliminary consultations necessary for achieving this aim must be carried out directly among them; they should be conducted in good faith and be addressed to issues pertinent to the establishment of such a zone.
225.	It is clear that only free and direct negotiations among all Middle Eastern States can ensure real progress towards the conclusion of a convention which would establish a system of mutually binding obligations on all States of the region. My delegation has been advocating this approach in the annual General Assembly debates; it introduced a draft resolution, contained in the annex to a letter dated 9 June 1981/ and formed part of the consensus on the subject. Our initiative gained wide- ranging support, and recognized leaders and experts in the field of disarmament paid tribute to Israel's position. Israel's proposal, however, was unfortunately turned down by hostile States in the region.
226.	Israel is fully aware of the many political differences between the States of the Middle East. None of those differences should be permitted to stand in the way of the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone. Israel, for its part, stands ready to commence negotiations on this matter among the interested States of our region at any time and without any preconditions.
227.	In recent years, the suppression of human rights by many Governments around the world has reached alarming proportions. It persists in all but a few countries and is in clear violation of the principles enshrined in various international treaties and in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. In the Middle East itself, many of the Arab regimes flagrantly violate these rights by persecuting political, ethnic and religious groups and minorities; by imprisoning political opponents without trial on a widespread scale; by humiliating, torturing and, indeed, executing many political prisoners; by staging at times large-scale massacres of their own citizens, as was the case in Hama, Syria, in February of last year; and by suppressing such fundamental liberties as freedom of expression and assembly.
228.	The Jewish people have known for centuries what it is like to suffer at the hands of cruel authoritarian regimes. Israel abhors such manifestations of repression. My country supports all sincere efforts to foster respect for and safeguarding of human rights. At the same time, it deplores attempts in this Organization and elsewhere hypocritically to divert legitimate concern for human rights in directions which serve objectionable and narrow political interests.
229.	Unfortunately, the Soviet Union's continuing harassment of Soviet Jewry remains one of the most persistent and glaring human rights problems faced by the world today. In spite of the many international agreements to which the Soviet Union is a signatory, such as the Helsinki accord,' hundreds of thousands of Jews in that country are being systematically denied the basic human right to emigrate and to be reunited with their families in Israel. At the same time, those who have been formally denied exit permits have been forced to live as outcasts in Soviet society, often for lengthy periods, having been deprived of their means of livelihood, exposed to the whims of the authorities and subjected to all manner of harassment. In some cases, Jews who apply to leave for Israel or who seek to preserve their Jewish heritage and identity are arrested and imprisoned and languish in Soviet jails and labour camps under the most inhuman conditions.
230.	Indeed, as the gates of emigration have been nearly sealed, officially inspired anti-Semitism, with the inevitable strong racist overtones, is being increasingly manifested in the Soviet media and in various forms of discrimination. Regrettably, the United Nations has yet to take appropriate action on this matter, which must distress decent people everywhere and which is certainly worthy of the Organization's attention.
231.	Unfortunately, the United Nations, and the General Assembly in particular, have also done very little of a constructive nature to alleviate international tension and defuse the many conflicts which have continued to plague much of the world for several years now. The cause of neither peace nor world security has been advanced in this past year. The past year has seen the escalation of the confrontation between the super-Powers, which in turn has had grave repercussions throughout the world, particularly for the smaller nations. International tension was greatly increased when the Soviet Air Force recently deliberately shot down a South Korean airliner—an act that was overwhelmingly condemned by the international community. Most of the armed conflicts and local wars raging around the globe year ago continue to exact a heavy toll in casualties despite destruction and suffering. In Afghanistan, Kampuchea foreign intervention continue, with hundreds of thousands having been killed or injured thus far and millions rendered homeless. The Middle East is torn apart by violent inter-Arab rivalries and by a number of conflicts, of which the Arab- Israel conflict is but one. Iraq and Iran are locked in a bitter, prolonged war which has now entered its fourth year and has already claimed the lives of hundreds of thousands. Internecine strife, encouraged by Syria, has rent Lebanon. Libya has pushed ahead with its imperialistic ambitions in Chad, while seeking to subvert also other regimes in Africa and elsewhere. Various disputes have also been plaguing the western hemisphere.
232.	Although usually stemming from local factors, much of the unrest throughout the world, including the Middle East, has been sharply exacerbated by Soviet policies which have exploited tensions to generate instability and thereby broaden the scope of Soviet influence. Whether directly, as in Afghanistan, or indirectly, through such proxies as Viet Nam, Syria and Libya, the Soviet Union has, instead of contributing to world peace, aggravated crisis situations and even sparked the outbreak of hostilities. Unfortunately, this holds true also for Soviet involvement in the Arab-Israel conflict.
233.	The last decade has demonstrated that the solution of the Arab-Israel conflict is indeed possible, provided that the parties to the conflict are sincere in their efforts to resolve it. Once again it must be stressed that progress in this regard was made entirely outside the United Nations. Indeed, instead of contributing to the promotion of peace in the Middle East, the Assembly and other United Nations organs have often added to the violent rhetoric which has fanned the flames of the Arab-Israel conflict. Were we to judge matters as they are reflected in these chambers, one might easily conclude that the conflict is insoluble. However, in the real world of the Middle East itself—as distinct from the world of the United Nations—progress has been achieved, as we have seen in the cases of the Israel-Egypt peace treaty and in the recent Israel-Lebanon agreement. Once States engage in serious and direct negotiations which acknowledge their mutual legitimate needs and interests, agreement has been shown to be possible.
234.	The United Nations, manipulated by powerful blocs and automatic majorities, has generated a basic misconception concerning the essence of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
235.	The essence of the conflict has always been and remains the persistent enmity of Arab States towards Jewish national renaissance. For decades now Arab leaders have obstinately maintained that the whole region from the Atlantic Ocean to the Persian Gulf must be exclusively Arab. This intolerant and exclusivist attitude has been reflected in their repressive policies directed against various non-Arab national groups in the Middle East. This, and no other, has been the primary cause also of the ongoing Arab-Israel conflict.
236.	Unfortunately, after several costly wars started by Arab States in their bid to destroy Israel, many of the Arab countries have apparently not yet realized that their designs concerning Israel are both wrong and futile. Thus, what they have been unable to achieve on the battlefield, they are now trying to achieve in the diplomatic arena. This has been demonstrated again at this podium during the last few days by the extreme language and content of the speeches made by, among others, the Foreign Ministers of Syria and Iraq.
237.	Significantly and most regrettably, representatives of Arab countries habitually referred to as "moderates" have not objected but acquiesced. Such indeed is their "moderation", which should be duly taken note of by all those nations here at the United Nations which have either deliberately or, at the very least, unwittingly aided and abetted a campaign which strives to delegitimize my country in order to dismantle it by stages.
238.	In the context just described, Arab enmity towards the State of Israel has been demonstrated very clearly in the case of the terrorist organization known as the PLO, an artificial framework which was created by the Arab Governments in the early sixties. That grouping of rival terrorist factions has always depended on the continued support of the Arab States and their allies for its very existence, as has been evidenced most vividly during and since the destruction of the PLO infrastructure in and around Beirut last year.
239.	Too many people have resorted to wishful thinking when referring to the PLO. Smooth phrases and eloquent double-talk cannot hide the PLO's true intentions and nature. Its criminal goal remains the destruction of Israel, whether in one fell swoop or in stages. In pursuing this objective, the PLO terrorists have perpetrated bloody atrocities which have struck at all, Jews and non-Jews, young and old, men, women and children. The PLO's true character and objectives must have become evident recently even to those who in the past were taken in by PLO phraseology.
240.	The continuing tragedy of Lebanon is a consequence of the havoc wreaked by the PLO and its allies over the past decade. Knowing full well the potential for subversion inherent in the PLO, Arab Governments were unwilling to tolerate the presence of this terrorist organization on their own countries' soil and, as a result, dumped that group upon Beirut and on the people of Lebanon. As a consequence, Lebanon's sovereignty was eroded and the country was tom apart by violent strife.
241.	It is well known that Israel stands for the full restoration of Lebanese sovereignty, of Lebanese independence, of Lebanese territorial integrity, of the unity of Lebanon within its internationally recognized boundaries, as well as for the restoration of the authority of the lawful government of Lebanon within that country. Israel believes that in order to permit the attainment of that goal, all foreign forces must be withdrawn from that country. Alongside these objectives, and bearing in mind the experience of recent years, Israel's legitimate security needs must also be guaranteed and Lebanese territory must never be used again for attacks upon our citizens.
242.	The agreement concluded by Israel and Lebanon on 17 May 1983 is linked to these requirements. Israel was and remains determined to proceed towards full and speedy implementation of this agreement aimed at the restoration of Lebanese sovereignty. However, it must have become clear to everyone by now that Syria and the PLO have no more intention of respecting Lebanese sovereignty today than they did in the past.
243.	We have all heard Lebanon's emphatic and repeated demands for the withdrawal of the Syrian forces and the PLO from its territory. At the last session, Lebanese President Amin Gemayel used this rostrum to call for "the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of all non-Lebanese forces from Lebanon". In a letter to the Twelfth Arab Summit Conference at Fez, a year ago, Lebanon explicitly demanded the termination of the Syrian and PLO presence in that country. Lebanon reiterated its demands as recently as last month. On 2 September, the Lebanese Foreign Minister wrote to the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States insisting again on Syrian and PLO withdrawal and he repeated this demand in his statement from this rostrum during the last meeting. Yet all this has been to no avail. Not only has Syria paid no heed to these demands, but it has increased its involvement in Lebanon and is engaged in direct warfare against the legitimate Government of that country. President Assad, backed diplomatically and militarily by the Soviet Union and assisted by Palestinian terrorists, continues his ruthless operations to keep Lebanon in disarray in an attempt to force Lebanon to submit to Syrian domination. Resorting to its well-known tactics of threats and extortion, Syria continues to undermine Lebanon's path to regaining its sovereignty. This is pursued by Syria directly or by proxy, and its uninhibited brutality stops at nothing.
244.	Israel's withdrawal from the Shouf Mountains, a first step in the direction of total withdrawal, was announced well in advance in order to provide the Lebanese Government and army with a chance to extend its control over that area. They were prevented from doing so by Syria and its proxies, which turned Lebanon once again into a battleground, exploiting existing enmity between groups there and encouraging all-out war against its legitimate Government.
245.	Israel welcomes the fact that a cease-fire has now been declared in Lebanon and hopes that the cessation of hostilities will endure, leading to true reconciliation, free of outside interventions and dictates. We are following the situation closely and are looking forward to the establishment of conditions which will ensure security and tranquillity along the Israel-Lebanon border. Under no circumstances will Israel agree to return to the state of affairs which prevailed until 16 months ago, when Lebanese territory was used as a base for terrorist operations against our citizens. Israel sincerely hopes and wishes to see an independent Lebanon in which a strong and stable regime exercises control throughout the country.
246.	Earlier, I had occasion to note that the United Nations has been systematically exploited in recent years as an instrument of Arab warfare against Israel. The most recent effort in this regard was the ill-conceived international conference at Geneva several weeks ago. As part of the manipulation of United Nations organs during the past decade by countries arrayed against Israel, that conference predictably served as an arena for anti-Israel slogans and made no attempt whatsoever to examine honestly and objectively the causes of the Arab-Israel conflict.
247.	Arab-Israel reconciliation can and must emanate from direct negotiations without outside interference. There is place neither for dictated nor for imposed solutions. Any overt or covert attempts to circumvent free and direct negotiations between the States of the region can only delay the peace process. A blatant example of such attempts is the so-called Fez "peace plan" with its calculated ambiguity and double-talk. It is intended to serve those who wish to evade direct negotiations and seek to impose long-standing and extreme Arab demands, thereby undermining the cause of peace. Any equitable and realistic solution will have to take into account the basic fact that on the territory of the former Palestine Mandate two national States have now been in existence for over three decades, one Arab and one Jewish. I refer, of course, to the Kingdom of Jordan and the State of Israel.
248.	The contribution of the United Nations and the world community at large should be to encourage discourse and dialogue rather than attitudes and trends which perpetuate and continued hostility to my country. Regrettably, the United Nations has allowed itself to be drawn into a biased position, has become entangled in a mushrooming web of unbalanced resolutions, has put itself into a straitjacket of partisan committees and has squandered vast resources and funds for dubious purposes. The time has surely come for-all to realize that a solution to the Arab-Israel conflict will be possible only if it takes full account also of the rights, interests and needs of Israel. First and foremost among these is the inalienable right of the Jewish people to self- determination and sovereignty in its homeland, the land of Israel.
249.	The Camp David accords reached after intensive direct negotiations with Egypt, with the participation of the United States of America, show what can be achieved if the parties involved approach the problem in a spirit of conciliation. These accords which fully take into account the legitimate rights and interests of the parties involved, have also set the stage for a future treaty with Jordan and have offered the Palestinian Arabs living in Judea, Samaria and the Gaza district an active role in shaping their own future, initially within the framework of autonomy and afterwards during the negotiations to determine the final status of the areas in question. Anyone sincerely interested in the well-being of the Palestinian Arabs, as well as in a true peace which would take into account both the interests of Israel and those of its Arab neighbours, should welcome the progress exemplified by Camp David. By contrast, those who wish to perpetuate the Arab-Israel dispute for selfish political reasons will no doubt continue to support one-sided resolutions in this body and will seek to undermine those initiatives which have brought us closer to a genuine Arab-Israel peace.
250.	Israel welcomes the voices of reason that have come out of African capitals declaring that their contribution towards the promotion of dialogue in the Middle East will be more credible and effective when their relations with both Israel and its neighbours are normalized. In the past, the potential inherent in the relations between Israel and the developing countries in Africa and elsewhere was realized in achievements which have proved useful and of significant mutual benefit.
251.	Israel would welcome the resumption of ties and expansion of co-operation and friendship with all those who/believe, as we do, that all nations, whether or not they agree on every issue, should engage in mutual relations and dialogue. In our opinion these are elementary requirements if we are to advance the prospects of peace and co-operation in our world, The purposes of the United Nations, as defined in Article 1 of the Charter, are to maintain peace, to develop friendly relations between nations, to achieve international co-operation in the solution of international problems and to act as a centre for harmonizing the actions of countries. These noble purposes, to which the founders of the United Nations dedicated themselves in 1945, are ill served by the Organization's present unchecked drifting into their abandonment through impotence. Above all, the principle of the sovereign equality of nations has often been set aside in deference to the dictates of bloc politics and military and economic blackmail.
252.	Despite this regrettable trend, Israel remains prepared actively to support a new, positive approach. An initial step in this direction could be the jettisoning of the heavy burden of politicization in the specialized agencies, thus rendering them as useful and efficient as they were meant to be.
253.	Israel still believes that the dim record of the past must not cloud our belief in the future. The Government of Israel is prepared today as it has always been to negotiate with the neighbouring Arab States an equitable solution to the Arab-Israel conflict.
254.	From this rostrum I wish to address myself to the Arab peoples of our region and to inquire whether 36 years of war and bloodshed have solved any problems. Are we better off as a result of so many years of conflict than we would have been had our nations lived side by side in peace? Could not the billions squandered on arms procurements have been put to better use in solving urgent domestic problems, such as poverty, hunger, illiteracy and a widening social gap between rich and poor? For how long will your governments be able to divert your legitimate concern with social injustice by pursuing hostile policies against my country, policies which can only perpetuate the violence which has cost our societies so much? Indeed, for how long will your Governments be prepared to sacrifice the flower of youth on the bloody altar of war?
258. Continued hostility and war have brought our region much grief and suffering. Would it not behave us to begin a new chapter in the history of our troubled region? Would it not be better for us to turn the Middle East into an area marked by co-operation and progress? Thousands of years ago from our region went forth a vision of universal peace. Together we could fulfil that vision in our region and be a source of inspiration to the rest of the world. Therefore let us meet in a spirit of reconciliation. Let us replace tension with tranquillity, misery with prosperity, hatred with friendship. Above all, instead of war, let us have peace.
﻿266.	 Sir, may I begin by congratulating you on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly. This is an appropriate recognition both of your own personal achievements and of the important role your country is playing in international affairs. New Zealand will fully support you in your endeavour to make this session a productive one, just as we fully support the Secretary-General in his efforts to make the United Nations more effective in the search for peace and development.
267.	Less than two weeks ago I had the pleasure of representing New Zealand at the independence celebrations of the new State of Saint Christopher and Nevis. Today I join others in congratulating the international community's newest Member in being represented for the first time at the United Nations. It is a salutary reminder to us all that one of the first acts of such a young and small country has been to register, in a formal sense, its interest in this Organization. We in New Zealand have no difficulty understanding that. By most counts, we are ourselves a young and small country. Our welfare can be profoundly influenced for better or worse by external developments very largely outside our control. Some four decades ago, when the Charter of the United Nations was negotiated, we held high hopes that through international co-operation we would achieve a measure of political and economic security which a country like New Zealand could not hope to realize alone.
268.	Time and experience have tempered our earlier expectations. In recent years we have seen the Soviet Union invade Afghanistan in flagrant violation of the Charter. Similarly, the invasion of Kampuchea by Viet Nam has been followed by nearly five years of occupation, thereby preventing the political settlement that the Assembly has urged repeatedly. The essential character of the apartheid system remains intact, in spite of the strongest condemnation by the international community. Day by day we witness the continuing suffering of various peoples and countries in the Middle East, indicating to us once more that peace and security cannot be achieved by force of arms alone. In one of those areas of conflict- Lebanon—New Zealand welcomes the cease-fire and hopes that it paves the way for a more lasting settlement among the parties involved.
269.	The Antarctic region stands in sharp contrast to these troubled areas throughout the world. For over 20 years the Antarctic Treaty" has succeeded in making Antarctica an area of international co-operation and preventing it from becoming the object of international dissension. The Treaty is open to any Member of the United Nations and it remains in force indefinitely. It makes a very effective contribution to achieving the purposes of the United Nations. We assume that any study carried out by the Organization will fully recognize this fact and seek to reinforce the Treaty rather than to weaken it.
270.	Antarctica is one example of what can be achieved by practical international co-operation. The South Pacific is another. At least once a year the heads of all the independent Governments in our region meet together in the South Pacific Forum to talk over common problems and to work out ways of dealing with them. So far we have succeeded in keeping our part of the world peaceful. We are, however, concerned about the continuation of nuclear testing in the South Pacific. We appreciate the offer made by the French Government to allow qualified experts from countries in the area to visit the testing site and check the effectiveness of the safety precautions followed by the French authorities. But the question is not merely one of safety precautions; it is about the use of a relatively peaceful part of the world for an essentially warlike purpose.
271.	We realize that this problem cannot be dealt with on a purely regional basis, and that is why New Zealand, like other countries in the South Pacific and elsewhere, attaches great importance to the negotiation of a comprehensive test-ban treaty. To be effective, such a treaty would need to be fully verifiable. Given good will and effort on all sides, we believe this problem can be overcome. The conclusion of a comprehensive test-ban treaty would do much to strengthen the 1968 Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and to limit the nuclear arms race.
272.	The part of the world in which New Zealanders live is one of the few areas of relative tranquillity. Nevertheless we are from time to time sharply reminded of the limitations both of international law and of normally accepted standards of civilized behaviour. The ruthless and totally unjustified attack by the Soviet Union on a civilian airliner has provided such a reminder. The Soviet Union must accept full responsibility for this act of brutality. What is truly outrageous is that the Soviet Government claims this action was fully in accordance with Soviet law. In plain language they seem to be saying that if tomorrow a civilian airliner from any one of our countries mistakenly flew over Soviet territory then they reserve the right to shoot it down.
273.	The limits to international co-operation are thus plain—all to plain—to see, yet the membership of the United Nations remains intact, and we welcome to the fold a new Member from the Caribbean region.
274.	The reason, I suggest, is obvious. However difficult it has been to develop habits of international cooperation on these major political issues, there is no practical alternative for the overwhelming majority of countries.
275.	I believe that today this applies with equal force to the international economy. International economic linkages are such that in practical terms no single country any longer has freedom of action. That is the consequence of several decades of sustained growth in world trade, production and investment. The interdependent world economy has arrived on our doorsteps, and the world has little idea how to manage it.
276.	The theory behind economic interdependence is not new. We always knew that the health of any individual economy was linked in no small measure with the health of its major trading and investment partners. There is nothing novel in pointing to the close connections between, say, trade and financial flows.
277.	What is new is that the practical significance of those linkages has increased to such an extent and with such rapidity that we have failed to adapt sufficiently our institutions and our thinking so as to be able to cope with those linkages.
278.	New Zealand respects the competence of the principal economic institutions such as IMF, the World Bank and GATT. As originally conceived after the war, they each had their role—IMF was concerned principally with short-term balance of payment adjustment and maintaining exchange rate stability, the Bank was concerned with development and GATT dealt with trade.
279.	The growth of interdependence has totally blurred these tidy dividing lines. The long-term resolution of the debt burden built up over recent years is inextricably linked with the resolution of the problems of protectionism. The old phrase that debt is deferred trade sums up the reality that it is only through increased exports that the interest and principal repayments can ever be met.
If protectionism chokes off that possibility, then the debt problem assumes very different proportions.
280.	It is not just a question of interdependence between issues such as debt and trade, development and growth. It is also a question of the interdependence between countries, between regions, between North and South.
281.	The current economic crisis facing many less developed countries has obscured the fact that until recently the growth performance of many of those countries was particularly strong. It has been estimated that in the 25-year period 1950 to 1975 the per capita gross Rational product of the developing countries as a whole grew at an average rate of 3.5 per cent per annum. Even though we knew this left a number of countries with unacceptable levels of poverty, this was a remarkable historic achievement. It was matched by creditable progress in such crucial indices as a steady rise in life expectancy and adult literacy.
282.	Because of these developments it was clear by the beginning of the 1980s that it was no longer accurate to see the concept of dependence flowing one way only. By the 1980s the economic health of developed countries was beginning to be influenced profoundly by the economic performance of their less developed neighbours.
283.	This is what interdependence means. It was visibly demonstrated last year when the expected recovery of the developed and affluent countries members of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development [OFCD] did not eventuate in the second half of 1982 very largely because of a sudden downturn in the demand for their exports to the less developed world. Faced with acute financing difficulties caused by a contraction in commercial bank lending, many of the more heavily indebted countries had no option but to pursue adjustment policies based largely on slashing imports. This impaired their own development needs. It impaired the OECD's recovery.
284.	From the suffering of the Second World War a system for international economic co-operation was developed. Those who designed that system had in mind a world economy that was very different from the interdependent world economy we live in today. In many respects those post-war arrangements achieved their central objectives. Many of the key elements, such as currency convertibility, are still as relevant today as they were then. The successes of that system of trade and payments created the global economy we have today. I believe the international community must now move on to the next phase of international economic co-operation and begin the task of managing that interdependence.
285.	To describe the scope and magnitude of that task I have used the term "a new Bretton Woods". For over a year, at a variety of international forums, I have urged the international community to initiate the comprehensive examination of the world's trade and payments system that is the first necessary step towards a new Bretton Woods. The conference as such should be regarded as the last step, the culmination of the most careful preparatory process of analysis and discussion.
286.	During that time there has been considerable debate over the future of the trade and payments system. There have also been unmistakable signs of a recovery in the United States economy, and the immediate danger of default by the most heavily indebted countries has been averted by various rescue operations.
287.	The key question, I believe, is whether the recovery and these rescue operations will in practice set back the growing consensus in favour of a comprehensive examination of the underlying structural difficulties facing the world economy. There is a serious danger that this will be the case. The remedy, however, lies entirely in our own hands.
288.	Let me first summarize the international debate as I believe it has evolved over that period. In February 1983 the Brandt Commission's second report proposed a major review of the world's trade and payments system." In March the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries endorsed the Indian Prime Minister's call for a conference on money and finance for development. Following the meeting of OECD ministers in May, at which I repeated my call for a Bretton Woods-type conference, the French President made a very similar proposal. Then, at the Williamsburg Summit the leaders of the industrialized countries issued a somewhat tentative call for their ministers of finance to work with the Managing Director of IMF to prepare the groundwork for what might develop into a high-level international monetary conference. However qualified that endorsement may have been, it was a response from the developed world to the growing weight of opinion favouring a careful examination of these international economic issues. The middle ground, if not clearly delineated, was at least becoming visible.
289.	Finally, at the meeting of Commonwealth finance ministers, which concluded in Trinidad and Tobago less than two weeks ago, ministers of finance from 44 countries, representing the diversity of wealth, population and size that is the key characteristic of that grouping, commended the general thrust of a major report entitled "Towards a New Bretton Woods".
290.	This was a report compiled by eminent experts from nine Commonwealth countries. Its work on conditionally, liquidity problems, the role of special drawing rights, protectionism and sovereign debt, to mention only a few of the issues covered in the report, will, I hope, be sifted and refined. As the first attempt by an international institution to outline the agenda for such a fundamental examination of the trade and payments system, it deserves careful consideration by the wider international community.
291.	Surveying the debate over the past 12 months as a whole, therefore, international opinion seems to have been evolving in a promising direction. We were beginning to move away from the sterile confrontations that have been the hallmark of international economic debate even in recent years.
292.	However, we now face the possibility that the recovery—welcome as it is—may have the somewhat predictable result of unravelling a good deal of that growing consensus. If the international community has been increasingly ready to consider the scope for changes to the trade and payments system, it has no doubt been due to the long period of stagflation we have been through. Equally, now that the first clear signs of a recovery in the United States and certain other industrial economies are evident, some of the pressure to examine these long- term issues is off. It may be only realistic to expect that debate to be influenced by short-term fluctuation in the real economy. It would, I suggest, be reasonable to expect a little more vision.
293.	In spite of the misgivings of many Governors and the continuing, though privately expressed, disquiet of the international banking community, a message to emerge from the annual meetings of IMF and the World Bank was, regrettably, all too clear. With some of the major industrial countries there was a mood that can be expressed quite simply: now that the recovery is under way, let us put aside all this talk of changes to the trade and payments system.
294.	I believe that view is more than short-sighted; it is tragically misplaced. The recovery of industrial countries, in itself undoubtedly the best piece of economic news we have had for some years, will not come to grips with the deep-seated changes that have occurred in the world economy since the formation of the Bretton Woods institutions.
295.	In 1982 the world economy went backwards. World production declined by an estimated 2 per cent, and the volume of world trade declined by 2.5 per cent. Had this continued into 1983 I believe it would have put nearly impossible strains on world economic and political stability. The recovery certain developed countries are now experiencing has to be seen against that perspective. It has turned the tide against the forces of contraction of world output and trade unprecedented in our post-war experience. The recovery in demand will strengthen many commodity prices and thus may offer some relief to those countries which, like New Zealand, have suffered disastrous declines in their terms of trade during the last decade. Finally, however, the recovery is not a panacea for the problems of debt, protectionism and development.
296.	In the first place the recovery is cyclical in nature and confined to relatively few countries. Even for them the persistence of high interest rates is a serious threat to sustained recovery of their economies.
297.	Recovery will not tackle the underlying roots of protectionism, since clearly, the growth of protectionist action predates the recession. Protectionism, which is by no means confined to the OECD countries, will persist in the developed world if only because no one is predicting growth rates which will reduce the number of unemployed, roughly 35 million, in the OECD area.
298.	Recovery will not do much to alleviate the debt burdens of many developing countries. The Commonwealth study "Towards a New Bretton Woods" estimates that there are as many as 40 countries which have been reported to have agreed to debt reschedulings or to be in substantial payments arrears. In the 10-month period to June 1983 the value of cross-border debt being renegotiated with commercial banks has been calculated as being over 20 times larger than in any previous year. Debt of this magnitude is a powerful force for uncertainty, a threat to the recovery and a source of instability for these Governments, whatever their political system.
299.	Nor can I see any reason why the recovery should reverse the mood—so obvious in most countries—which has been aptly described as "aid weariness". The New Zealand political system is no more immune to that than any other democratic country. However, my experience with our small but highly effective aid programmes in the independent countries of the South Pacific has convinced me that the prevailing modem view of aid is profoundly misplaced.
300.	I have advocated putting aid on a firmer basis, possibly by issuing special drawing rights to the countries in greatest need. In any such distribution there may be a useful role for the World Bank, in part because that would put the Bank's finances on a more assured basis.
301.	These are only some of the medium- and longer- term issues which I believe the modest recovery in the OECD area will do little to address.
302.	The ideas, the issues involved, although technical in nature, have profound political implications. Many countries represented in the Assembly have witnessed directly the political consequences that flow from economic dislocation. Economic growth and stable financial markets will not of themselves preserve the fabric of world peace, but they are powerful positive forces all the same. Many of the elements of the post-war system of economic co-operation are under strain. I believe we, as an international community, now need to develop new political levers to tackle some of the underlying difficulties. We must move beyond the ad hoc responses that have developed to cope with severe, long-term current account deficits. We must reassure heavily indebted countries that there will be adequate financing available while they pursue the long-term process of structural adjustment. The original political mandate of GATT, which is now all but exhausted, must be renewed.
303.	The difficulty in all this is to move beyond general expressions of concern to initiate a process which might come to grips with some of these fundamental issues facing the world trade and payments system.
304.	Of course, if the complacent mood prevalent in some countries persists there is little that can be done. In that case, the middle ground that I believe was becoming visible until very recently will quickly disappear. We will quit the field and leave it to extremists of varying points of view. We will return to the dubious pleasure of the sterile confrontations of past years.
305.	I do not pretend to have a blueprint for the process that might lead to a comprehensive examination of the trade and payments system. There are many possible approaches, involving different timetables and different combinations of people and institutions. The study "Towards a new Bretton Woods", to which I referred earlier, has one such proposal worthy of the Assembly's consideration. Ultimately, the process must be tailored to the needs of the main participants so as to command their support.
306.	It is not hard, however, to describe in general terms the criteria for a successful examination of the trade and payments system.
307.	First, the basic work must be undertaken by experts of the highest standing, otherwise its analytical competence would be subject to easy and probably fatal challenge.
308.	Secondly, these experts must enjoy the confidence of major Governments and have ready access to their political advice. In that way, we might avoid proposals that are completely outside the limits of political possibility.
309.	Thirdly, any such group must be of manageable size. In my view this implies a small group of around 15 to 25 members broadly representative of the international community and working closely with the major international economic institutions. We would probably end up with something analogous to the structure of the Interim Committee and the Executive Board of IMF. Unlike the Interim Committee, however, it would be concerned with all the fundamental long-term trade and payments issues, rather than simply determining the current policy of IMF.
310.	Fourthly, a conference, involving participation on a far wider international basis, should be seen as a conclusion rather than a beginning. The Commonwealth finance ministers saw a Bretton Woods-type conference in this context very much as an end to the process rather than a commencement.
311.	It is more difficult to be definitive about the timetable when agreement on the process described above still escapes our grasp. I believe there is an urgent need to begin the task now, and I believe that the general proposition has wide support. If we accept the projections which imply an annual rate of growth in the key industrial countries of 3 to 4 per cent into 1984, then this gives us some flexibility to implement any changes agreed at what we might call the study group level. If we delay the start of our examination too long, then we face the possibility of yet another cyclical downturn in the world economy. A return to an even less auspicious macro-economic climate could sound the death-knell to the implementation stage of the exercise.
312.	The point requires no labouring. There is a real and pressing need to get on with the job of re-examining the system and working out how to adapt it to the needs of the period we live in. Delay is dangerous. To avert the threat, we should aim to have broad international agreement to implementing changes in the trade and payments system by, say, 1985. The process of preparing for it should begin straight away, certainly by the beginning of 1984. The time for action is now.
 




﻿58.		First of all, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your election to the important post of President of this session of the General Assembly. Your wealth of experience, including your profound knowledge of the Organization, is an excellent guarantee of the effectiveness of the work of the General Assembly.
59.	I should like to take this opportunity to convey our gratitude to our friend and comrade Mr. Imre Hollai, the representative of the fraternal Hungarian People's Republic, for his skilful conduct of the proceedings of the General Assembly last year.
60.	We would also like to welcome the entry into the United Nations of a new State, Saint Christopher and Nevis.
61.	There are today 158 Member States of the United Nations. It is worth recalling that this reality of the contemporary international scene has quite a definite political meaning.
62.	The solution to the crucial problem—the problem of war and peace—depends precisely on the States Members of the United Nations, on the way they construct relations among themselves and on the way they act in the world arena.
63.	Under the Charter of the United Nations these States have pledged to "live together in peace with one another as good neighbours".
64.	If only all of them abided by that Charter provision It would not then be necessary so vehemently to voice the urgent need to defend peace and to dispel the storm clouds gathering over it.
65.	That is what the Soviet Union is once again doing today.
66.	Our planet is practically caving in under the unprecedented burden of arms with unheard-of destructive power. Should it happen that those arms are actually used, the very survival of human civilization will be in question.
67.	The situation is compounded by the fact that the forces heating up the international atmosphere in order to further their pathological ambitions have now sharply intensified their activities.
68.	The reckless actions of those forces, combined with the enormous potential of lethal weapons, have produced, figuratively speaking, an explosive mixture which has added an entirely new dimension to the threat to peace.
69.	Given the present situation, the task of preventing war has now acquired particular urgency.
70.	At a time when all mankind is threatened with a nuclear catastrophe it is the duty of all those who have anything to do with the political decision-making process to put concern for peace above all else.
71.	This is what the peoples of the world are entitled to demand of their political leaders, their Governments and parliaments and, of course, international organizations, above all the United Nations, which is designed to be "a centre for harmonizing the actions of nations" in maintaining international security.
72.	On all continents the people's anti-war movement is growing and its activities in the struggle to preserve peace are increasing. This is only natural, for people cannot and will not live today in a permanent state of anxiety about tomorrow.
73.	The course pursued by some Members of the Organization is contrary to the age-old human yearning for a peaceful life embodied in the purposes and principles of the Charter and to the interests of the peace-loving majority of States. The credo of the architects of this course is revealed by the Washington-imposed decisions of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization bloc. Their policy is aimed at achieving military superiority, a vantage point from which they wish to dominate and dictate to others.
74.	It would appear that the nuclear arsenals of the United States and NATO are filled to capacity, and yet the assembly lines continue to chum out military hardware in a kind of frenzy. Every item of military hardware that exists is being either increased or replaced by another even more destructive.
75.	Armaments programmes costing many billions are being approved one after another. Whatever objections are raised—and they are being raised in this regard by sober-minded politicians and authoritative public figures in the United States itself—the United States Administration has but one thing to say: there is not the slightest doubt that we must arm and preferably two or three times over.
76.	There have been fierce clashes over deployment of the MX strategic missile and, indeed, as to whether it is necessary at all, but the decision was both to deploy the MX and to develop the Minuteman—yet another intercontinental missile.
77.	There were arguments over whether or not to build the B-l bomber. The decision was to go ahead with two new types of strategic bomber, at the same time.
78.	Other kinds of nuclear and other systems are also being put into mass production. The barbaric neutron weapon and new chemical weapons are being stockpiled. Next on the list is the development of systems for waging warfare in and from outer space.
79.	Under the pretext of an alleged shortage of nuclear weapons in areas where they already exist, attempts are being made to add to them, and where they do not exist, attempts are being made to deploy them.
80.	The intention has been expressed to move nuclear weapons as close as possible to the borders of the Soviet Union and its allies, to introduce into Western Europe new American medium-range missiles, that is to say Pershing II and cruise missiles.
81.	To the south and to the east the land and waters are also being saturated with nuclear weapons. A11 this is taking place over a wide geographic area, from Diego Garcia to Okinawa, across the vast expanse of the Indian Ocean and the Pacific.
82.	In order to justify the unchecked escalation of their militaristic preparations they are deliberately whipping up war hysteria and do not stop short of staging the crudest provocations.
83.	We, for our part, have already set forth our view, based on principle, of the incident involving the intrusion of the South Korean aircraft into Soviet airspace.
84.	It is impermissible for anyone to infringe the sovereignty of States, and this includes the inviolability of their borders. This is a universally recognized rule of international law and is fully consistent with the Charter of the United Nations. Anyone that attempts to violate our borders must know that he will have to bear the full responsibility.
85.	We have expressed our regret at the loss of human life. The initiators of this anti-Soviet act of provocation are entirely to blame for this tragedy. No matter what scurrilous slander or dishonest devices they resort to, they will never be able to cover up their tracks and conceal the true aims of their crime.
86.	To the impartial observer there cannot and should not be the slightest doubt as to the nature of these aims. An act of sabotage against peace was committed to further militaristic policies and the inflation of military budgets.
87.	In an attempt to change in their own favour the military-strategic situation in the world they invoke the security interests of the United States and its allies.
88.	It is the right and duty of each country to protect its own security, just as it is its right and duty to work for the strengthening of universal peace.
89.	But nowadays international and national security are interrelated to a greater extent than ever before. Neither can be reliably ensured when the United States and NATO are spurring the arms race and pursuing a policy based on a "position of strength".
90.	Such a policy, however it may be packaged, is the exact opposite of a policy which ensures international security.
91.	Certain quarters in the United States have become partial to ringing phrases. Of late a formula that has gained currency at the highest level is "peace through strength", which means, of course, the strength of the United States. This has been proclaimed as its policy.
92.	In both ancient and modern history there have been quite a few attempts to be the strongest and to rule the world. It is common knowledge how these all ended.
93.	Through costly experience mankind has distilled a different notion of what should be the basis of peace and security: the renunciation of the threat or use of force and peaceful co-operation among States. That is what inspired the creation of the United Nations. That is the one and only foundation upon which peace can rest.
94.	The myth of the "Soviet threat", invented to deceive the peoples, is being used on a particularly wide scale today. In his own time V. I. Lenin aptly characterized those who "shout about red militarism . . . pretend that they believe this absurdity and throw charges of this kind right and left", making use of their "skill in concocting false arguments and in throwing dust in the eyes of the masses".
95.	Since the Great October Revolution peace and friendship among peoples has been the sign of our socialist State. We remain faithful to that sign.
96.	There has been a great deal of talk about the USSR being "excessively armed" and having military superiority. It has been claimed that the West needs to dose the existing gap. Yet the facts—and the West is just as well aware of them as we are—confirm beyond doubt that in all areas—strategic nuclear arms, medium-range weapons in Europe, the conventional armed forces of NATO and of the Warsaw Treaty—there is approximate equality between the two sides.
97.	Statements about national security interests are riddled with falsehoods. They are turned inside-out so that those interests conflict with the security interests of other countries and peoples.
98.	Those who like to hold forth about the sanctity of international obligations and to preach morality in relations among States are violating elementary norms of decency, showing disrespect not only for statesmen and States but also for the United Nations. Moreover, as was pointed out in a recent statement by Mr. Andropov, this question as to whether this international Organization, whose task it is to maintain peace and security, can be located in a country in which an unbridled militaristic psychosis is spreading and the good name of the Organization is being insulted.
99.	The contenders for the role of master of the destinies of the world brazenly proclaim as a sphere of their vital interests any particular area of the world they take a fancy to, an area perhaps that is even thousands of miles away from the United States. They are prepared to stake such claims all over the globe.
100.	Thus, the sphere of the United States "vital interests" includes for example, the Middle East, where new anti-Arab deals and designs violating the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people are being pushed through. Step by step the United States is forcing its presence, including its military presence, on that region.
101.	Israel is being encouraged to continue its policy of aggression. Tel Aviv has absolutely no wish to end its adventure in Lebanon. Palestinian refugees in that country are being subjected to acts of genocide. Lebanon has been forced into accepting a capitulation agreement. Attempts are being made to turn the State of Lebanon into a United States-Israeli protectorate and virtually to dismember that country.
102.	Constant pressure is being exerted on Syria to make it change its steadfast course in Middle East affairs.
103.	As a result, the Middle East continues to be a focal point of the danger of war, while a peaceful settlement remains out of reach. All this is damaging to both the vital interests of the peoples of the region and the interests of international security.
104.	The Soviet Union consistently advocates the elimination of the consequences of the Israeli aggression, supports the legitimate rights of the Arab peoples, including the right of the Arab people of Palestine to establish a State of their own, and advocates a just and comprehensive settlement and the convening of an international conference on the Middle East with the participation on an equal footing of all the parties concerned, including the PLO, the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people.
105.	The hegemonistic policy of "vital interests" is well matched by the tools used to implement it. They include the "central command" set up to carry out interventionist operations against almost 20 sovereign States in the Middle East, in South-West Asia and on the African continent.	
106.	The "rapid deployment force", whose mission is to prevent internal changes in various countries if such changes are not to Washington's liking, is in a constant state of readiness. It can be said that the creation of such forces has become a vogue among NATO powers. The events in Chad show where this can lead.
107.	What about the extensive worldwide network of United States military bases? They too are being equipped for use against peoples and countries fighting for their freedom and defending their sovereignty. The areas where this struggle is going on are being surveyed for sites for new military bases.
108.	Aircraft carriers and battleships are being dispatched to the shores of those who are unwilling to submit to foreign diktat. Modern "gunboats" ply the waters off the coasts of many independent countries.
109.	Libya has been chosen as a target for a show of force in the Mediterranean.
110.	A United States armada is stationed in the Indian Ocean. It is no accident that Washington is opposed to the proposal of the non-aligned countries to turn that region into a zone of peace and is impeding the convening of an international conference on the Indian Ocean.
111.	The Soviet Union cannot ignore the threat to its security emanating from that quarter, especially since the United States has broken off and refuses to resume the Soviet-American talks on the limitation and subsequent curtailment of military activities in that region. Our country has been and remains in favour of the withdrawal from that area of all naval forces not belonging to the littoral States and supports the idea of creating a zone of peace in the Indian Ocean.
112.	Large United States naval contingents are concentrated off Central American countries, along both the Atlantic and the Pacific coasts. Land and air forces are being concentrated.
113.	The purpose of all this must be clear to everyone. The whole policy of the United States serves but one purpose: that of containing the liberation movement of the peoples, to obstruct the process of the strengthening of national independence and democratic change in Latin American countries.
114.	At the same time the United States authorities dismiss the very idea that they assume the overt role of policeman. They prefer to call it "assistance to fiends". Yet their friends include anti-popular regimes steeped in blood and infamy.
115.	They are shielding the military junta in El Salvador from the wrath of the people by supplying it generously with money and weapons. They are sending their military advisers there to supervise repressive operations being carried out by the puppet regime.
116.	Brutal pressure is being brought to bear on Nicaragua, whose people have taken a strong stand in favour of the progressive development of their country. Nicaragua is being threatened from the sea, gangs of mercenaries and pirate aircraft are infiltrated into its territory, and neighbouring States are incited to hostility against it.
117.	Washington will not succeed in concealing the fact that it is organizing aggression against Nicaragua, thus posing a threat to peace in Central America and exacerbating the international situation in general.
118.	No amount of demagoguery about the  'scheming of Moscow and Havana" will hide the true causes of the growth of the liberation movement in the countries of the region: imperialist oppression and the poverty of the masses. Do they really expect anyone to swallow their bait? Latin America and the world at large are fully aware of the actual state of affairs.
119.	Washington does not like the fact that the Cuban people are following the path of socialism they themselves have chosen. Cuba's independent policy and its role in the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries go against the grain. Cuba is being subjected to open threats and subversive actions.
120.	Interference in the internal affairs of Central American States must be unconditionally stopped. The proposals put forward by Nicaragua and supported by Cuba open up the possibility of easing tensions and bringing about a political solution of the existing problems. The course pursued in particular by Mexico and other countries of the Contadora Group also appears to be positive in that respect.
121.	There has been much effort to make things look as if the current aggravation of the international situation dates back to well-known events in Afghanistan.
122.	One might assume that even those who were inclined to take that assertion on trust are now beginning to see through its absurdity. The enemies of the Afghan people will not reconcile themselves to the fact that the Afghan people have decided to rid themselves of medieval darkness and have begun building a democratic society.
123.	The situation around Afghanistan—and I am stressing the external aspects of the problem—can be settled on the basis of the proposals made by the Government of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, which proposals the Soviet Union fully supports. Military incursions into Afghanistan as well as any outside interference in its affairs, must be stopped.
124.	The talks being conducted through the representative of the Secretary-General are of positive significance. They would be more fruitful if the Pakistani side were to display greater political foresight.
125.	The policy pursued by outside forces is behind the aggravation of the situation in South-East Asia. That policy is aimed primarily against Viet Nam, Laos and Kampuchea, whose peoples are defending their independence and are engaged in building a new and peaceful life. There have been persistent attempts to pit against the countries of Indo-China their neighbours, the States of the Association of South-East Asian Nations.
126.	The Soviet Union has been and remains on the side of the people of Viet Nam, Laos and Kampuchea. We support the proposals to turn South-East Asia into a zone of peace, good-neighbourliness and co-operation, and we support the initiatives of the three countries of Indo China to open a political dialogue among the States of the region. 
127.	Those who are blowing the so-called Kampuchean question out of proportion are not acting in good faith. The people of Kampuchea have chosen the political system for their country and they themselves choose the ones to make friends with and to rely upon.
128.	Alarming shifts are taking place in the policy of Japan, whose ruling circles seem to be pleased with the role currently assigned to it as NATO's partner in the Far East. The accelerated militarization of that country adds to tensions in the Far East.
129.	This policy can hardly be in the interests of Japan itself and it certainly does not help Japan to develop good relations with neighbouring States.
130.	Our country stands for the development of Soviet- Japanese relations on the basis of the principles of good- neighbourliness and cooperation, but of course this presupposes reciprocity.
131.	The fact that the Korean question remains unresolved does not enhance the stability of the situation in the Far East. The proposals of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea providing for the withdrawal of United States troops from South Korea and the creation of the conditions for the reunification of that country by peaceful means, without outside interference, offer a suitable basis for the settlement of this question. The USSR is in sympathy with this position and supports it.
132.	With the connivance of Western Powers and in the shelter of their neo-colonialist policies, the racist regime of Pretoria has been making aggressive moves against neighbouring States in southern Africa. These include, primarily, the undeclared war being waged against the People's Republic of Angola. Such criminal acts should be condemned and stopped.
133.	The United Nations and the Security Council must bring to bear the weight of their authority in favour of the early decolonization of Namibia, which is still being blocked by South Africa and its protectors. We are confident that the Namibian people will throw off the fetters of colonialism and win freedom and independence for their country, under the leadership of the South West Africa People's Organization their patriotic vanguard.
134.	The people of Micronesia, which the United States is unlawfully attempting to hold on to and to convert into a United States military springboard in the western Pacific, are entitled to express their will freely.
135.	Britain is pursuing a course aimed at the entrenchment of the colonial status and the militarization of the Falkland (Malvinas) Islands, while refusing to negotiate in accordance with the decisions of the United Nations.
136.	A consistently realistic analysis leaves no doubt that the source of the increasingly alarming trends in the international situation resides, as pointed out in a recent statement by Mr. Y. V. Andropov, in the militaristic policy of 6he United States, which is posing a grave threat to peace. The essence of that policy is to try to ensure dominant positions in the world for the United States without taking into account the interests of other States and peoples and to block and reverse the objective process of the world's development.
137.	Such a policy is bound to destabilize the world situation still further and to disrupt normal relations among States. Indeed, what guarantee is there that such an adventurist course will not have irreparable consequences?
138.	The conclusion that must follow is that practical steps are needed to prevent the worst from happening. The dangerous shift in world developments must be redressed so as to bring about an improvement in international relations.
139.	The Soviet Union and the countries of the socialist community are doing everything in their power to achieve that goal.
140.	The socialist society, as one which is confident of its creative potential, has no need of an arms race or war. It has demonstrated and will continue to demonstrate its advantages in the process of peaceful competition with capitalism, and it is our conviction that the future belongs to socialism.
141.	However, we do not seek to impose our world view on anyone, and we believe that ideological differences should not be allowed to affect relations among States. This is a behest of Lenin, and our country will continue to abide by it.
142.	In his statement of 28 September Mr. Andropov said:
"The transfer of ideological contradictions to the sphere of inter-state relations has never benefited the one who resorted to it in external affairs. This is simply absurd and inadmissible at present, in the nuclear age. Transformation of the battle of ideas into military confrontation would be too costly for the whole of mankind." 
Those forces in the United States and some other NATO countries which shape their foreign policies shrink from nothing in painting a distorted picture of the international situation and laying the responsibility for the exacerbation of that situation at the door of the Soviet Union.
143.	Every possible propaganda means has been mobilized to that end. Statements have been pouring forth in torrents from platforms large and small, spewing out uncivilized invective and insults. That technique is used to camouflage their own policy, which is against the interests of the peoples.
144.	They will not succeed in casting aspersions on the socialist system and on our civic, social and moral values. No amount of malicious slander can possibly lessen the honest and peaceful policy of the USSR and of the entire socialist community. We and our allies firmly repudiate these calumnies and will give them the response they deserve.
145.	The development of friendly relations among States, the peaceful coexistence of countries with different social systems, strict respect for the right of peoples to independence and social progress—these are the immutable principles upheld by the socialist countries in their foreign policy.
146.	On the basis of a common world outlook and unity of purpose, these States fully co-operate and co-ordinate their policies in the interests of strengthening the foundations of international peace. They are asserting themselves as a powerful factor which has had a positive impact on world events.
147.	The countries of the socialist community have made the prevention of nuclear war the centrepiece of their foreign policy.
148.	Who among responsible leaders and sober-minded, thinking people in general could fail to agree that this is the most urgent task of our time?
149.	There have already been so many speeches made on this subject, here in the United Nations and elsewhere, since the advent of nuclear weapons, but a solution has yet to be found.
150.	The degree of progress in limiting and reducing nuclear arms will largely determine the nature of the international situation in the forthcoming period.
151.	The present moment is particularly crucial with regard to the situation developing in the matter of the limitation of nuclear arms in Europe.
152.	The plans of the United States to deploy, under cover of a NATO decision, new nuclear missiles in some Western European countries have long been poisoning the political atmosphere on that continent and beyond. The implementation of these plans would have an adverse effect on the entire European and international situation and would significantly exacerbate nuclear confrontation.
153.	We believe that plans and ideas with regard to what is to be done with nuclear weapons—both in their totality and as regards nuclear systems in Europe—should be reversed.
154.	The Soviet Union has supported the most radical solution, that is, that all such nuclear systems, both medium-range and tactical, should be removed from Europe. This would really be the zero option. However, NATO has pointedly made it clear that it is not ready to accept this.
155.	We have proposed that the deployment of any new medium-range systems in Europe be cancelled and that all existing systems, both of the USSR and of NATO, be reduced by approximately two thirds; in other words, two thirds of the road towards totally ridding Europe of these weapons would have been covered.
156.	Surely, it is quite clear what the Soviet Union is calling for in proposing this far-reaching step, which it is of course understood would not be the last word in the solution of this problem.
157.	Why, then, has such a furor been created around the supposed desire of the USSR to gain the advantage in medium-range nuclear systems?
158.	Why has it been concealed that the Soviet side is prepared, as has been repeatedly stated at the very highest level, not to have in Europe a single missile, a single aircraft or a single warhead in excess of what NATO countries would have? _
159.	Where is the objectivity in this approach? Any politician who claims to be objective is supposed to know at least the basic relevant facts and to make an honest assessment of them.
160.	Recently the Soviet Union demonstrated once again its desire to reach agreement. Our initiative envisages that once a mutually acceptable agreement has been reached, including the renunciation by the United States of the deployment of new missiles in Europe, the USSR, while reducing its own medium-range missiles in the European part of our country to a level equal to the number of missiles possessed by Britain and France, would eliminate all the missiles affected by that reduction, including a considerable number of SS-20 missiles.
161.	This renders totally groundless allegations that the USSR intends to retain the SS-20 missiles which are affected by the reduction, merely relocating them from Europe to the East.
162.	Progress at the talks is being held up by the United States position, which in practice amounts to a demand for unilateral disarmament by the Soviet Union while the arsenals of medium-range nuclear weapons of the NATO countries would remain intact.
163.	This position is merely disguised by talk about some flexibility on the part of the United States at the Geneva talks, Another instance of this so-called flexibility
has just materialized, and the deception contained in it has become clear this time too. Mr. Andropov has stated: "To leave aside details, the essence of the so-called new move in the United States position, which is billed as 'superb', boils down to a proposal to agree, as before, on how many Soviet medium-range missiles should be eliminated and how many new American missiles should be deployed in Europe in addition to the nuclear potential already possessed by NATO.
"In brief, it is proposed that we talk about how to help the NATO bloc to upset to its own advantage the balance of medium-range nuclear systems in the European zone. And this move is presented brazenly as something new." 
164.	The unacceptability of such an approach is so obvious as to indicate only one thing: a persistent reluctance on the part of our negotiating partners to search for a solution based on equality and equal security and their intention to station their missiles on European soil at any cost.
165.	Whether or not agreement is to be reached depends on the United States and on NATO as a whole. The current round of Soviet-American talks on the limitation of nuclear weapons in Europe is crucial in this sense.
166.	If Washington's position remains so unconstructive, if Washington goes so far as actually to deploy new United States missiles in Europe, then we of course will have to take countermeasures to preserve the balance of forces on both a European and a global scale.
167.	It is to be hoped that Washington and other NATO capitals will ponder again and again the existing situation and the grave consequences which would result from another twist in the arms race.
168.	The Soviet Union and the Warsaw Treaty States do not seek military superiority, but they will not allow anyone to acquire military superiority over them. They have invariably advocated equality, and equality at the lowest possible level.
169.	The USSR proposals in the negotiations on the limitation and reduction of strategic arms are also based on the same approach. They call for, among other measures, a substantial reduction—a reduction by more than a quarter—of the total number of strategic delivery vehicles with a concurrent reduction to agreed equal limits of the aggregate number of nuclear weapons carried by these delivery vehicles. Our proposals arise from an interest in strengthening overall military strategic stability while strictly observing the principle of equality and equal security.
170.	In the negotiations on the limitation of reduction of strategic weapons the United States has taken a one-sided approach. The position of the Washington Administration is actually aimed at promoting, rather than halting, the strategic arms race in areas where the United States sees advantages for itself.
171.	The fatal consequences of a nuclear war are not to be regarded as fictional conjectures. Its flames would not spare a single country or people.
172.	This is the unanimous view of the most eminent scholars and competent military and civilian experts.
173.	There is and can be no justification for any actions that push the world towards the abyss, or for doctrines and designs based on the admissibility of a nuclear war and the possibility of winning it.
174.	Guided by these considerations, the Soviet Union proposes the inclusion in the agenda of this session of the General Assembly of an important and urgent item entitled "Condemnation of nuclear war". 
177. Such war must be condemned resolutely, unconditionally and for all time as the most hideous of crimes that can be committed against the peoples. We propose that States Members of the United Nations declare as criminal acts the formulation, promotion, dissemination and propagating of political and military doctrines and concepts designed to substantiate the "legitimacy" of the first use of nuclear weapons and in general the admissibility of unleashing nuclear war.
178. The USSR is submitting a draft declaration on this point to the Assembly for its consideration. Its adoption would contribute to generating a political climate which would make more difficult the actions of those who are devising plans calling for the first use of nuclear weapons.
179. The approval of this declaration, following the Declaration on the Prevention of Nuclear Catastrophe adopted in 1981 on the initiative of the Soviet Union, would be a major move by the United Nations towards removing that threat.
180- The condemnation of nuclear war should be effectively backed up by practical steps to curb the nuclear arms race.
181.	In this context a freeze on nuclear weapons by all States which possess them would be an extremely timely and truly tangible measure. The idea of such a freeze has been winning ever-increasing support in the world, in both nuclear and non-nuclear countries.
182.	Our country proposed some time ago, in the course of negotiations on the limitation and reduction of strategic arms and on the limitation of nuclear weapons in Europe, that both strategic weapons and medium-range weapons in Europe be immediately frozen for the duration of the negotiations.
183.	Now the Soviet Union is submitting an urgent and important question entitled "Nuclear arms freeze" to this session of the General Assembly for its consideration.
184.	Our proposal is for a cessation, under effective verification, of the build-up of all components of nuclear arsenals, including all kinds of delivery vehicles and weapons, a renunciation of the deployment of new kinds and types of such weapons, the establishment of a moratorium on all tests of nuclear weapons and of new kinds and types of delivery vehicles, and a halt in the production of fissionable materials for the purpose of creating arms.
185.	A simultaneous quantitative and qualitative freeze on nuclear weapons by all nuclear Powers is the best way to achieve this goal. Our country is prepared to agree that initially this be done by the USSR and the United States on a bilateral basis as an example to other nuclear States.
186.	Giving practical effect to this initiative would markedly raise the degree of trust among the nuclear- weapon countries and would make it possible to move decisively towards breaking the vicious circle of the arms race. This would also promote the reduction and, eventually, the complete elimination of nuclear weapons.
187.	We express the hope that States Members of the United Nations, above all the other nuclear Powers, will take a responsible and constructive stand on our proposal and will support it.
188.	The Soviet proposal entitled "Conclusion of a treaty on the prohibition of the use of force in outer space and from outer space against Earth" submitted to the current session for consideration, has been prompted by concern for preventing the militarization of outer space, an issue which is becoming extremely important.
189.	Positive action on this initiative, which is a follow- up to our 1981 proposal made here at the United Nations for a treaty on the prohibition of the stationing of weapons of any kind in outer space, would be in keeping with the urgent task of ensuring peaceful, and exclusively peaceful, use of outer space in the interest of and for the benefit of all people.
190.	Specifically, the idea is to have a comprehensive ban on the testing and deployment of any space-based weapons designed to destroy targets on Earth, in the air or in outer space.
191.	At the same time, provision is made for the complete renunciation of the development of new anti-satellite systems and the elimination of existing systems. If it would be of any help, we are also prepared to conduct separate talks on anti-satellite systems, including talks with the United States on a bilateral basis.
192.	The obligation assumed by the USSR not to be the first to place any kind of anti-satellite weapons in outer space is yet a further manifestation of its desire to see the problem of such weapons solved in a radical way. This unilateral moratorium declared by our country is to last for as long as other States, in particular the United States, refrain from placing anti-satellite weapons of any kind in outer space.
193.	The initiatives we are taking at this session are a logical extension of our foreign policy, based as it is on principle, and of the convincing peace-oriented proposals that the Soviet Union has been putting forward in recent years.
194.	Among the many other steps taken by the Soviet Union in the key areas of international life, I would like to single out the following.
195.	There is the obligation by the USSR not to be the first to use nuclear weapons. If such an obligation were assumed by all the nuclear Powers, this in practice would be tantamount to a prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons. Our appeal for this remains in force.
196.	There is also the proposal for a treaty on the complete and general prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests. This is consistent with the task of preventing the possibility of developing new kinds of nuclear weapons and of strengthening the non-proliferation regime. The Committee on Disarmament should as a matter of priority take measures with a view to producing the draft of such a treaty.
197.	Furthermore, there are proposals for banning neutron weapons as well as for preparing an international convention on the prohibition and elimination of chemical weapons.
198.	These and other Soviet initiatives aimed at limiting the arms race and bringing about disarmament deserve the most serious attention.
199.	I would like to make special mention of the joint proposal of the socialist countries for a treaty on the mutual non-use of military force and the maintenance of peaceful relations between the States of the Warsaw Treaty and the North Atlantic alliance. The obligation not to use weapons of any kind—nuclear or conventional—that is to say, not to use force at all, would help to dispel mutual fear and distrust. The initiative is gaining increasing prominence in European and world politics.
200.	It has always been our view that the problem of security on the European continent should be treated with particular circumspection. It is precisely here in Europe that the two militarily most powerful groupings of States —the Warsaw Treaty and NATO—are facing each other. 
201.	In view of all this, not a single move in Europe leading to the easing of tensions and the positive development of relations among States could be redundant or superfluous.
202.	It is time to break the deadlock in the talks on the mutual reduction of armed forces and armaments in central Europe, where the level of military confrontation is particularly high. The draft agreement submitted at Vienna by the socialist countries creates real conditions for narrowing the gap between the positions and for reaching agreement.
203.	The Conference on Confidence- and Security- building Measures and Disarmament in Europe scheduled for next January at Stockholm will play an important role in enhancing European and international security. The USSR, to the extent it can, will seek to ensure that the work of the Conference is fruitful and lives up to the expectations placed in it by political circles and broad sectors of public opinion in European and other countries.
204.	The Soviet Union attaches great importance to preserving and expanding its diverse ties with the countries of Western Europe. We intend to continue to maintain relations with them along the lines traced by the. Helsinki Final Act in a spirit of trust and co-operation.
205.	The successful conclusion of the Madrid meeting of representatives of States participating in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe is quite rightly viewed as an indication that the policy of detente, which has been so beneficial for all the peoples of Europe, has a great deal of vitality.
206.	Even though there has been a coolness in relations in the current international situation, this proves that despite considerable divergences in their policies, States with different social systems are capable of solving together problems that are not at all easy to solve, and of searching for and finding areas of agreement.
207.	We would like to believe that appropriate conclusions will be drawn from this, and not only as regards Europe and relations among European States.
208.	This November marks the fiftieth anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between the Soviet Union and the United States. The whole history of Soviet-American relations makes it abundantly clear that whenever these two States have followed a course of mutual understanding and co-operation, their peoples as well as universal peace and security have gained thereby.
209.	It has been our invariable view that the maintenance of normal stable relations between the Soviet Union and the United States is in their mutual interest, and we are in favour of their overall improvement and peaceful co-operation.
210.	It is not through any choice of ours that Soviet- American relations are currently marked by tensions which also affect the international situation.
211.	Today, the urgency of the problem of preventing the threat of war requires that each State be fully aware of the degree of its responsibility and to reaffirm, both in word and in deed, its commitment to the policy of peace. The Soviet Union is in favour of combining our efforts on the broadest possible basis in order to achieve this noble goal.
212.	In the service of peace there is room for action by every country, regardless of its social system, its level of economic development, its size or its geographic location.
213.	Such an important State as the People's Republic of China can do a great deal to ease international tension and eliminate the danger of nuclear war.
214.	The Soviet Union is ready for a political dialogue with China on questions of bilateral relations, as well as on central problems connected with strengthening peace and international security. The positive development of Soviet-Chinese relations, which should be constructed with due account being taken of and mutual respect for the interests of each side and, naturally, without detriment to third countries, would benefit our two peoples and promote a better political climate in the world arena.
215.	We welcome the growing activity of the countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America in defending international peace. They need lasting peace to solve the difficult problems of their national and social development.
216.	The results of the non-aligned forum held this year at New Delhi have once again demonstrated the anti-war and anti-imperialist orientation of the Movement of Non- Aligned Countries.
217.	The policy of peace of India, the current Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement, enjoys well-deserved prestige. The Soviet Union and India are linked by bonds of friendship and close co-operation which are highly valued by both sides.
218.	The Soviet Union pursues a course of principle with regard to the elimination of all manifestations of inequality and exploitation, the building of confidence in economic ties between States and the establishment of just international economic relations.
219.	The peoples of developing States have a real awareness of the magnitude and nature of our assistance in helping them to overcome their economic backwardness. In this area the Soviet Union is doing more than any developed capitalist country.
220.	The Soviet Union supports the demand for the early launching, within the United Nations, of "global negotiations" on major economic problems, as envisaged in decisions of the General Assembly, and also the idea of the convening, within the framework of the United Nations, of an international conference on these subjects.
221.	We have been and we remain sympathetic to the developing countries which are striving to do away with the tyranny of monopoly capital and free themselves from neo-colonialist exploitation.
222.	Our country is firmly on the side of those who, to this very day, are fighting for their freedom and independence, those who are being forced to repel the aggressor or being threatened with aggression. This stand is inseparable from our struggle for lasting peace on Earth.
223.	In the present alarming international situation there is also need for the mobilization of the entire impressive potential of the United Nations as an instrument for maintaining international security. The Soviet Union has supported and will continue to support consistently and resolutely United Nations efforts to remove the threat of nuclear war, curb the arms race, eliminate the existing hotbeds of international tension and prevent the emergence of new ones and to develop relations of peace and co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
224.	No matter how complicated the situation, real possibilities exist for overcoming the difficulties of this period in international relations. Mr. Andropov stressed in his statement of 28 September:
"The Soviet leadership does not hesitate about which line to follow in international affairs in the present critical situation . . . Our course remains aimed at preserving and strengthening peace, lessening tension, curbing the arms race and expanding and deepening co-operation between States. This is the unfailing will of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, of all Soviet people. These are, we are convinced also the aspirations of all peoples."
225.	We appeal to all States to draw sensible conclusions in the existing situation, conclusions that are in keeping with the most profound aspirations of the peoples, and above all to exert efforts urgently to solve the problem common to all mankind, that of eliminating the risk of nuclear war.
226.	People must feel secure about their future.
 

﻿1.	Thank you for granting me the honor of speaking today, on this first day of the general debate at the thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly. Once again I come before this body preoccupied with peace. Last year I stood in this chamber to address the special session on disarmament. I have come today to renew my nation's commitment to peace. I have come to discuss how we can keep faith with the dreams that created this Organization.
2.	The United Nations was founded in the aftermath of the Second World War to protect future generations from the scourge of war, to promote political self- determination and global prosperity, and to strengthen the bonds of civility among nations. The founders sought to replace a world at war with a world of civilized order. They hoped that a world of relentless conflict would give way to a new era, one where freedom from violence prevailed.
3.	Whatever challenges the world was bound to face, the founders intended this body to stand for certain values, even if they could not be enforced, and to condemn violence, even if it could not be stopped. This body was to speak with the voice of moral authority. That was to be its greatest power.
4.	But the awful truth is that the use of violence for political gain has become more, not less, widespread in the last decade. Events of recent weeks have presented new, unwelcome evidence of brutal disregard for life and truth. They have offered unwanted testimony on how divided and dangerous our world is, how quick the recourse to violence.
5.	What has happened to the dreams of the founders of the United Nations?
6.	What has happened to the spirit which created the United Nations?
7.	The answer is clear: Governments got in the way of the dreams of the people. Dreams became issues of East versus West. Hopes became political rhetoric. Progress became a search for power and domination. Somewhere the truth was lost that people do not make war, governments do.
8.	And today, in Asia, Africa, Latin America, the Middle East and the North Pacific, the weapons of war shatter the security of the peoples who live there, endanger the peace of neighbors, and create ever more arenas of confrontation between the great Powers. During the past year alone, violent conflicts have occurred in the hills around Beirut, the deserts of Chad and the Western Sahara, in the mountains of El Salvador, the streets of Suriname, the cities and countryside of Afghanistan, the borders of Kampuchea, and the battlefields of Iran and Iraq.
9.	We cannot count on the instinct for survival to protect us against war. Despite all the wasted lives and hopes that war produces, it has remained a regular, if horribly costly, means by which nations have sought to settle their disputes or advance their goals.
10.	And the progress in weapons technology has far outstripped the progress toward peace. In modern times, a new, more terrifying element has entered into the calculations—nuclear weapons. A nuclear war cannot be won and it must never be fought. I believe that if governments are determined to deter and prevent war, there will not be war. Nothing is more in keeping with the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations than arms control.
11.	When I spoke before the twelfth special session, devoted to disarmament. I affirmed the United States Government's commitment, and my personal commitment, to reduce nuclear arms, and to negotiate in good faith toward that end.
12.	Today, I reaffirm those commitments. The United States has already reduced the number of its nuclear weapons worldwide and, while replacement of older weapons is unavoidable, we wish to negotiate arms reduction; and to achieve significant, equitable, verifiable arms control agreements. And let me add, we must ensure that world security is not undermined by the further spread of nuclear weapons. Nuclear non-proliferation must not be the forgotten element of the world's arms control agenda
13.	At my last visit here, I expressed hope that a whole class of weapons systems—the longer-range intermediate nuclear forces—could be banned from the face of the earth. I believe that to relieve the deep concern of peoples in both Europe and Asia, the time was right, for the first time in history, to resolve a security threat exclusively through arms control. I still believe the elimination of these weapons—the zero option—is the best, fairest, most practical solution to the problem. Unfortunately, the Soviet Union declined to accept the total elimination of this class of weapons.
14.	When I was here last, I hoped that the critical Strategic Arms Reduction Talks would focus, and urgently so, on those systems that carry the greatest risk of nuclear war—the fast-flying, accurate, intercontinental ballistic missiles which pose a first strike potential. I also hoped the negotiations could reduce by one half the number of strategic missiles on each side and reduce their warheads by one third. Again, I was disappointed when the Soviets declined to consider such deep cuts, and refused as well to concentrate on these most dangerous destabilizing weapons.
15.	Despite the rebuffs, the United States has not abandoned and will not abandon the search for meaningful arms control agreements. Last June, I proposed a new approach toward the START negotiations. We did not alter our objective of substantial reductions, but we recognized that there are a variety of ways to achieve this end. During the last round of Geneva talks, we presented a draft treaty which responded to a number of concerns raised by the Soviet Union. We will continue to build upon this initiative.
16.	Similarly, in our negotiations on intermediate-range nuclear forces, when the Soviet leaders adamantly refused to consider the total elimination of these weapons, the United States made a new offer. We proposed, as an interim solution, some equal number on both sides between one and 572. We recommended the lowest possible level. Once again, the Soviets refused an equitable solution and proposed instead what might be called a "half zero option"—zero for us, and many hundreds of warheads for them. That is where things stand today, but I still have not given up hope that the Soviet Union will enter into serious negotiations.
17.	We are determined to spare no effort to achieve a sound, equitable and verifiable agreement. For this reason, I have given new instructions to Mr. Nitze at Geneva, telling him to put forward a package of steps designed to advance the negotiations as rapidly as possible. These initiatives build on the interim framework that the United States advanced last March and address concerns that the Soviets have raised at the bargaining table in the past.
18.	Specifically, first, the United States proposes a new initiative on global limits. If the Soviet Union agrees to reductions and limits on a global basis, the United States for its part will not offset the entire Soviet global missile deployment through United States deployments in Europe. We would, of course, retain the right to deploy missiles elsewhere.
19.	Second, the United States is prepared to be more flexible on the content of the current talks. The United States will consider mutually acceptable ways to address the Soviet desire that an agreement should limit aircraft as well as missiles,
20.	Third, the United States will address the mix of missiles that would result from reductions. In the context of reductions to equal levels, we are prepared to reduce the number of Pershing II ballistic missiles as well as ground-launched cruise missiles.
21.	I have decided to put forward these important initiatives after full and extensive consultations with our allies, including personal correspondence that I have had with the leaders of the Governments of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and Japan and frequent meetings of the NATO Special Consultative Group. I have also stayed in close touch with other concerned friends and allies. The door to an agreement is open. It is time for the Soviet Union to walk through it.
22.	I want to make an unequivocal pledge to those gathered today in this world arena. The United States seeks and will accept any equitable, verifiable agreement that stabilizes forces at lower levels than currently exist. We are ready to be flexible in our approach—indeed, willing to compromise. We cannot, however, especially in light of recent events, compromise on the necessity of effective verification.
23.	Reactions to the Korean airliner tragedy are a timely reminder of just how different the Soviets' concept of truth and international co-operation is from that of the rest of the world. Evidence abounds that we cannot simply assume that agreements negotiated with the Soviet Union will be fulfilled. We negotiated the Helsinki Final Act,' but the promised freedoms have not been provided and those in the Soviet Union who sought to monitor their fulfillment languish in prison. We negotiated a biological weapons convention, but deadly yellow rain and other toxic agents fall on Hmong villages and Afghan encampments. We have negotiated arms agreements, but the high level of Soviet encoding hides the information needed for their verification. A newly discovered radar facility and a new inter-continental ballistic missile raise serious concerns about Soviet compliance with agreements already negotiated.
24.	Peace cannot be served by pseudo-control of arms. We need reliable, reciprocal reductions. I call upon the Soviet Union today to reduce the tensions it has heaped on the world in the past few weeks and to show a firm commitment to peace by coming to the bargaining table with a new understanding of its obligations. I urge it to match our flexibility. If the Soviets sit down at the bargaining table seeking genuine arms reductions, there will be arms reductions. The Governments of the West and their peoples will not be diverted by misinformation and threats. The time has come for the Soviet Union to show proof that it wants arms control in reality, not just in rhetoric.
25.	Meaningful arms control agreements between the United States and the Soviet Union would make our world less dangerous; so would a number of confidence- building steps that we have already proposed to the Soviet Union.
26.	Arms control requires a spirit beyond narrow national interests. This spirit is a basic pillar on which the United Nations was founded. We seek a return to this spirit. A fundamental step would be a true non-alignment of the United Nations. This would signal a return to the true values of the Charter, including the principle of universality. The Members of the United Nations must be aligned on the side of justice, rather than injustice; peace, rather than aggression; human dignity, rather than subjugation. Any other alignment is beneath the purpose of this great body and destructive of the harmony that it seeks. What harms the Charter harms peace.
27.	The founders of the United Nations expected that Member nations would behave and vote as individuals, after they had weighed the merits of an issue—rather like a great, global town meeting. The emergence of blocs and the polarization of the United Nations undermine all that the Organization initially valued.
28.	We must remember that the Movement of Non- Aligned Countries was founded to counter the development of blocs and to promote cooperation between them. Its founders spoke of the right of smaller countries not to become involved in others' disagreements. Since then, membership in the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries has grown dramatically, but not all the new members have shared the founders' commitment of genuine non- alignment. Indeed, client Governments of the Soviet Union which have long since lost their independence have flocked into the Movement and once inside have worked against its true purpose. Pseudo non-alignment is no better than pseudo-control of arms.
29.	The United States rejects as false and misleading the view of the world as divided between the empires of the East and the West. We reject it on factual grounds. The United States does not head any bloc of subservient nations, nor do we desire to. What is called "the West" is a free alliance of Governments, most of which are democratic and all of which greatly value their independence. What is called "the East" is an empire directed from the center, which is Moscow. 
30.	The United States today, as in the past, is a champion of freedom and self-determination for all peoples. We welcome diversity; we support the right of all nations to define and pursue their national goals. We respect their decisions and their sovereignty, asking only that they respect the decisions and sovereignty of others. Just look at the world over the last 30 years and then decide for yourselves whether the United States or the Soviet Union has pursued an expansionist policy.
31.	Today, the United States contributes to peace by supporting collective efforts by the international community. We give our unwavering support to the peacekeeping efforts of this body, as well as to other multilateral peace-keeping efforts around the world. The United Nations has a proud history of promoting conciliation and helping keep the peace. Today, United Nations peace-keeping forces or observers are present in Cyprus, Kashmir, on the Golan Heights and in Lebanon.
32.	In addition to our encouragement of international diplomacy, the United States recognizes its responsibilities to use its own influence for peace. From the days when Theodore Roosevelt mediated the Russo-Japanese War in 1905 we have a long and honorable tradition of mediating or dampening conflicts and promoting peaceful solutions. In Lebanon, we, along with France, Italy and the United Kingdom, have worked for a cease-fire, for the withdrawal of all external forces, and for restoration of Lebanon's sovereignty and territorial integrity. In Chad, we have joined others in supporting the recognized Government, in the face of external aggression. In Central America, as in southern Africa, we are seeking to discourage reliance upon force and to construct a framework for peaceful negotiations. We support a policy to disengage the major Powers from third-world conflict.
33.	The Charter of the United Nations gives an important role to regional organizations in the search for peace. The United States efforts in the cause of peace are only one expression of a spirit that also animates others in the world community. The Organization of American States was a pioneer in regional security efforts. In Central America, the members of the Contadora Group are striving to lay a foundation for peaceful resolution of that region's problems. In East Asia, countries of the Association of South-East Asian Nations have built a framework for peaceful political and economic co-operation that has greatly strengthened the prospects for lasting peace in their region. In Africa, organizations such as the Economic Community of West African States are being forged to provide practical structures in the struggle to realize Africa's potential.
34.	From the beginning, our hope for the United Nations has been that it would reflect the international community at its best. The United Nations at its best can help us transcend fear and violence and can act as an enormous force for peace and prosperity. Working together, we can combat international lawlessness and promote human dignity.
35.	If the Governments represented in this chamber want peace as genuinely as their peoples do, we shall find it. We can do so by reasserting the moral authority of the United Nations.
36.	In recent weeks, the moral outrage of the world seems to have reawakened. Out of the billions of people who inhabit this planet, why, some might ask, should the death of several hundred shake the world so profoundly? Why should the death of a mother flying toward a reunion with her family or the death of a scholar heading toward new pursuits of knowledge matter so deeply?
Why are nations which lost no citizens in the tragedy so angry?
37.	The reason rests on our assumptions about civilized life and the search for peace. The confidence that allows a mother or a scholar to travel to Asia or Africa or Europe or anywhere else on this planet may be only a small victory in humanity's struggle for peace. Yet what is peace if not the sum of such small victories?
38.	Each stride for peace and every small victory are important for the journey towards a larger and lasting peace. We have made progress. We have avoided another world war. We have seen an end to the traditional colonial era and the birth of 100 newly sovereign nations. Even though development remains a formidable challenge, we have witnessed remarkable economic growth among the industrialized and the developing nations. The United Nations and its affiliates have made important contributions to the quality of life on this planet, such as directly saving countless lives through its refugee and emergency relief programmes. These broad achievements, however, have been overshadowed by the problems that weigh so heavily upon us. The problems are old, but it is not too late to commit ourselves to a new beginning, a beginning fresh with the ideals of the Charter.
39.	Today, at the beginning of this thirty-eighth session, I solemnly pledge my nation to upholding the original ideals of the United Nations. Our goals are those that guide this very body. Our ends are the same as those of the founders of the United Nations, who sought to replace a world at war with one where the rule of law would prevail, where human rights were honored, where development would blossom, where conflict would give way to freedom from violence.
40.	In 1956 President Dwight Eisenhower made an observation on weapons and deterrence in a letter to a publisher. He wrote:
"When we get to the point, as we one day will, that both sides know that in any outbreak of general hostilities, regardless of the element of surprise, destruction will be both reciprocal and complete, possibly we will have sense enough to meet at the conference table with the understanding that the era of armaments has ended and the human race must conform its actions to this truth or die."
He went on to say,
". . .we have already come to the point where safety cannot be assumed by arms alone . . . their usefulness becomes concentrated more and more in their characteristics as deterrents than in instruments with which to obtain victory . . .".
41.	As we persevere in the search for a more secure world we must do everything we can to let diplomacy triumph. Diplomacy, the most honorable of professions, can bring the most blessed of gifts, the gift of peace. If we succeed, the world will find an excitement and accomplishment in peace beyond that which could ever be imagined through violence and war.
I want to leave you today with a message I have often spoken about to the citizens of my own country, especially in times when I have felt they were discouraged and unsure. I say it to you with as much hope and heart as I have said it to my own people. You have the right to dream great dreams. You have the right to seek a better world for your people. A11 of us have the responsibility to work for that better world and, as caring peaceful peoples, think what a powerful force for good we could be. Let us regain the dream the United Nations once dreamed.
﻿77.	 In the name of the Chinese delegation, I would like to extend to Mr. Jorge Illueca warm congratulations on his election to the presidency of the thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly. His outstanding talent and rich experience have won wide admiration, and I am convinced that under his guidance the session will conduct its work efficiently and handle all its tasks appropriately.
78.	I also wish to take this opportunity to express our thanks to his predecessor, Mr. Imre Hollai, for the positive contribution he made to the thirty-seventh session.
79.	This is the first time I have attended a session of the General Assembly as chairman of the Chinese delegation. I am very pleased to have this opportunity to exchange views with my colleagues here on international issues of common concern.
80.	The Chinese delegation extends its warm congratulations to Saint Christopher and Nevis on its recent achievement of independence and cordially welcomes it to the United Nations.
81.	Safeguarding world peace is the most important task facing mankind today and the primary concern of all peoples in the world. Working hard for the modernization of their country and the improvement of their living standards, the Chinese people eagerly desire a lasting peaceful international environment. Like other peoples of the world, we are deeply concerned about the maintenance of international peace and security. However, we are compelled to face the harsh realities. The present-day world is far from tranquil and is beset with tensions and turmoil.
82.	The fierce arms race between the super-Powers and their wrangling over the question of deployment of medium-range nuclear weapons have kept Europe in a state of tense confrontation. The hegemonists aggression against, and rivalry in, the third-world countries have given rise to frequent wars and emergencies in Asia, Africa and Latin America. Certain developed countries are shifting the consequences of their economic crises onto others, plunging many developing countries into great economic difficulties. All this has caused disasters in many countries and posed a serious threat to world peace.
83.	People of all countries have come to realize more and more clearly that world peace can be effectively maintained only be resolutely opposing hegemonism. The numerous third-world countries and the people of the world have strengthened their united struggle against expansion, aggression and power politics, so that the super-Powers have met with ever-stronger opposition and constraints in pursuing their hegemonist policies. We are confident that it is possible to maintain world peace, so long as the people of the world become truly united and wage a resolute struggle against alt manifestations of hegemonism.
84.	All the peace-loving countries and people ardently wish to see disarmament realized, and they have expressed this wish in various ways. The massive peace movement that has emerged in some countries in recent years reflects in its main trend the strong aspirations for peace of the people who suffered the havoc of two world wars and are now faced with the increasing threat of a nuclear war. Their aspirations are completely understandable and deserve sympathy.
85.	Historical experience shows that a genuine desire for disarmament is essential to real progress in disarmament. Twenty years have passed since the 1963 signing of the Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under Water. During this period the two super-Powers have held many disarmament talks and reached some agreements. But what is the result? Their armaments, especially nuclear armaments, have increased in quantity and improved in quality despite all the talks on reduction. Their annual military expenditures amount to more than half of the world's total. More than 95 per cent of the world's nuclear weapons are in the hands of the two super-Powers, which admit that they have long possessed what is commonly known as "overkill" capabilities, and it is always the people of the world who are to suffer once these capabilities are put to use. The arms race between superpowers has extended from the land, sea and air to outer space. And the reality is that, for all the disarmament talks, the arms race is intensifying, with each super-Power trying to gain the upper hand over the other. One cannot but question their sincerity for disarmament. Will they give up their nuclear threats and nuclear blackmail to let others live in peace for a while? Without good faith, their words and proposals, however high-sounding and numerous, would in essence only serve to cover up their continued efforts to expand their nuclear arsenals and hoodwink world opinion.
86.	As matters now stand, it is only natural that people should ask the two nuclear super-Powers, which possess the largest arsenals, to be the first to reduce their arms, drastically cut their nuclear and conventional armaments and destroy the reduced armaments before there can be any reduction of arms by other countries.
87.	China desires peace and favours disarmament. We are for genuine disarmament and against sham disarmament, that is, arms expansion under the camouflage of disarmament talks. The Chinese Government has, together with other third world countries, made unremitting efforts to promote real progress in disarmament.
88.	China has always stood for complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons. China declared explicitly, in 1964, on the occasion of the successful test of its first atomic bomb, that China was developing nuclear weapons for defence purposes and that at no time and in no circumstances would China be the first to use nuclear weapons. China was the first country to propose that nuclear-weapon States should undertake not to use nuclear weapons against each other and was the first country to undertake the commitment not to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon States or nuclear-free zones. China respects and supports the proposals of non-nuclear-weapon countries for the establishment of nuclear-free zones or zones of peace. China is in favour of reducing conventional armaments as well as nuclear arms. China stands for the early conclusion of a convention on the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of chemical weapons.
89.	At the twelfth special session of the General Assembly, which was devoted to disarmament, China put forward proposals on the question of the nuclear-weapon States ceasing to develop, and reducing, nuclear weapons,'" calling on the two super-Powers to take the lead in adopting practical measures to cut their nuclear weapons and means of delivery by a wide margin. With a view to promoting progress in disarmament, we are prepared to make a further effort by proposing that, after the Soviet Union and the United States have taken practical action to stop testing, improving and manufacturing nuclear weapons and have agreed to reduce by half their nuclear weapons and means of delivery of all types, a widely representative international conference should be convened, with the participation of all nuclear-weapon States, to negotiate the general reduction of nuclear weapons by all nuclear-weapon States. We hope that this proposal will receive a positive response. Thirty years ago, during the Sino-Indian talks in December 1953, the late Premier Zhou Enlai of China, for the first time put forward the five principles of peaceful coexistence; namely mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence. Those principles give expression to the common desire of the peoples of the world to defend their national independence and sovereignty and promote world peace. They are in full accord with the purposes of the Charter of the United Nations. Over the past 30 years, these five principles have been accepted by the international community as basic norms guiding the relations between States and have played an important role in maintaining international peace and security. Regrettably, however, peaceful coexistence among States, particularly the independence and security of the third world countries, has constantly been subjected to grave threat and violation by imperialism, hegemonism and colonialism.
90.	The Kampuchean issue is, in essence, one of undisguised armed aggression against and military occupation of Kampuchea by the Vietnamese authorities, with the support of a super-Power, in gross violation of Kampuchea's independence and sovereignty. Viet Nam's invasion and occupation of Kampuchea is now more than four years old. It has not only brought untold sufferings to the Kampuchean people but has also posed a grave threat to peace and stability in South-East Asia. Viet Nam has so far refused to withdraw its troops, thus blocking a settlement of the Kampuchean issue which is long overdue. In an attempt to extricate itself from its predicament, Viet Nam has made all kinds of excuses and even described the Kampuchean question as "an issue between China and Viet Nam". This is sheer sophistry and slander.
91.	The General Assembly has at four successive sessions adopted resolutions by an overwhelming majority, and the International Conference on Kampuchea, held in July 1981, issued a Declaration," all calling for the total withdrawal of the Vietnamese troops from Kampuchea so that the Kampuchean people may decide their own destiny free from outside interference. How can the Kampuchean issue be described as one involving differences only between China and Viet Nam? Talking about differences, they could be accurately stated as those between the Vietnamese authorities who crudely trample upon the Charter of the United Nations and the international community which firmly upholds it.
92.	A number of countries have tried more than once to break the deadlock on the Kampuchean question and bring about a political settlement. On 1 March of this year the Chinese Government put forward its proposal for resolving the Kampuchean question and improving Sino-Vietnamese relations. Like the ASEAN countries and all other peace-loving and justice-upholding countries, China hopes that after the Vietnamese withdrawal Kampuchea will become an independent, peaceful, neutral and non-aligned country and that free elections will be held under United Nations supervision for the Kampuchean people themselves to choose their political system and government leaders. We are prepared to join the other countries concerned in an international guarantee. We also hope that the South-East Asian countries will achieve peace and stability in the region on the basis of mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity and non-interference in each other's internal affairs. We are willing to develop friendly and good-neighbourly relations with all countries in the South-East Asian region, including Viet Nam. The heart of the matter is that Viet Nam must implement the resolutions of the General Assembly and the Declaration of the International Conference on Kampuchea, undertake to withdraw unconditionally all its troops from Kampuchea and act accordingly. This is the prerequisite for a political settlement of the Kampuchean issue.
93.	The question of Afghanistan is also a matter of great concern to the international community. Soviet armed aggression against Afghanistan constitutes a gross violation of Afghanistan's independence and sovereignty, which has turned millions of Afghan people into refugees. This is something rare in the modern history of international relations. The international community has strongly called for an immediate, unconditional and total withdrawal of foreign troops from Afghanistan and full respect for the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-aligned status of Afghanistan.
94.	The Chinese Government firmly supports this just demand. We are in favour of a political settlement of the Afghanistan question, and efforts have been made in many ways by some countries to promote indirect talks through the good offices of the United Nations. However, any political solution must accord with the relevant United Nations resolutions, especially the crucial principle of the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of all foreign troops. The formulation of "guarantee before withdrawal" is obviously putting the cart before the horse, and its purpose is none other than legalizing military interference and occupation and putting off withdrawal. We consider that an international guarantee is necessary, and China is prepared to join the other countries concerned in such a guarantee, but this can happen only after, and not before, the withdrawal of all foreign troops from the country and the restoration of Afghanistan's independence and sovereignty. At present, a genuine political settlement depend? on whether the Soviet Union will publicly undertake to withdraw its troops and set a timetable for the withdrawal. Failing this, no effort to reach a political settlement will achieve real progress.
95.	The situation in the Korean peninsula also arouses concern. The division of Korea into North and South has already lasted for more than years. This not only runs counter to the aspirations of the entire Korean people, but also prevents any easing of tension in this region. The Chinese Government and people wholeheartedly support President Kim 11 Sung's reasonable proposal for the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea and the establishment of a Confederal Republic of Korea. The United States should stop interfering in Korea's internal affairs and withdraw forthwith all its troops from South Korea in accordance with the relevant resolution adopted at the thirtieth session of the General Assembly, so that the Korean question may be settled by the Korean people themselves free from interference by outside forces.
96.	The situation in the Middle East has been tense and turbulent for years. The crux of the matter is that the Israeli authorities are carrying out wanton aggression and expansion against Arab countries and trampling upon the national rights of the Palestinian people and that their arrogance is inflated by United States partiality. On the eve of the commencement of the General Assembly session last year, Israeli aggressor troops massacred innocent Lebanese and Palestinian civilians in cold blood. As the current session meets here, Lebanon is confronted with the danger of being divided. To justify its aggression and expansion, Israel has kept harping on the need to guarantee its "security and survival". But the present reality is that Israel not only arbitrarily frustrates the restoration of the Palestinian people's national rights, but also wilfully threatens the security of Arab countries.
97.	The key to safeguarding peace in the Middle East is to stop Israeli aggression. Israel must withdraw from Lebanon and all the Arab territories it has occupied, and the Palestinian people must regain their national rights.
98.	Unity among the Arab countries is the fundamental guarantee of success in checking Israeli aggression and expansion and of the settlement of the Middle East question. As a Chinese saying goes, "Brothers may quarrel at home, but they unite to resist outside attack". We sincerely hope that the Arab countries and all the Palestinian groups will seek common ground on major issues, while setting aside minor differences, and strengthen their unity in the joint struggle against the enemy. The Chinese Government and people will as always firmly stand by the Arab people and support their just struggle. We are deeply convinced that all aggressors will be punished in the long run. Final victory will definitely belong to the united Arab people.
99.	The South African authorities have persisted in their racist policies, continued their illegal occupation of Namibia and carried out repeated armed incursions and military provocations against neighbouring countries. Here lies the root cause of the turbulent situation in southern Africa. Peace and tranquillity in that region require resolute sanctions against the racist South African authorities and the achievement of Namibian independence in compliance with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council. It is totally unjustified to attempt to link Namibian independence with the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola, as those are issues of different natures. What ground is there for obstructing the independence of one country by citing the presence of foreign troops in another? The people of Namibia strongly demand independence at an early date. They have carried out a prolonged struggle under the leadership of the South West Africa People's Organization No force on earth can block the independence and liberation of Namibia.
100.	The conflict in Chad is becoming more and more complicated because of the meddling of external forces. The majority of African countries are in favour of seeking a settlement through the OAU. They want to eliminate intervention by external forces and call for a settlement of the internal dispute in Chad through negotiations. The Chinese Government supports this justified position. We believe the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Chad should be respected, its internal affairs should be settled by the people of Chad themselves and all foreign intervention must cease forthwith.
101.	The tension in Central America has further escalated in the past few months. It is impermissible to attempt either to use military Muff to restrict the struggle of the people in Central America for democracy and social reform or to carry out infiltration by exploiting the national and democratic movements there. We consistently hold that the problems of the Central American countries should be solved by the people of the respective countries, that disputes between Central American States should be settled peacefully on the basis of mutual respect for sovereignty and non-interference in the internal affairs of other countries and that no external forces should be allowed to intervene. The Chinese Government supports the Contadora Group and the Latin American countries in their position against the super-Powers' attempt to involve Central America in their rivalry and confrontation and in their endeavour to uphold the right of the Central American peoples to self-determination and ease the tension in Central America. The issue of the Malvinas Islands remains a matter of public concern. We maintain that Argentina's claim to sovereignty over the Malvinas Islands must be respected by the international community and that resolution 37/9, adopted at the last session of the General Assembly, must be implemented.
102.	In the face of the tense and turbulent world situation, we call on all States strictly to observe the basic principles of peaceful coexistence in their mutual relations and resolutely condemn and halt any acts that violate these principles so as to uphold the purposes of the Charter and promote the noble cause of world peace and human progress.
103.	The question of development is one of the most important issues of our time. It has a direct bearing not only on the effort of the developing countries to safeguard their national independence and develop their national economy but also on the world economy as a whole and international pence and security. Many countries in Asia, Africa and Latin America have now entered a new historical period of bolstering their political independence with economic independence. Although they have achieved some gratifying results in their economic development, they have also come across serious difficulties. In particular, under the impact of the world-wide economic crisis, some developed countries have tried to get rid of their own troubles by shifting the consequences of the crisis on to others. This has wrought havoc among the developing countries, and many of them are faced with economic situations grimmer than any since their independence. We hope that these developed countries will become more farsighted, for all countries are closely linked in their economies, and the economies of the developing countries constitutes an important part of the world economy. If their economic difficulties are not resolved or, worse still, are aggravated, the entire world economy is bound to suffer. In trying to harm others these developed countries will end by harming themselves and will find it difficult to achieve a steady recovery and growth in their own economies.
104.	Last April it was pointed out at the Fifth Ministerial Meeting of the Group of 77, held at Buenos Aires, that the crisis confronting the world economy today is structural as well as periodic. The Group called on the international community to make the maximum effort to seek a global settlement and work out a set of mutually complementary and coordinated policies and measures on a short-term as well as a long-term basis. The Chinese Government supports the series of concrete proposals put forward by the Group of 77 for this purpose. It has become an increasingly urgent task to take emergency measures in the fields that are vital to the developing countries and carry out the necessary reforms in international economic relations. We always maintain that the long-term objective of establishing the new international economic order should be linked with the solution of the immediate urgent problems. In order to promote North- South dialogue and break the present deadlock, it was proposed at the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi in Match, that global negotiations be carried out in phases and that some problems in specific fields be chosen as the basic content of the first-phase negotiations. This proposal is quite reasonable, but it has not been accepted by the major developed countries. The just proposal of the Group of 77 also failed to win positive response from the developed countries at the sixth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development held not long ago. We hope that the major developed countries, and the United States in particular, will change their rigid position in response to the wishes of the developing countries and display sagacity and goodwill in promoting North-South negotiations and improving North-South relations.
105.	While North-South dialogue is at a stalemate, South-South co-operation is making steady progress. This co-operation is new in international economic relations. A sure way to economic prosperity and greater economic strength for the developing countries is to expand South- South co-operation, embark on collective self-reliance, build up independent national economies and reduce dependence on developed countries. The strengthening of South-South co-operation, of course, does not replace North-South dialogue, nor is it intended to lighten the commitments of the developed countries towards the developing countries. But it can serve as a stimulus to North-South dialogue. China, being a developing socialist country and a member of the third world, has had historical experience similar to that of other third world countries and is faced with a similar task.
106.	For the purpose of developing China's economic relations with foreign countries and strengthening South- South co-operation, Premier Zhao Ziyang, in his recent visit to Africa, put forward four principles, namely, "equality and mutual benefit, stress on practical results, diversity in form, and attainment of common progress". We are prepared, in accordance with these principles, to explore with other developing countries ways for active co-operation.
107.	China is ready to work together with other countries for the defence of world peace, in the interest of smooth progress in its modernization programme and of its national security and in the fundamental interests of the people of the world. We will steadfastly pursue an independent foreign policy. We are opposed to all acts of hegemonism. We are striving to maintain and develop normal relations with all countries on the basis of the five principles of peaceful coexistence and will persist in a long-term policy of opening to the outside world on the basis of self-reliance. We attach special importance to strengthening our unity and co-operation with the other third-world countries. We support the Movement of Non- Aligned Countries, which is playing an increasingly important role in maintaining world peace. With unflagging interest we have done our best to develop good-neighbourly and friendly relations with our neighbouring countries. We are steadily promoting our good relations with the developed countries in Western Europe, North America and Oceania. We are striving to improve and strengthen our relations with the East European countries. As for the United States and the Soviet Union, we also hope that the obstacles in our relations with them can be removed and normal relations maintained and developed in accordance with the five principles of peaceful coexistence. We believe that this will not only benefit the people of various countries but is also in the interest of world peace.
108.	As a founding Member, China has always attached importance to the role of the United Nations. We have noted that, thanks to the joint efforts of Member States and particularly those of the third world, the United Nations has in recent years played a positive role in the maintenance of international peace and security, in decolonization and the promotion of economic development. However, we cannot but point out that many of the correct resolutions adopted by the United Nations have not been implemented; as a result, it has become rather weak in the settlement of many important issues. The permanent members of the Security Council have a special responsibility to remedy this regrettable state of affairs. We appreciate the suggestions made by the Secretary-General in his annual report for the strengthening of the role of the United Nations. We support the views put forward by the Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries regarding the democratization of international relations. Together with other countries, we will strive to enable the United Nations to play a more positive and useful role in realizing the purposes and principles of its Charter.
 


28.	 I wish first of all, Sir, to take this opportunity to convey to you the congratulations of the Federal Republic of Germany on your election to the high office of President of the General Assembly. You are a person with exceptional qualities and wide experience, among other things in the work of the United Nations, as well as the representative of a country and a continent with which friendly relations are for us traditional.
29.	I wish also to extend my country's thanks to your predecessor, Mr. Hollai, the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Hungary, whose presidency of the thirty-seventh session bore the stamp of commitment and balance.
30.	I am grateful to the Secretary-General and his staff for their dedicated work in the past year in the service of the Organization and in the cause of world peace.
31.	On behalf of the Federal Republic of Germany, I extend a warm welcome to Saint Christopher and Nevis as the newest Member of the United Nations.
32.	Ten years ago the Federal Republic of Germany became a Member of the United Nations. On that occasion, speaking from this rostrum, our then Foreign Minister, Waiter Scheel, said:
"Peace takes first place. The times have gone when the family of nations allowed a single State or a political group to upset the coexistence of the whole family through the use of force.
"In our time there is no longer any room for the law of the jungle.'" Today those words ring more true than ever. All Members of the United Nations have solemnly undertaken not to use force of any kind. Yet what do we see around us? Afghanistan, Cambodia, South-West Asia, the Middle East, Chad, southern Africa, Central America and other regions of the world are scenes of ghastly wars and civil strife.
33.	This year the world will have spent the staggering sum of $800 billion on arms. How ruthlessly force is resorted to is shown by the shooting down of a South Korean passenger aircraft by a Soviet military aircraft. That must never happen again. I appeal to all nations to participate in the efforts of ICAO to work out rules that will make a repetition of such a tragedy impossible.
34.	The peoples of the earth long for peace and the absence of force, and they look to the United Nations in the hope that the Organization will accomplish its most noble task, which is to promote world peace. It was the desire to participate in this global task of fostering peace that motivated my country in joining the United Nations. We reaffirm our commitment to the United Nations and we shall do all we can to help it accomplish its task of safeguarding peace.
35.	We laid the foundations of our policy for peace in the 1950s when we joined the European Community and the Western alliance.
36.	The treaty policy with our neighbours in the East and with the German Democratic Republic followed. With our accession to the United Nations we assumed our full responsibility within the community of nations.
37.	In 1973, the year of our accession, the efforts to achieve the goals of detente and co-operation between East and West were in full swing. No doubt all Members of the United Nations then hoped that the international community would from then on be able to concentrate its political energies and economic resources more and more on the three great global tasks of mankind: disarmament, the elimination of hunger and want, and protection of the natural environment.
38.	This year 1972 was that of the first United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, and 1975 saw the commencement of the North-South dialogue. But hopes for the progressive, constructive development of East-West relations were dashed. Detente and co-operation have suffered severe setbacks since the end of the 1970s through the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, the events in Poland and the destabilizing arms build-up by the Soviet Union.
39.	Today once more international discussion focuses on East-West tensions rather than on comprehensive North-South co-operation in pursuit of development in the third world. Once again the East-West confrontation is preventing the United Nations from doing its job of f serving world peace.
40.	Yet we must not give up. Proceeding on the basis of its membership in the European Community and in the Western alliance, the Federal Republic of Germany will continue to work for the maintenance of peace in Europe. The European Community, the core of which is Franco-German friendship, is an organization of
European democracies which have pooled their energies to shape their future together, as equals, in peace and freedom.
41.	Referring to the goals of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization's defence alliance, the heads of State and Government declared at Bonn on 10 June 1982: "Our purpose is to prevent war and, while safeguarding democracy, to build the foundations of lasting peace. None of our weapons will ever be used in response to attack."
42.	Europe must be a continent of peace, must become a force for the peace of the whole world.
43.	We shall continue to pursue detente and co-operation with our neighbours in the East. We shall continue to do everything in our power to help build a world order of peace in which nations, conscious of their interdependence, will work together as partners and human rights, the civil and political just as much as the economic, social and cultural rights, will be enjoyed by all.
44.	At this moment the eyes of the whole world are on Geneva, the venue of the negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union on strategic arms reduction and intermediate-range nuclear forces.
45.	My Government welcomes the new American proposals for the intermediate-range negotiations which President Reagan outlined in his address to the Assembly on 26 September. We hope they will make possible at least an interim result in those negotiations before the end of the year. The United States has proposed the total renunciation of all American and Soviet land-based intermediate-range missiles. That remains our goal. Only such a result could render superfluous the deployment of Western missiles scheduled for the end of 1983. The key to that lies in Moscow. The Government and citizens of the Federal Republic of Germany and all nations of Europe and Asia long for nothing more ardently than the attainment of that goal.
46.	We do not want to be constantly exposed to the threat of Soviet intermediate-range missiles. We shall not accept a Soviet monopoly of land-based missiles. As the Soviet Union does not at present seem willing to forgo that weapons system completely, we pin our hope on an interim agreement that would limit Soviet and United States missiles of this type to the lowest possible number.
47.	The new Western proposals have opened up that possibility. They take account of Soviet interests and considerations. I appeal to the Soviet Union not to let the opportunity to achieve a concrete result pass. I appeal to the Soviet Union not to block the intermediate-range nuclear forces negotiations any longer by insisting that the British and French systems be included.
48.	The Soviet Union should take careful note of what has been said by President Mitterrand and the British Foreign Secretary and also the Chinese Foreign Minister about taking into account and limiting strategic systems in terms of arms control policy.
49.	We must view these disarmament negotiations at Geneva in the overall context of East-West relations. The fact that today the West and East are engaged in such intensive and comprehensive negotiations on confidence- building, arms control and disarmament is encouraging. We have never doubted that the military aspects of security pose the most difficult problems in the detente process, but the settlement of these issues is indispensable for real detente and for the development of a durable peace order in Europe.
50.	Chancellor Kohl has reaffirmed that we recognize the Soviet Union's need for security in the light of history. We want for ourselves no more, but also no less, than equal recognition of our own security interests.
51.	The process of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe offers one of the most promising opportunities for resolving or reducing East-West problems through mutual understanding and compromise and for carrying out common tasks through co-operation. That Conference has linked human rights and human contacts with the process of detente and economic cooperation. It has become a matter which concerns not only governments but peoples as well. We made every effort to ensure that the follow-up meeting at Madrid took place in spite of critical international developments and that it was assiduously continued and eventually concluded at the ministerial level.
52.	The result of that meeting shows our endeavours to have been worth while. The net woven by the Final Act of Helsinki2 has held up under many heavy strains. Now the Concluding Document of the Madrid meeting has brought important progress. It makes allowance for the interests of the people and for questions of co-operation, security and confidence-building. Now the aim must be to translate these results into practice and to let the positive impulses generated at Madrid give impetus to the disarmament negotiations also.
53.	The Conference on Confidence- and Security-building Measures and Disarmament in Europe due to begin at Stockholm on 17 January 1984 will for the first time open the whole of Europe, from the Atlantic to the Urals, to arms control. Military stability in the field of conventional forces in Europe can become a reality only if confidence-building measures and arms control encompass all European territory. Thus that Conference is a necessary complement to the Vienna negotiations on mutual and balanced force reductions, which cover only central Europe.
54.	In the first phase of negotiations the Conference will seek agreement on verifiable confidence-building measures to reduce the danger of a conventional surprise attack in Europe. A further phase of the Conference could lead on to disarmament negotiations proper. The sooner stability in the conventional sphere is established at the lowest possible level of forces, the sooner it will become possible also to reduce nuclear capabilities in Europe step by step on the basis of agreements. We must remain constantly aware of this broad perspective. Disarmament directed towards the establishment of equilibrium is the aim of German peace policy. We want to achieve peace with ever fewer weapons.
55.	Speaking on behalf of the new German Government formed after the March elections, Chancellor Kohl said that we would consistently pursue the policy of understanding, detente and co-operation with our Eastern neighbours on the basis of the treaties concluded in the seventies. That policy is designed for the long term. We shall continue our efforts to infuse those treaties with life.
56.	We are convinced that positive developments in the political and economic relations between West and East can facilitate the settlement of the difficult security issues. Economic co-operation brings stability to East-West relations. We want neither a trade war nor any misuse of economic relations as a disciplinary instrument. That applies in relation to all countries.
57.	We want to expand consistently our relations with the Soviet Union in the long term and improve their quality. We are conscious of the importance of German- Soviet relations for East-West relations. But this policy cannot be a one-way street. Chancellor Kohl said in his policy statement on 5 May 1983 that we judge the will for co-operation of the Soviet Union's leaders by the extent to which they actually help to reduce and eliminate all impediments.
58.	We wish to keep on developing our relations with our other Eastern neighbours also. Europe does not stop at the Elbe. Europe has a common history and a common future. All of us in Europe can gain from progress in detente and in co-operation, but we can all only lose through confrontation.
59.	Constructive development in East-West relations is greatly influenced by the relationship between the two German States. The Germans in West and East have a common responsibility towards peace in Europe, and the Governments of the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic must constantly be aware of that responsibility. We share the conviction that Germany must never again be a source of war but that it should rather generate impulses for peace.
60.	The treaty between the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic laid the foundation for the development of comprehensive cooperation. We Germans in West and East must have the ambition not to be outdone by anyone else when it comes to putting into practice the Final Act of Helsinki and the declaration of Madrid. A peaceful and stable situation in and around Berlin is crucial both for German-German relations and for East-West relations as a whole.
61.	Co-operation between the two German States strengthens the cohesion of the nation. Our aim is to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will regain its unity through free self-determination. Our aim is to work for a peace order in the whole of Europe that is characterized by trust and comprehensive cooperation.
62.	All countries concerned must make their contribution to detente and co-operation between West and East. This means the following. The political dialogue between West and East must not stop; indeed it must be intensified precisely when the going is rough, and this applies in particular to the dialogue between the two super-Powers. My Government regrets that Foreign Minister Gromyko is not attending this session of the General Assembly. We strongly advocate a summit meeting between President Reagan and General Secretary Andropov and welcome the readiness of the United States to attend such a meeting.
63.	Co-operation in all spheres consolidates peace. Disarmament negotiations cannot bear fruit in a climate of confrontation, nor can they be conducted in a vacuum. They need to have a place in the framework of constructive East-West relations. This calls for a willingness to see and appreciate the other side's interests, needs, fears and problems. Presenting each other as demons poisons the international atmosphere. Reason, clear-headedness and cool calculation are indispensable.
64.	All nations, in the West and in the East, must adhere strictly to the principle of the renunciation of force, as they have promised in the Charter of the United Nations and in the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, to the extent that they are signatories. This includes the exercise of moderation in the pursuit of one's own interests. Referring to the further development of the concept of the renunciation of force, Chancellor Kohl, during his visit to Moscow on 4 July 1983, said that a further binding renewal of the prohibition of the use of force "can help improve the international situation if it actually prevents the threat of force and stops it where it is still being used",
65.	We do not want war, either a nuclear or a conventional one. President Reagan is right; a nuclear war cannot be won and must never be fought.
66.	All countries must contribute to arms control and disarmament directed towards the establishment of an equilibrium, and all countries must be willing to help establish tangible confidence-building measures. Transparency and verifiability must be translated into concrete measures.
67.	All nations, in the West and in the East, must discharge the obligation to keep the East-West confrontation out of the third world. There is no longer any future in hegemony or in spheres of influence, either in Europe or elsewhere in the world. We must all contribute to a peaceful settlement of the conflicts in Asia, Africa and Latin America. Economic development and the elimination of hunger and want in the third world brook no further delay. It is not the export of weapons but development co-operation that is urgently needed. Only if disarmament produces a stable equilibrium between East and West at the lowest possible level of armaments will East and West be able to make the necessary contribution to the global tasks of the future: the development of the third world and the preservation of the natural basis of life on our planet. My country is conscious of its responsibility concerning peace, development and environmental protection. We are playing our part in the efforts to accomplish these tasks.
68.	The principles guiding our co-operation with third world countries are clear: we respect the right of all nations to independence and self-determination; we support genuine non-alignment, which we see as a stabilizing element of international relations; we plead the cause of the renunciation of force world-wide and support the peaceful settlement of conflicts; we are helping to eliminate hunger and want everywhere in the world; and we are striving for progress in the global exercise of human rights, since without this nations will find no lasting peace, internally or in their external relations.
69.	At its thirty-eighth session the General Assembly will be debating a number of crises. The most urgent problem to be solved in safeguarding world peace is unchanged: that of a comprehensive and equitable peace settlement in the Middle East. In Lebanon the bloodshed and the suffering of the civilian population must be ended without delay and the way to national reconciliation reopened. Reconciliation is essential for the independence, sovereignty and unity of Lebanon. The peace process in the wider Israeli-Arab Middle East conflict must be resumed. The right of self-determination of the Palestinian people must be recognized, as must the right of all nations in the region, including Israel, to live within secure and recognized boundaries.
70.	We appeal to Iraq and Iran to stop the war in the Gulf that has claimed so many lives on both sides.
71.	The Cyprus question exemplifies attempts by the United Nations to help resolve conflicts by peaceful means. My Government supports the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus. It supports all efforts by the Secretary-General to ensure the regular pursuit of intercommunal talks.
72.	The continuing Soviet occupation of Afghanistan and the Vietnamese intervention in Cambodia place a particularly heavy strain on international relations. The Soviet Union and Viet Nam must cease their resistance to the demand of the entire world that they withdraw their forces. Concerning the Cambodian question, we support the recent appeal by the members of the Association of South-East Asian Nations in all respects. Afghanistan is a touchstone of Soviet will do to recognize the independence of third world nations, to respect their desire for non-alignment and not to seek a position of dominance.
73.	The peaceful settlement of the conflicts in the Horn of Africa, Western Sahara and southern Africa is urgently needed. International efforts to secure Namibia's independence must at long last be brought to a successful conclusion on the basis of Security Council resolution 435 (1978). As a member of the Western contact group, the Federal Republic of Germany has been playing an active part in these efforts for a number of years and will not relax its efforts. We welcome the Secretary-General's initiative in this respect and promise him our full support. In the Republic of South Africa, the policy of apartheid, which is inimical to the very notion of human rights, must at long last be ended.
74.	It is only by peaceful means that the political, economic and social conflicts currently convulsing Central America can be resolved. Here too we are ready to help in so far as we can to bring stability to that region. We see a possibility for regional co-operation between the European Community and the nations of that region. We strongly support the peace initiative of the Contadora Group.
75.	The worsening conflicts in Asia, Africa and Latin America are accompanied by an increasing arms build-up in those parts of the world. Military spending in the third world has quadrupled over the past 20 years and today accounts for one quarter of the global military expenditure. Thus arms control and disarmament are becoming increasingly urgent tasks for many regions of the third world also. Confidence-building measures are indispensable for the third world too. An international symposium held in the Federal Republic of Germany in the spring called for such measures in order to defuse tensions in the third world. Within the Disarmament Commission our work on the list of guidelines for confidence-building measures continues.
76.	Regional co-operation is an effective and promising concept for the promotion of peace and stability in the world. My Government sees tit as the best way of safeguarding and strengthening the political and economic independence of the developing countries. The European Community is a model for a regional grouping in which all members have equal rights. It has long been a factor of stability in Europe and in the world. Through cooperation agreements with regional groupings in the third world it has created a model for future co-operation between industrial and developing countries. The Lom6 Convention which links the European Community with African, Caribbean and Pacific States, and the successful co-operation between the European Community and ASEAN testify to this.
77.	According to the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, international co-operation should also serve to ensure the protection of human rights. Innocent people are still being held, tortured and murdered in prisons. Individuals are still the object of discrimination merely on account of their colour or their religion. Many millions of people, principally in the third world, are still having to live in conditions of poverty that are unworthy of the human race. These pictures of violence, injustice and misery illustrate the challenge. They show how much still has to be done to make human rights a reality.
78.	The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights must not remain mere declarations. They must become a reality. We support the proposal for the appointment of a high commissioner for human rights. We call upon the family of nations, conscious of the good done by the European Court of Human Rights, to agree on the institution of a court of human rights of the United Nations. We hope that the next session of the General Assembly, acting on the basis of the report submitted by the Commission on Human Rights, will approve our proposed optional protocol for die abolition of capital punishment. A convention affording protection against torture is urgently needed.
79.	Among the important creative tasks of the United Nations in the Held of law is that of formulating the right to development. We support the current work of the Commission ca Human Rights in this field.
80.	The refugee situation is one of the most pressing problems of our time. It demonstrates how closely human rights are tied up with peace. Millions of refugees mean not only human misery a million times over. This trend endangers the political and economic stability of the overburdened receiving countries and is a threat to peace.
81.	As the Secretary-General explained in his report on the work of the Organization the refugee problem can only be resolved if the underlying political causes are removed. It was  mark of progress when, at the initiative of my country, the General Assembly included in the agenda of its thirty-fifth session an item concerning international preventive measures to avoid new flows of refugees. We must now develop a system of concrete measures so that the United Nations can take timely action to prevent new flows.
82.	The economic and social development of the third world is only possible if world peace is safeguarded. Development needs peace, but, conversely, peace needs development. For the sake of world peace all energy must be devoted to the task of economic development in the third world. That is also a vital self-interest of the industrialized countries. The world economy is gradually overcoming the worst recession since the thirties. Nowhere has that recession had such devastating consequences as in the third world. In the African countries with low incomes, the situation of many people has become desperate. And even in Latin America, per capita incomes have dropped sharply in the past two years.
83. The development process now needs to be started up again and accelerated everywhere in the third world. The international community as a whole must help. The industrialized countries of the East, too, must finally meet their responsibilities. Belief in the success of the development process needs to be revitalized. 86. How great the difficulties are is reflected in the discussions at the annual meeting of the World Bank and IMF in Washington. But neither can we afford to resign ourselves to the situation, nor would such resignation be justified. The incipient upswing in the industrialized countries must be harnessed to the needs of the third world. Energy prices have become more stable. Interest rates, though still high, are distinctly below the 1981/82 peak. Every per cent less in Eurodollar interest rates saves the developing countries over two billion dollars in interest payments a year. World trade is showing signs of picking up again. Rising commodity prices mean bigger export earnings for many developing countries. The industrial democracies must maintain their economic growth without rekindling inflation. This still cannot be done without reducing budget deficits. One per cent or less growth in the industrialized countries can be instrumental in determining the success or failure of the developing countries' own efforts.
87.	This places an additional responsibility on the industrialized countries to ensure lasting, non-inflationary growth. Widespread North-South co-operation must afford direct support to the development process. The international flow of capital to the developing countries must now scrupulously be maintained and extended. Development requires—and this applies at any time—an inflow of capital and foreign exchange. To the least developed countries, official development aid is crucial. In recent years this aid has accounted for 84 per cent of capital inflows.
88.	In the case of the advanced developing countries, on the other hand, the problem of easing the external debt is the prime concern. With a volume of some 700 billion dollars and an annual interest burden amounting to 50 billion dollars, the debt of the developing countries has assumed dramatic proportions. Co-operation between IMF and development and commercial banks, as well as between the governments of debtor and creditor countries, must be intensified. The commercial banks must be ready to provide even more loans. The World Bank, IMF and the regional development banks must make their contribution, and to do so they must receive the necessary funds from their member countries. The ability of these proven institutions to function must be preserved if the basic conditions for the economic recovery of the third world and of the world as a whole are not to be placed in jeopardy.
89.	Rescheduling must allow for special individual circumstances and take place within the scope of sensible stabilization programmes. More effective measures are needed to counter protectionism. Commodity markets and the earnings from commodity exports must be stabilized. By means of such measures, coupled with resolute adjustment policies on the part of the developing countries, the present crisis can be overcome and the development process consolidated and energetically continued.
90.	To ensure the success of development efforts, the industrial countries must not only keep their markets open to exports from developing countries, but widen them. Protectionist policies in relation to the developing countries are tantamount to refusing development. East-South trade must also be intensified. The industrialized state- trading nations of Eastern Europe account for only four per cent of exports from developing countries, whereas the market economy industrial countries absorb 67 per cent. Thus, the Western industrialized countries import more than sixteen times as much from the developing countries as the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance countries, although they have only about twice their population. CMEA's economic planning is therefore, obviously, of a protectionist character.
91.	It is time the East European industrial countries created wider possibilities for imports from developing countries. Only thus will they meet their responsibility towards the third world. Helping those countries in their development is a dictate of peace and, especially in relation to the poorest nations, an expression of global solidarity.
92.	Yet it can never be more than an aid towards self- help. The key to successful development lies ultimately in the economic and social policies of the third world nations themselves. Here it will be important to draw on the experience of three development decades.
93.	The economic co-operation of the Federal Republic of Germany is concentrated on four main areas: rural development; the development of conventional and renewable sources of energy; education, particularly vocational and primary education; and environmental protection. 
94.	We attach special importance to support for UNFPA. It is now widely recognized that too rapid a population growth can be too great a burden on the development process; it can drag it down and stifle it. Official development aid must be complemented by private direct investment in the third world and by cooperation between companies in the developed and industrialized countries. In the third world, too, private in vestment must become one of the hubs of growth.
95.	The mutual desire of North and South to re-establish stable growth and development calls for a continuous dialogue between North and South at all levels. The sixth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, at Belgrade, proved disappointing in some ways, yet the many resolutions adopted indicate that North and South place their faith in co-operation. That consensus must be the basis for further co-operation. The launching of global negotiations must not be put off any longer. The participants in the International Meeting on Co-operation and Development, at Cancun, came out in favour of them. Now words must be followed by deeds. Global negotiations must be complemented by smaller but, at the same time, representative bodies. The Cancun meeting clearly brought more objectivity into the North- South dialogue. It will continue to require impulsion at the highest political level.
96.	Preserving the natural basis of life on an Earth that has become smaller is a task that will be crucial for the future of mankind.
97.	In Europe the forests are dying. In other regions of the world the deserts and steppes are spreading; the land is becoming barren. The air is becoming more and more polluted; the ecological balance of lakes and rivers, even of the oceans, is in jeopardy. The ecosystems of tropical regions, too, are particularly sensitive, and many developing countries have suffered environmental damage, which at the same time does great harm to the economy. Therefore, environmental protection must already be an integral part of any development strategy.
98.	Long-term damage resulting from the indifferent- worse, irresponsible—use of natural resources spells danger for the existence of the whole of mankind.
99.	Global environmental problems can be solved only through close international co-operation. Protection of the environment is a major objective of the Federal Republic of Germany, both at home and in other parts of the world. We are co-operating for the protection of the environment with other industrial countries in the European Community, the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development and the Economic Commission for Europe. In 1984 a conference is to be held at Munich at which all nations of Western and Eastern Europe, as well as the United States and Canada—that is, all members of the Commission—will tackle the problems connected with dying forests and the ecosystems of national and international waters.
100.	Part of our bilateral development co-operation is to help the third world countries solve their environmental problems. Our aim is to bring all development projects into harmony with their respective environments.
101.	In regard to the environmental protection programme of the United Nations it is important to note the following.
102.	There must be no lasting North-South gap in terms of environmental protection.
103.	Environmental pollution must not be transferred to the third world.
104.	Environmental protection and economic co-operation must be linked in such a way that ecological aspects are always taken into account when implementing development projects.
105.	A pool of experts must be available to third world countries, which can request their assistance through UNEP in the planning, implementation and evaluation of environmental projects.
106.	The training and advisory services available to nations of the third world must be expanded to cover environmental aspects. This applies in particular to food and water supply problems.
107.	The community of nations must use the world's natural resources rationally and in a manner compatible with the environment.
108.	We want all men to be able to live in a world without fear, without force, without want. We realize that in order to build such a world we require a strong world organization. Hence we must all, together, give the United Nations that strength.
109.	We say to the Secretary-General: "We stand by your side. We support your efforts to make the United Nations the focal point of global co-operation through which conflicts can be resolved by peaceful means and the great common tasks accomplished."
110.	The world is at the crossroads. It must decide between international anarchy, confrontation and the use of force, and co-operation between equals for the sake of peace, freedom and progress.
111.	Only if we all act in accordance with the principles of the Charter, only if the right to the self-determination of nations and human rights are realized everywhere, only if the renunciation of force, disarmament, development and protection of the natural environment are seen as our common task, will mankind survive.
 


 Mr. President, thank you very much for your kind words of welcome. For the first time since the Federal Republic of Germany became a Member of the United Nations its President has the great privilege of addressing this world forum.
3.	Ten years ago the Federal Republic of Germany became a Member of the United Nations. My visit today is a mark of the high esteem which the United Nations enjoys in the Federal Republic of Germany. At the same time it underscores a great importance which my country attaches to close co-operation with the United Nations in the pursuit of peace and justice.
4.	From the very outset the goal of the Federal Republic of Germany has been peace. This policy is an expression of our political conviction, which stems from the bitter experience of two world wars in one century.
5.	This policy also has its roots in the tradition of German philosophers and thinkers who saw peace as the basis for the well-being of every nation. Two hundred years ago one of the great German philosophers, Immanuel Kant of Koenigsberg, described the preconditions for a world order in a treatise which reflects his deep insight into man's nature. The citizen of the world, as Kant called him, is the starting point and the goal, as it were, the subject and the object of politics and law. Kant saw a close link between a State's internal constitution and its foreign policy. A State's internal constitution, its legal system, is also bound to affect its conduct in relation to others. By the same token, injustice in matters of foreign policy poses a serious threat to the State's internal structure.
6.	Throughout history mankind has longed for and dreamed of peace and justice, but to this day the reality is, unfortunately, different. Throughout the centuries, right down to the present day, the world has been torn by war and conflict. Today, the United Nations is the great hope of mankind. Imperfect though it may be, there is no alternative to the United Nations. My country has learnt from the terrible experience of two world wars. We have chosen the path of reconciliation and mutual understanding.
7.	Today, the Federal Republic of Germany is a member of the European Community. The enemies of yesterday have become the friends and partners of today. The European Community is a unique example of what common ideals and common aims can achieve for the benefit of more than 300 million Europeans and all the 62 third world countries that are linked with us within the framework of the Lome Convention.
8.	The Federal Republic of Germany is also a member of the Atlantic alliance which links Western Europe with the United States and Canada. This community safeguards peace in our part of the world, which so often in the past has been the battlefield of conflicting power interests. The Atlantic alliance differs from the military pacts of former times by virtue of its defensive character and the identity of shared values, such as peace, equality, democracy and respect for the rights of the individual.
9.	For over 30 years we have owed peace and security in Europe to this alliance. Peace in Europe, may I add, is not an exclusively European affair. The state of peace we Europeans have been able to enjoy for more than three decades has also placed us in a position to develop and extend our economic relations with the nations of the third world, with the objective of promoting the economic and social development of those countries for the sake of their citizens.
10.	The treaties which the Federal Republic of Germany has concluded with its Eastern neighbours have helped to reduce tensions in Europe and opened the way for new forms of co-operation on our continent. The Federal Republic of Germany attaches great importance to continuing dialogue and peaceful co-operation with the countries of Eastern Europe. The 1975 Final Act of Helsinki' and the process it initiated have revitalized the concept and the ideal of human rights, the desire for closer human contacts and the intent to reduce tensions between East and West.
11.	The agreements between the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic have paved the way for closer co-operation between the two States on German soil. We see that co-operation as an element of and a means of strengthening the bonds between the people in divided Germany. It remains our political aim to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will regain its unity through free self-determination. The boundary which cuts Germany in two, the wall that runs right through our old capital of Berlin, cannot be the final word of history.
12.	Disarmament and arms control leading to balance at the lowest possible level are one of the foremost objectives of the German peace policy. At many conference tables our Governments are striving for a reduction of armaments. To achieve this what we need above all is mutual confidence. That is why the Federal Republic of Germany sets so much store by confidence-building measures that lead to greater transparency and control. The first significant results to this end were achieved in the Final Act of Helsinki. The Conference on Confidence- and Security-building Measures and Disarmament in Europe, as envisaged in the Concluding Document of the Madrid follow-up meeting to the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe and scheduled for Stockholm early in 1984, will be another important step in this direction. My country hopes and works for real, substantial results in this Held which is so important to us all. Positive results will make peace safer throughout the world. The Federal Republic of Germany, for its part, renounced many years ago the production and possession of nuclear, biological and chemical weapons. I wish others would follow this example.
13.	Since the 1950s, close co-operation with the nations of the third world has been one of the pillars of our foreign policy. We believe in solidarity and partnership. We respect the right of every nation to choose its own path into the future and to safeguard its independence. It was from a sense of responsibility that the Federal Republic of Germany took part in the International Meeting on Co-operation and Development at Cancun in October 1981. We had hoped it would produce more than it has so far. One of the reasons for the unsatisfactory progress in this sphere is no doubt the critical world economic situation. However, we shall not relax our efforts in pursuit of a constructive North-South dialogue.
14.	My country's accession to the United Nations ten years ago was a question of political logic and a result of our conviction that we would thus be serving the cause of peace. It was also an expression of our willingness to participate in global co-operation and to assume worldwide responsibilities. This is exemplified by our membership in the Security Council in 1977 and 1978.
15.	From the very beginning the Federal Republic of Germany conceived its membership of this world Organization as service for human rights. We strongly support efforts to reinforce the protection of human rights and to ensure that they can be exercised. This was the purpose of our proposals for the universal abolition of the death penalty, the adoption of preventive measures against the emergence of new flows of refugees and for a convention against the taking of hostages. The reality which we experience every day is depressing and is a long way from the goals to which we all feel committed. Yet we must not relax our efforts to secure respect for the inalienable rights of every individual, irrespective of his religious or political convictions, his origin or race. Here is an important task for the world Organization. The respect which a State enjoys must depend on the freedom of its citizens and not on the strength of its weapons.
16.	There is also a deep gulf between the idea of global peace and the reality of a world full of conflict and violence. In his last annual report as Secretary-General, in 1961, Dag Hammarskjold said:
"A failure to gain respect for decisions or actions of the Organization within the terms of the Charter is often called a failure for the Organization. It would seem more correct to regard it as a failure of the world community, through its Member nations and in particular those most directly concerned, to co-operate in order, step by step, to make the Charter a living reality in practical political action as it is already in law."
17.	It is not sufficient for us simply to regret that not much has changed since those words were spoken. You, Mr. Secretary-General, indicated in your report on the work of the Organization to the thirty-seventh session how the instrument of the United Nations can be used more effectively to achieve the goal of collective security. The Federal Republic of Germany supports your proposals.
18.	We continue to have an obligation to mankind not to spare any effort to achieve the goals of the Charter of the United Nations, no matter how difficult and toilsome the path may be. The moral leadership of the United Nations and the universal acceptance of its decisions and resolutions will be decisively enhanced the more they are seen as an expression of justice and political wisdom.
19.	The United Nations plays a major role in the elaboration of new rules of international conduct and in the further development of international law. International law binds everyone, weak and strong alike. There is a natural tension between sovereignty of the individual States and the concept of universality. Here lies one of the major tasks of the world Organization, namely to seek a balance between the interests of the individual Member State and the well-founded rights of the whole international community.
20.	I firmly believe that the course of history will lead away from short-sighted, egocentric power politics. Hegemonic aspirations, the desire to dominate others, have no future in this world. Ever more countries regard themselves as members of a world community with equal rights and equal opportunities. It is politically wise to promote this development with energy and patience.
21.	We Germans endeavour to understand other nations, their culture and their history and to establish links with them. This applies not only to North and South America, to which millions of Germans emigrated and with whose new home countries we today have many economic and cultural ties. It also holds true for the Far East, whose languages and cultures have fascinated our writers and philosophers no less than the languages and cultures of the Near and 'Middle East, where the origins of European civilization are to be found. Equally, it holds true for Africa with whom we have close bonds of friendship. Tolerance is the key word for international co-operation and for understanding among nations.
22.	Many years of experience in public life and inter-national affairs have convinced me that, as in private life, tolerance is also indispensable in relations between States. Tolerance in the international sphere implies respect for the historical and cultural identity of every nation and its political, economic and social needs. The Federal Republic of Germany, in whose name I have the honour to speak today, is willing, as the Charter says, "to practice tolerance and live together in peace with one another as good neighbours".
23.	I wish the United Nations endurance and success in its pursuit of peace. The aim of preserving peace and the hopes which mankind places in the world Organization deserve our every effort.


﻿30.	It is a great honour for me to address the Assembly.
31.	Since the United Nations was founded—and I have not forgotten that France was at San Francisco as one of the founding Members—it has filled an essential role. Whatever results it may or may not have achieved, it has remained the one place where, in spite of set-backs and the eternal temptation to use force, peaceful solutions have been tirelessly sought. Through the testimony of that search and that perseverance it has become the symbol of all that is best in the international community .
32.	I should like to pay a tribute, Mr. President, to the wisdom of the thirty-eighth session which, in electing you to preside over it, has underlined the important place occupied today by Panama, and also by Latin America.
33.	It is my pleasure to reaffirm here the confidence of France in the Secretary-General; I have already met Mm several times in Paris, and my country has had the opportunity to appreciate his impartiality and talent and the high-minded approach he takes to his duties. The report he presented to the Assembly last year remains fresh in our memories. Like this year's report, it contained suggestions concerning the role of the Security Council, the reduction of tension, regional conflicts, disarmament, human rights and economic and social development, suggestions which I would solemnly endorse. It is on the subjects of disarmament and development that I shall now address the Assembly.
34.	For more than 30 years a de facto peace based upon deterrence has prevailed between the great Powers of the northern hemisphere, whereas in various corners of the world conflicts have proliferated. There have been more than 100 such conflicts during this period. However, up to the 1970s, the world had the feeling that it was making progress—difficult progress, uncertain progress, but nevertheless progress towards a less chaotic universe where, it was thought, underdevelopment would be overcome and peace would gain ground in the south as in the north. We now see that the gap is growing wider between the rich, who are growing ever richer in spite of the crisis, and the poor, who are growing ever poorer because of the crisis. Passing from one state of imbalance to another, the arms race is accelerating. Human rights are still being trampled under foot. All too many conflicts remain unresolved. One crisis succeeds another and each gives rise to another—economic, monetary, strategic and cultural. Before our very eyes the world is being remade by blood and the sword; might responds to might, and weakness entails further weakness.
35.	Are we to despair of the efforts that have been made to find solutions for the problems of our world other than domination, violence or war? If the words uttered from this rostrum have any meaning, we cannot resign ourselves to that. Poverty and war are not inexorable, but the inevitable result of a false logic that we must join together to defeat. More than ever we need to realize that this must be done, at a time when fate is making a dramatic choice between peace and war.
36.	Yet, what could be more simple than the hopes of the peoples of the world—hopes centred on food, clothing, shelter, a free life, freedom from fear, access to knowledge, security of ownership and the ability to pass possessions on to one's children? However legitimate such hopes may be, are they, I should like to ask, too much to ask for?
37.	Each of us, I believe, is convinced that the consequences of a new world war would be incalculable, perhaps irrevocable. But peace between nations can be maintained only on the basis of a genuine equilibrium. That is the lesson of history. It is through respect for this golden rule that the rights of all to independence and security are reconciled. To establish these equilibriums, or to re-establish them when they have been disturbed, to guarantee their stability, to reduce forces gradually to a lower and lower level, and to provide for continuous monitoring of the information provided—that is the only possible approach to the problems that confront us.
38.	In the recent past the negotiations between the Soviets and Americans on strategic arms limitation, known as SALT, have made it possible to limit certain technological developments and to slow down the qualitative strategic arms race, but at the same time we have seen a rapid development of the destructive capacity of these weapons, multiplication of the number of their warheads and improvements in their accuracy.
39.	Thus the two great Powers, which each possess a central nuclear system of 2,000 to 3,000 delivery vehicles carrying 8,000 to 9,000 warheads, can attack each other and destroy each other—if I may so put it—seven to eight times over.
40.	One set of negotiations under way at Geneva is attempting to bring about a reduction of strategic intercontinental weapons with a view to bringing about a balance between American and Soviet armaments. France hopes that these negotiations will be successful, but for the time being world attention is focused on another set of negotiations, those dealing with what are known as intermediate nuclear forces. I should like to make my views on this subject absolutely clear.
41.	As a result of continuous escalation on both sides on the ground in Europe, a new situation has come about in which today in our continent the Soviet Union alone possesses a considerable intermediate nuclear force of three-headed missiles which are mobile and accurate, with a range of about 5,000 kilometres, which, since they cannot cross the Atlantic, consequently have as their only possible target the nations of Western Europe. The same reasoning applies to the missiles installed in the Asian part of the Soviet Union, aimed at the States bordering on that region. France welcomed as a very positive act the opening at Geneva of negotiations between the Soviet Union and the United States on weapons of this type, after the latter, in compliance with the twofold decision taken by the member States of the integrated North Atlantic Treaty Organization command—a body to which France does not belong—made plans to install Pershing II missiles and cruise missiles in various European countries at the end of this year.
42.	I shall not here go into all the aspects of a debate which I have dealt with elsewhere and which does not involve France directly even if it concerns it. But I should like to make my country's position clear in the face of the request that its nuclear weapons be included with a view to a Euromissile balance of some kind. In this respect I recall that France, for a quarter of a century now, has possessed a nuclear deterrent force, defensive by its very nature, against any possible nuclear aggressor. That force forms a whole and constitutes for my country a central defence system essential to its security. A few figures will demonstrate its defensive character: each of the two major Powers today possesses 8,000 to 9,000 Warheads; France, for its part, possesses 98.1 am sure that is enough for our own deterrent, but it excludes the possibility of any other use. These 98 missiles are, furthermore, part of a strategic concept and not a tactical one, nor an intermediate concept, if we are to use the extremely precise vocabulary used by the Soviets and the Americans when discussing their own affairs.
43.	Moreover, it would be paradoxical to have my own country depend on the results of a conference in which it is not participating and which, without its consent, would be debating strategic weapons, particularly underwater weapons, which neither the Americans nor the Russians, who possess many more of them, are debating among themselves, at least in that conference.
44.	We can only compare what is comparable. The idea of weighing the central weapons system on which the independence and survival of my country rest against the intermediate nuclear forces of the two major Powers, which for them constitute a mere supplement to their formidable strategic arsenal, is unacceptable. Since in fact this is a request by the Soviet Union, on what grounds can that country expect France to give up something essential, namely its own national defence? Of course we are told—and I am prepared to believe it—that this is not the aim of the request. Of course we are promised that the inclusion of the French force at Geneva will in no way lead to its reduction. But if France were to enter into a calculation it has nothing to do with, would it not be running the risk of having the modernization of its means of defence placed under the control of others? Would it not be taking on a responsibility which it rejects, that of disrupting the world balance?
45.	My country is independent. Its deterrent force obeys the orders of the President of the Republic alone. Its loyalty to the Atlantic alliance does not affect its autonomy. It respects the great Russian people and wishes to maintain the age-old good relations linking us. It has neither the intention nor the means—and it does not wish for them—to impose its law by force of arms. It possesses weapons for its own defence, no more, no less. It would not understand a monopoly of intermediate nuclear forces in Europe being agreed to for the Soviet Union in particular, which is the case today, and it hopes that mutual concessions between the two Geneva partners will make it possible to end that monopoly, while creating conditions for a new balance, which I fervently hope for. This presupposes a continued tireless search for a midpoint from which we shall be able to see whether preference has been given to reduction of tensions rather than to their exacerbation.
46.	However, since we must consider the whole picture, we must not forget that several conflicts, the direct or indirect results of the policy of blocs, or stirred up or aggravated by such a policy, are giving rise to concern.
47.	The unjustifiable destruction of a South Korean civilian aircraft by a Soviet military aircraft leads us to deplore the contempt for moral standards and the tragic absence of laws strong enough to make the perpetration of such an act impossible. I hope that France's proposals to ICAO will finally be heeded.
48.	But beyond this event, how many unacceptable situations exist, how many countries are occupied or threatened by foreign armies and how many peoples on all continents are prevented from choosing their own destiny, from Central America to South-East Asia, through Africa, the Middle East, central Asia and not forgetting Europe Let us stop; the list would be long. I am also thinking of these men and women throughout the world, in exile, refugees, political prisoners, victims of torture, those whose most elementary rights are flouted. On this latter point, surely the international community has been too sparing in its protests and sanctions, and finally has it not resigned itself to these crimes?
With regard to the former point, has it shown enough intransigence whenever a people has been threatened or has lost the right to self-determination? This is a principle which brooks no exception. Where it is possible, why do we not envisage a process of disengagement which would confer a status of neutrality, once these three conditions are met—the will of the State concerned, the evacuation of foreign forces and the solemn undertaking not to interfere in other countries—under the supervision of the Security Council?
49.	But I should like to dwell on two conflicts in which France is involved: the conflict in Lebanon and the conflict in Chad. In Lebanon, the French are present as soldiers of peace, first within a United Nations force, the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, and later with three other countries at the request of the Lebanese Government, as part of a multinational force in Beirut to act as a buffer between the opposing forces there. Has it been forgotten that France contributed to the dignified departure of the Palestinian soldiers and then to protecting the survivors of the tragic Sabra and Shatila camps? We regarded this mission as an honour and we fulfilled it. As for the situation recently created by the partial withdrawal of the Israeli Army and by the new increase in lethal fighting involving civilian and foreign forces, we have tackled this task by placing ourselves at the service of peace. I proclaim loudly from this rostrum: France has no enemy in Lebanon. It is protecting its nationals, as it must. That is all. Its wish is for the Lebanese to manage to overcome their divisions within the framework of their institutions and respect for their legitimate authorities, for Lebanon to regain its independence, sovereignty and unity and for the United Nations to broaden its mission as soon as possible, if necessary, in line with the proposals of relevant leaders. Departure of the foreign armies will make it unnecessary to maintain an international security force.
50.	As regards Chad, we went to that country at a time when it was the victim of external aggression, at the request of the Government recognized by the international community and in accordance with Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations and Security Council resolution 387 (1976). Our efforts today are aimed at mediation, and as a matter of priority mediation by the Organization of African Unity making possible a cease-fire between the opposing parties and the opening of negotiations the primary purpose of which would be to guarantee the integrity of Chad and the withdrawal of foreign armies. Then, I assure the Assembly, France will not delay by one hour the repatriation of its troops. I have mentioned the OAU, thus indicating France's interest in regional efforts, which are an excellent way of dealing with the conflicts. I could have praised, in this regard, the action undertaken in another part of the world by the Contadora Group, and I can think of many other examples.
51.	It is time, at this stage of my statement, to come back to strategic nuclear armaments in the world. We cannot reject the idea—and I do not—that the five nuclear Powers should together debate, when the time comes, a permanent limitation of their strategic systems. We must therefore set out clearly the conditions for progress in this field.
52.	The first of these conditions is the correction of the fundamental difference, in terms of type and quantity, between the armaments of the two major Powers and those of the others, and the difference between a country that might use them to assert its power and a country which might be forced to make use of them for its own survival.
53.	The second condition flows from the wide gap between conventional forces, particularly in Europe, a gap which has become even wider, I fear, because of the existence of chemical and biological weapons, the manufacture and stockpiling of which must be prohibited by a convention.
54.	The third condition is the cessation of the escalation in anti-missile, anti-submarine and anti-satellite weapons.
55.	It is also essential to safeguard peoples against threats from space. Is space to become an additional Held for the limitless development of the old earthly antagonisms? Space is surely by its very essence the common heritage of mankind, as the Earth itself should be. It would be a betrayal of the interests of our peoples if we were to fail to define, in time, a code of law which would preserve it.
56.	Now there is no curb on the development of antimissile weapons in space, no limit to the number of satellites, because only weapons of mass destruction—that is, nuclear weapons—are banned by the 1967 Treaty.' An amendment to that Treaty which banned the placing in orbit of any type of weapon, brought about the gradual withdrawal of arms already in orbit and provided for effective verification would give it its proper scope.
57.	In another field which concerns us, and whatever may be the controversies about its tests—controversies with which I am familiar—I wish to stress that France has decided to open its underground nuclear test sites next month to a fact-finding visit from foreign scientists from the South Pacific. I hope this example will be followed.
58.	I shall end this part of my statement as I began it, that is, with Europe. If peace has reigned in this continent since the Second World War, it has been in a Europe divided, rent asunder, and which has barely invented ways and means of protecting its future and its own security. No true European will renounce the possibility of doing away with the consequences of this division, renewing the ties that were Oroken and repairing the situation born in Yalta. It was with this in mind that France worked for the success of the Madrid meeting of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe and will continue to work for the success of the conference in Stockholm. Only good mutual knowledge of military activities throughout the region stretching from the Atlantic to the Urals will restore the conditions for greater trust.
59.	I would recall that the relations between France and Germany were very important in laying the foundations for the European Community, thus making war unthinkable among the 300 million West Europeans. This commitment and this experience explain our support for any process which would ensure increased security for all Europeans. Believe me, the contagion of peace can overcome the consequences of war.
60.	The States represented here are going through the worst recession afflicting their economies in the last 50 years. The crisis affects us all. The upsurge, sometimes remarkable and always difficult, experienced by the developing world has been halted. While in certain industrialized countries there are signs of a recovery, the difficulties are getting worse for the majority. The burden of the past—that is, the burden of debt—is being added to the uncertainties of the present to impose upon the fragile societies efforts at austerity and discipline which are exceptionally severe.
61.	Of course, we must improve public finances. Of course, we must reduce deficits which are too high. But When the solution to the economic crisis only exacerbates it, where are the signs of a cure? When the increase in poverty and hunger sows the seeds of social and political crises, surely the difficulties are increasing. When the North is content with its own recovery, does it believe for a moment that it can find lasting well-being alone? What does it propose to those who are living today and what does it propose for the 2 billion men and women who will be born within the next 15 years? Silence has become the ally of the worst. Let us all resume dialogue between the two hemispheres. Let us urgently respond and lay down firm foundations for the future.
62.	A transfer of resources from the countries of the North to those of the South is a natural course and is desirable for the well-being of all. The present levels of aid should be considered irreversible. The principal donors should undertake not to reduce their aid as long as the recipient countries show no sign of economic growth. The banking sector must be encouraged not to slacken its efforts.
63.	But these immediate actions will not spare us damage to our societies if the currencies in which the third world debt is payable and the interest rates on this debt reach excessive levels. It is up to each industrialized country to shoulder its responsibilities.
64.	France, for its part, is making steady progress towards the aid target it has fixed for itself: 0.7 per cent of its gross national product for the third world, 0.15 per cent for the least developed countries. We intend to do everything possible to see to it that the seventh replenishment of the International Development Association represents a significant increase. We snail continue to give our support to the Paris Club to seek ways of dealing with the most critical situations of indebtedness. We support the idea of an increase in the resources of IMF to be assigned as a matter of priority to the developing countries.
65.	We have to attack the deep-rooted causes of the instability and disarray which mark international economic relations. For my part there are three major priorities: currency, primary commodities and technology.
66.	If I begin with currency it is because, after all, it is the main primary commodity. A few months ago I put forward the idea of a new Bretton Woods. This was a symbolic reference, as far as I was concerned, to stress the need to recreate the conditions of an ordered monetary system with currencies sufficiently stable and reflecting the actual evolution of economies. That is a need felt by us all. The Prime Minister of India and the Prime Minister of New Zealand were right to issue an appeal for international monetary co-operation. The seven industrialized countries decided at Williamsburg to consider the role that could be played at the right time by a monetary conference with a view to improving the international monetary system. This, I know, is something that will take a great deal of time and requires very thorough preparation, and all the countries interested must be involved in this enterprise. Consideration of stricter rules for the establishment of exchange parities, diversification of reserve instruments, agreement on a rate of evolution of international liquidities, definition of the necessary disciplines in the light of the specific economic and social situations of each country—these are the principal subjects to which thought should be given.
67.	With regard to primary commodities, the path was laid by the sixth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, held at Belgrade last June. But the matter cannot rest there. France proposes improvement of the functioning of private commodity markets by regularizing futures markets, which too often by .their erratic and speculative movement mislead economic agents instead of informing them. Stricter discipline Li the area of competition would return those markets to their proper role. And I stress that vital primary commodity, energy. The current stabilization of the oil markets in no way diminishes the importance of encouraging the financing of investment in non-renewable energy sources, whether through the World Bank or any other specialized agency.
68.	Over and above the difficult situations it has created, the crisis has made it possible for us to understand the growing role of technical progress. It is certainly necessary to make constant efforts at adaptation, but it also offers exceptional opportunities for the development of the South and the progress of the North. This fact seems obvious, and yet too often some countries tend to consider that this is their own business, as if technical progress were a privilege reserved for the richest, the cleverest or the most advanced. We are well aware that nothing is more ambivalent than technical progress—a source of growth but also a decisive element in the arms race. Are we to remain content with this finding? Are we to concede that the major efforts of the biggest countries must be devoted to military technology? Are we to concede that the overwarming of the planet should prevail over its development? This is the most important question, and it is becoming ever more acute from one generation to the next. It is something which has been unceasingly asked in and by France, and not France alone. From the beginning of the century Jean Jaures, Albert Thomas, Eduard Herriot, Aristide Briand and Leon Blum each in turn tried to banish the threat of a modern war and to work for disarmament. They carried further the inextinguishable hope, hope that has resisted all set-backs.
69.	The world will recover its equilibrium and security only if solidarity—which today, unfortunately, is expressed in military terms—assumes another dimension, for solidarity is the higher form of security. But how are we to give expression to it? The General Assembly has already repeatedly reaffirmed the link between the tasks of development and the endeavour to achieve disarmament, between the rejection of poverty and the rejection of arms escalation. Our Governments, in spite of their differences on the approaches to disarmament and security, would surely subscribe to the disarmament-development link and the establishment of an international fund which would make it possible to give effect to this. France itself has put forward suggestions along these lines: as far back as 1955 by the Government of Mr. Edgard Faure, who is here today, and in 1978, on the initiative of my predecessor, during the first special session on disarmament.
70.	To deal with the problem of over armament at its roots and put disarmament at the service of development, it is not enough—although of course the idea may be supported—to seek to use for the benefit of the countries of the South a tax levied on military budgets or procurement expenditures. The prolonged crisis we have experienced leads us to adopt a global approach—or should lead us to adopt a global or, more precisely, a political approach. We have to go back to the origin of these expenditures, that is, the close and growing link between military insecurity and economic insecurity which characterizes the world today. By a series of paradoxes, the deregulation of the international economic system strengthens the need for security and by the same token fuels the arms race, which, in its turn, causes disequilibrium. In view of this, the following essential tasks must be tackled. First of all, we have to determine the true weight of armaments, and urgent questions arise: for example, how to overcome differences in terms of both data and estimates; how to work out a basis of evaluation acceptable to all. Next, we must assess the internal and external economic effects of the increase in military expenditures. Thirdly, how do we judge the relationship between the increase of military expenditure and the major factors of international economic disorder? Finally, while clarifying the above points, the essential issue is the possibility and the means of carrying out the tasks of interest to mankind as a whole, those concerning health, vocational training and agricultural development in the third world—to all of which we must devote the sizeable resources that would be released by a gradual but methodical reduction in military expenditures in the principal countries. And there is also the question of how we are to ensure favourable economic effects of these reductions and conversions in the contributing countries themselves, and how to devise mechanisms to assist in this switch to disarmament and development.
71.	Each country can provide only a partial response to these major questions, but no country can escape them. Indeed, what country today can deny that after 10 years— sometimes even longer—of crisis the patterns of military expenditure are creating increasing difficulties for it? What is the point of spending more for less security, whether military or economic? That is the fundamental question which everyone has to face. It is a question which I wanted to bring before you.
72.	All countries have an interest in this important debate which transcends our differences, but since what is essential in this Held depends upon a small number of States, I think it desirable that action should be taken in two stages. In the first stage there should be, as early as possible, a meeting on the problem posed by the link between disarmament and development and the creation of an international fund provided for by the General Assembly. When the major military Powers have announced their agreement, France is ready to be host to such a conference in Paris. As a second stage, representatives of the Governments participating in that meeting could set themselves the task of preparing a United Nations conference, which would be open to all Members of the Organization, and that preparatory meeting could, without delay, define an initial series of targets to be reached for transfers for the benefit of development.
73.	In the words and logic of the time, the Prime Minister of France, Mr. Pierre Mendes-France, appealed in 1954, at the 498th meeting of the General Assembly, for co-operation between the Eastern and the Western Powers. "By making them partners in life-giving tasks, it is bound to deflect them from the path of death. By facilitating and promoting exchanges among them, it may break down impassable barriers, clarify mysteries and dispel distrust."
74.	I myself, 30 years later—and the weight of facts having now become almost unbearable—wish to state that no country can avoid this debate.
75.	Let us begin now to free ourselves from our acquired reflexes, from fear, from mistrust, from habits of which we ourselves are the first victims, and embark on this common endeavour.
 


﻿150.	 Mr. President, may I begin by joining other speakers in congratulating you on your election to the presidency of the thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly. You have my best wishes for the difficult task which lies ahead of you. May I also express my thanks to the outgoing President, Mr. Hollai, who has so ably fulfilled his role on behalf of the Assembly.
151.	It gives me particular pleasure to pay a tribute also to the Secretary-General. We owe a great deal already to his careful authority and leadership. His report to last year's session' brought out in a striking way the gravity of the problems facing us in the United Nations. His report this year has again underlined the crucial problem of trust. He has also drawn our attention to the need for the Secretary-General, in the interests of all, to exercise tighter control over the administration of the Organization. It is now up to us to do something about these problems. As my predecessor said last year, the blame for the state of the world does not lie with the United Nations system or with the Charter, but with us, the Member States. I endorse that conclusion wholeheartedly, but I see absolutely no evidence that it has sunk in.
152.	This is my first year as a foreign minister. But it is a reflection of today's increasingly complex and interdependent world that this year has not by any means been my first taste as a minister of international affairs.
153.	My own particular experience has been in international economic and financial affairs, and I have learned from that one very clear lesson: the problems which face us can effectively be tackled only through close international co-operation and, of course, with the necessary determination and patience. If that is true, as it is, of economic and social questions, it must be even more so in the political field, where major questions of peace and security are at stake.
154.	Economic and political problems are, of course, often interlinked. Indeed, the former can cause, or exacerbate, the latter. That is why foreign ministers, even if they were so minded, cannot fail to concern themselves with economic questions. These are, of course, questions which require effective action at the national level, and national determination to solve, but the need for action on the international plane is no less clear.
155.	So, as a foreign minister, I remain very interested in what is happening—and what is not happening—in the world economy. There are signs of recovery in my country and in others, but complacency and over-confidence would be equally damaging to the prospects of sustained non-inflationary growth: complacency because there will not be much growth if we rest on the laurels of our achievements so far; and over-confidence because growth will not be sustained if we abandon the fight against inflation. The consequences of inflation, of inflated expectations and of over-ambitious and over-promising governments, are still very much with us, in particular, the problems of debt and the pressures to resort to quick and wrong solutions, like protectionism. It will take patience as well as energy to ensure that they are safely overcome.
156.	On the whole, I am optimistic. While vast problems remain, there have been encouraging signs that many members of the international community recognize that we are all affected by the same economic conditions and are ready to respond to the challenge of joint action. For example, the Interim Committee of the International Monetary Fund was able to reach agreement in February on an increase in quotas and a parallel enlargement of the General Arrangements to Borrow—an agreement which would not have been possible if all parties had not been willing to show considerable flexibility. It remains vitally important for countries to take legislative action necessary to implement their increased quotas so that IMF can be more effective.
157.	Some of these problems are technical, or perhaps it is just that they are made to sound that way by the economists who propose solutions in a language which does not always make for easy understanding. But the underlying reality shines through any amount of jargon: we need to restore the balance and vitality of the world economy in order to provide a rising standard of living, and above all to meet the basic human needs of the people of the world for food, shelter and a decent standard of life.
158.	For the last decade, the world has been proving Malthus wrong, but only just—world agricultural production has kept slightly ahead of population increase. But this conceals the fact that in many countries agricultural production per capita has stagnated or declined. Experience shows that the opposite can be achieved where policy is directed to encouraging individual enterprise and more widespread use of appropriate technology.
159.	Population policy must be part of the answer, and progress has already been made. But much more needs to be done. We should give a high priority to this since it is the poorest people who will benefit most. Aid too has a vital part to play, but food aid is only first aid. The main requirement is for aid to increase production where it is most needed, and it is on this that the international community should concentrate.
160.	Production alone is not enough. We cannot afford not to make the best use of the resources at our disposal, and therefore we cannot afford to relent in the fight against protectionism. Barriers to trade are barriers to economic efficiency and the creation of wealth. We all need to fight more resolutely against them. There must be no new upward twist to the spiral of protection. Instead, I should like to see a vigorous programme of commercial disarmament.
161.	I have mentioned the word' 'disarmament'' in an unusual context. That is not because I underrate its importance in the more normal one. Indeed, nothing could illustrate more vividly the link between the economic and the political world. 
162.	Without security there can be no lasting prosperity; arms control and disarmament can contribute to both by reducing at the same time the risks of war and the burden of defence costs.
163.	It would, of course, be madness to turn our backs on such a prospect, or to reduce our efforts to achieve so obviously beneficial a result. In theory, there is no doubt that agreements can be reached which will bring lasting economic and military benefit to both sides.
164.	Over the last two decades there have been practical examples of successful agreements between East and West, which should encourage us to persevere in our efforts. But history shows also that the road is not an easy one: confidence is hard to build up and all too easy to destroy; secrecy inevitably breeds suspicion; and the stake: are high enough to underline the need for caution.
165.	But caution should not prevent movement, and on the Western side, at least, it has not. President Reagan has proposed major cuts in strategic missiles and the elimination of a whole class of intermediate range missiles. Speaking from this podium only two days ago he revealed a further package of steps designed to advance the negotiations as rapidly as possible. These are radical measures by any standards, and they have our support. So do the Western proposals to reduce the forces facing each other in central Europe to a common ending. We have put forward proposals of our own trying nearer a ban on chemical weapons. It is dear that the West means business over disarmament. It is now up to the Russians to respond.
166.	Our objective in these and other negotiations is simple: we want realistic, balanced and verifiable measures of arms control and disarmament which will enhance peace and security—not just for ourselves, but for all participants. We do not seek unilateral advantage, nor shall we give in to those who seek it at our expense.
167.	That, for the moment, is what the Soviet Union is trying to do by claiming that British and French systems should be included in the intermediate-range nuclear force negotiations. The two participants in the negotiations, the United States and the Soviet Union, have agreed that their own strategic systems should be excluded. There can be no reason in equity or logic why the strategic systems of non-participants should be included. The Soviet attempt to suggest otherwise should perhaps be dismissed as a smokescreen designed to hide what I hope is only a temporary unwillingness to negotiate seriously.
168.	Taken literally, what the Soviet leaders are asking for is either the unilateral strategic disarmament of Britain and France or a monopoly of intermediate-range missiles in Europe at the expense of the United States and its allies. These demands are unacceptable and will remain so— not because British weapon systems would be affected, but because what is proposed is unbalanced and inequitable and would benefit one side at the expense of the other.
169.	When it comes to arms control and disarmament, we in Britain claim no special privileges and no sanctuary. The record makes this clear, and we remain ready to play a full part in the arms control and disarmament process.
170.	As far as the British deterrent is concerned, we must naturally take into account that our force is a strategic one and that it represents less than 3 per cent of the strategic nuclear forces available to the United States or to the Soviet Union. It would be absurd as things stand for us to seek to trade reductions with a superpower. But we have never said "never". On the contrary, we have made it clear that, if Soviet and United States strategic arsenals were to be very substantially reduced and if no significant changes had occurred in Soviet defensive capabilities, Britain would want to review its position and to consider how best it could contribute to arms control in the light of the reduced threat. That remains our position.
171.	I have spent some time on the subject of arms control and disarmament because it is one which is rightly at the centre of the international stage and rightly of concern to the United Nations and its Member States. But, as Mrs. Thatcher made clear when she addressed the twelfth special session of the General Assembly in June 1982 the causes of war do not lie in the existence of particular weapons, whether nuclear or conventional, or even in particular numbers of weapons. They lie in the disposition of States to ignore international law and to seek to impose change on others by resort to force.
172.	We in Britain had direct experience of this last year, when Argentina invaded the Falklands in flagrant violation of one of the most fundamental principles of the Charter of the United Nations. That invasion has not faded into history. We, for our part, have upheld and will continue to uphold the principles of the Charter. We will defend the Falkland Islands and their inhabitants against the possibility of renewed attack; our military dispositions are designed solely for this purpose. We will continue to defend the right—the inalienable right—of the people of the Falkland Islands to self-determination, a right to which they are no less entitled than other small island peoples, and we will carry forward economic and constitutional development in close consultation with the islanders.
173.	At the same time, we shall continue to seek a more normal relationship with Argentina and a reduction of tension in the South Atlantic. We have played a constructive part in international efforts to help with the problem of Argentine debt. It was very much at our initiative that progress has been achieved in the removal of bilateral financial restrictions. We look to Argentina to honour the agreement that has been reached. We would like to do the same in the commercial and economic fields and have supported the initiative of the European Community to this effect. We have also taken other initiatives intended to promote the development of a more normal bilateral relationship.
174.	The return for these efforts, I regret to say, has not been encouraging. The Argentine authorities have shown no regret at their resort to the use of force, no interest in reducing tension and no response to these various initiatives from the British side aimed at restoring a better relationship between our two countries. They continue to see negotiations purely as a means for transferring sovereignty without regard for the wishes of the islanders. A radical change of approach is required in Buenos Aires.
175.	The lengthy passage on the Falklands in the statement of the Foreign Minister of Argentina consisted of rhetoric which is as unhelpful as it is tendentious. His reference to respecting the existing cessation of hostilities has yet to be translated into a convincing and dependable renunciation of the use of force. The whole world knows who stands rightly convicted of deception and of dangerous military adventures. The Argentine invasion, launched without warning when we were negotiating in good faith, cannot be wished away. I can understand why the Argentine representative found it too embarrassing to mention. To accuse us of threatening the security of the Latin American region is lurid nonsense; we have done and will do no more than is necessary to protect the Islands and their population against a threat which recent history has shown to be all too real and which the current pattern of Argentine arms purchases seems designed to keep alive.
176.	As for the charge of colonialism, the answer can be seen by looking round this chamber. Britain's record speaks for itself. Only a few days ago, in response to the freely expressed wishes of the people exercising their right to self-determination, we gave independence to the Federation of Saint Christopher and Nevis. I congratulate Saint Christopher and Nevis on becoming, last week, the 158th Member of this Organization and the 48th member of that unique association of nations, the Commonwealth. The strength of the Commonwealth will once again be reaffirmed when its heads of Government meet in November at New Delhi.
177.	It is sad that so many of the political problems which confronted us last year are no less acute now. The Middle East is a prime example. Violence and the rule of force are the order of the day. There is not much time left for peaceful change. The United Kingdom was greatly disappointed, especially after the initial response from the Twelfth Arab Summit Conference, held at Fez on 25 November 1981 and 9 September 1982, that the proposals put forward by President Reagan on 1 September 1982' were not taken up by the parties. They offered a realistic starting point for negotiations aimed at reconciling the right of Israel to live within secure and recognized borders with the right of the Palestinian people to determine their own future.
178.	Only through negotiation will there be a just and lasting solution to the Arab-Israel dispute. But we are a long way from a negotiation, and we shall stay a long way as long as the parties do not take the first steps to build mutual confidence and trust. On each side there is a long-canvassed step which could transform the picture: for Israel, to halt its policy of building illegal settlements in occupied territory; for the Arabs, including the Palestinians, to show that they are ready to accept Israel's right to live in peace and security.
179.	Efforts to tackle the central issue of the future of the occupied territories of the West Bank and Gaza have been diverted by events in Lebanon. This is a tragedy for Middle East peace, but it is a greater tragedy for the people of Lebanon. Let us be honest about this: Lebanon has internal problems which would be difficult enough to solve in conditions of peace. It has no chance of solving them as long as it is at the mercy of foreign forces. That is why we shall continue to support all efforts to restore Lebanon's sovereignty and independence and to secure the withdrawal of all foreign forces from that country. The presence of a small contingent of British troops in Beirut is a symbol of that support.
180.	Israel's invasion of Lebanon last year has, predictably enough, solved nothing. On the contrary, it has led only to more suffering, while making even more difficult the essential process of national reunification. Meanwhile, the Syrian refusal to withdraw, despite the clear wishes of the Lebanese Government, only prolongs the agony and increases the risk of partition. I warmly welcome the declaration of a cease-fire and the intention of all parties to pursue a dialogue aimed at reconciliation of the various communities. The important thing now is for this to be implemented fully and faithfully by all concerned.
181.	Sadly, conflict in the Middle East is not an isolated phenomenon. In the Gulf we shall support all efforts to end the bloody war between Iran and Iraq. The work of the Secretary-General's mission of inquiry provides a starting-point for a consensus. Meanwhile, members of the international community should avoid any action which could extend or increase the level of conflict in the area.
182.	This is an appropriate place to mention also two other issues with which the United Nations remains closely concerned: Korea and Cyprus. The best prospect of peaceful reunification in Korea lies in direct talks between the two sides. The Republic of Korea has made clear its positive approach. It is high time that it received a constructive response from Pyongyang. In this context let me repeat my Government's total condemnation of the shooting down by the Soviet Union of a South Korean civilian airliner. What is essential now is full redress and effective arrangements to avoid such incidents in future. We will work strenuously to this end in ICAO.
183.	In Cyprus the United Nations has been tireless in its efforts to promote a settlement. The Secretary-General has this year increased his personal involvement. My Government welcomes this and stands ready to help in every appropriate way. Despite some limited progress in the intercommunal talks held under United Nations auspices, a peaceful and lasting settlement regrettably still seems to be a long way off. I cannot believe that it is in the interests of any of the parties that the current situation should become frozen, still less that it should deteriorate.
184.	That conclusion applies overwhelmingly also in southern Africa. Violence cannot be the solution. Human rights must not be trampled upon or ignored. South Africa will not succeed in the end in coercing its neighbours into a change of heart through the use of military force or subversion. Nor, on the other hand, will bomb attacks against innocent people incline the South African Government to change its course.
185.	The only hope for a peaceful future in southern Africa lies in political change and the creation of greater trust through regional co operation and international support. We believe these can be achieved and achieved peacefully. The independence agreement for Zimbabwe was an important first step. A settlement in Namibia has still to be reached, but I am confident that, with so many of the difficult issues now settled, it can be reached, and on the basis of Security Council resolution 435 (1978). My country is committed to such a settlement and will continue to use its weight and influence to help bring it about, both through our own efforts and in conjunction with the other members of the Western contact group. We have no doubt that the front-line States will be using their influence in the same direction.
186.	We do not see or seek to present all the problems and conflicts in the world in terms of East against West. It would be factually wrong to do so wrong also in terms of policy. Problems like those in southern Africa and the Middle East are quite hard enough to deal with as it is. To introduce an element of East-West rivalry, or to add to it where it already exists, could only make things worse. And it is indeed the case that problems are worse where tension is exploited from outside and where international efforts to promote peaceful change are thwarted.
187.	In Afghanistan the Soviet Union continues to use military force to suppress a small and non-aligned people. But after nearly four years of brutal military occupation in support of an unpopular and unrepresentative regime, the struggle of the Afghan people for national liberation continues to inspire widespread admiration. Only a complete and prompt Soviet withdrawal can open the way to the return of the Afghan refugees and to the establishment of an independent Government, in accordance with the true wishes of the people and with the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly. 
188.	The Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia is another example of a situation in which foreign military force is being used to deny the right to self-determination of a neighbour. We shall continue our full support for the efforts of the United Nations and the neighbouring countries of ASEAN to find a comprehensive political solution based on self-determination.
189.	In Central America there is no doubt that many problems stem from social, economic and political injustice. But there is no doubt also that these problems have been and are being exploited by those who seek, not to solve them for the good of the people of those countries, but rather to use them to bring about violent revolution. Our own position is clear. On the one hand we support all efforts to correct injustice by peaceful and democratic means, and we welcome efforts such as those of the Contadora Group to reduce tension and encourage dialogue. On the other hand, we condemn the action of all who use force to block the path to peaceful reform and evolutionary change.
190.	The conduct of the Soviet Union in these regional problems has contributed to the present state of strain in East-West relations. The Soviet military build-up, the situation in Poland and the disregard of human rights in the East have also played a part. The brutal destruction of the Korean Air Lines airliner and the murder of its passengers only a few weeks ago were a reminder of how far Soviet international behaviour can fall short of civilized standards. Britain has made plain to the new Soviet leadership that these are matters of grave and continuing international concern to the entire world. But together with our partners we have also said—and said repeatedly —that we are ready for a more constructive relationship, provided that the Soviet Union is prepared to adopt a new approach. What we are calling for is willingness by the Soviet Union to base its actions and its policies on respect for internationally accepted standards of behaviour. If the Soviet Union were ready to take real steps in this direction, I have no doubt that the international response would be overwhelming.
191.	I have already had occasion to mention human rights when speaking of southern Africa and East-West relations. I could equally have done so in relation to the Middle East, Afghanistan and elsewhere. This year is the thirty-fifth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Yet human rights continue to be widely disregarded in many parts of the world. It is an appealing comment on the failure of the international community to implement the commitments that its Members so readily proclaim.
192.	Personal freedom and individual rights are the foundation of national and international order. If they are absent, both national and international edifices, however imposing and monolithic, are a betrayal of those they serve and must ultimately crumble away. Where they are encouraged, international co-operation—and thus international security and prosperity—will grow on firm foundations. Let each country look honestly at its own performance in this field and resolve to do better. That, rather than speeches, will produce the improvements the people of the world demand.
193.	I have ranged widely in my speech and yet left many important subjects untouched. The challenge before us is indeed formidable, but it can be faced successfully if we are prepared to work effectively together. International co-operation is the key: it has worked in Antarctica and it can surely be made to work also nearer hope. We need to think more about our neighbours and to co-operate more with them. We need to take more seriously our international obligations, including respect for individual rights and freedoms and the need to settle problems by peaceful means.
194.	Confrontation is easy. Pursuit of national interest appears to be. But neither confrontation nor blind nationalism can provide the conditions of stability essential for peace to break out and the world economy to flourish. That is what our people want, and we owe it to them to make a reality of international co-operation under the Charter.
 

﻿1.	  I congratulate you, Mr. President, on your election to that august office. Your long association with the United Nations and your experience give us hope that during your tenure the Organization will gain strength. We are glad also to see the Secretary-General by your side. His analysis of the current world situation deserves serious reflection. We wish success to his patient and untiring labour in the cause of world peace.
2.	I welcome our newest Member, St. Kitts-Nevis.
3.	I am here on a quest of peace and co-operation. I have the privilege of addressing the Assembly not only on behalf of the people of India, one of the founder Members of the United Nations, but also on behalf of 100 other members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, which met at New Delhi in March at the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries and renewed their pledge to work for a world which would not be driven by distrust and hatred and for a truly international community where nations would grasp hands of friendship across geographical frontiers.
4.	For the last 20 years the non-aligned have customarily met once in three years, and the Chairperson has reported to the United Nations. Firm faith in the United Nations is central to the non-aligned. All members of the Non- Aligned Movement are Members, current or potential, of the United Nations. However, the United Nations is an institution, the non-aligned group a movement. The United Nations is, or ought to be, a forum for solving disputes; the Non-Aligned Movement eschews discussion of bilateral problems. But the aim is the same: to maintain peace by removing the sources of tension and to bring out the humanity in human beings.
5.	At the New Delhi Conference we adopted a comprehensive statement on the economic and political state of the world. Our views were summed up in what has now come to be called the New Delhi Message. The final paragraph says:
"The crisis which confronts our civilization today is unprecedented in history. Great tasks call for wise decisions. We appeal to the great Powers to give up mistrust, engage in sincere, forward-looking negotiations in a spirit of shared good faith to reach agreement on various disarmament measures and to find a way out of the deepening economic crisis which threatens all of us. United, the members of the Non-Aligned Movement are prepared to do everything in their power to assist in this process. The earth belongs to us all- let us cherish it in peace and true brotherhood, based on the dignity and equality of man." I am here to give this message to the entire world.
6.	When the non-aligned plead with the aligned to give up confrontation and conflict, it is not out of any presumption. We are only too keenly aware of our own weaknesses, of the unnecessary discords and disputes between ourselves. But, being militarily weak, we do not have to find justification for strength. We are familiar with pain and suffering, we do not want them to increase anywhere. Our plea for peace is not out of superior virtue but because peace is indispensable, because humankind now has the choice, the knowledge and the power to prevent the calamity of extinction.
7.	Scientists, scholars and some notable soldiers have vividly described the outcome of a future nuclear war. Imagine a hundred or a thousand Hiroshima at one time. Imagine a world with nowhere to hide and perhaps nobody left to hide. As more and more people in all countries comprehend the full implications of the monstrous stockpiles of nuclear death, peace movements grow in number and beyond political ideology, driven by peoples' inmost urge to live. We can all live only if we all combine in the struggle for peace.
8.	Some quarters believe that nuclear armaments can be controlled, and deployed with exact calculation of cost- effectiveness. Equally frightening is the preparation and willingness to use other deadly chemical, biological and other such devices. Even more disturbing is the talk in depersonalised terms of using outer space for future wars.
9.	This relentless search for ever increasingly barbaric weapons systems is undertaken in the name of security. India and other non-aligned countries are convinced that only general and complete disarmament can provide real and enduring security. Nuclear-weapon Powers owe it to humanity to renounce the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons in any situation whatever. As a first step they should resume negotiations for disarmament and ban the production and testing of all nuclear weapons.
10.	In four days we shall celebrate Mahatma Gandhi's one hundred and fourteenth birthday. There is renewed awareness of the continued relevance of his message of non-violence and tolerance. He said:
"Man as animal is violent, but as spirit is non-violent. The moment he awakes to the spirit within he cannot remain violent. Either he progresses towards non-violence or rushes to his doom. That is why the prophets and avatars have taught the lessons of truth, harmony, brotherhood, justice—all attributes of nonviolence."
11.	The other major theme of the non-aligned is development. We are largely poor and technologically backward. Even the handful of the rich amongst us are not technologically self-reliant. Most of us have become free from colonial rule only in the last 35 years. Our national freedom is new; our national unities need to be consolidated. Freedom itself releases long-pent-up hopes and yearning for rights. In this age of instant globe-encircling information technology, the media dazzle eyes and fill ears with images and reports of affluence. Even the modest expectations of our peoples are far beyond our present means. Besides, we are hard put to preserve our independence because of the many economic, political and military pressures.
12.	The present world economic order is based on domination and inequality. The basic aim of the programmes of action drawn up at New Delhi was to strengthen the economies of weak nations. We outlined a mechanism to pool our own technological resources, a South-South dialogue as a supplement to the North- South one. We also indicated some immediate measures, the most important of which was the convening of a conference on money and finance for development. To help developing countries is not mere largesse. It will directly benefit the industrialized because development in Asia, Africa and Latin America, and the enlargement of their incomes by removing obstacles to their export, will absorb industrial goods and machinery from advanced countries, stimulate economic activity and ease their unemployment problem. What better investment can the North make in its own future than by turning today's deprived of the South into tomorrow's consumers?
13.	Existing international institutions and those who have headed them have done valuable work, but these bodies are not wholly representative, nor do they reflect the changes that have occurred in the international economy. No country or set of countries is without dilemmas. The affluent ones which follow market economies have problems of production, unemployment and currency instability. Industrialized countries with planned economies, which do not formally belong to the international monetary system but participate in the global activities of commerce and technological exchange, also face problems of production and renovation. We the developing are caught between the inadequacies of internal and external resources. All these are parts of one global crisis. There is no way out except through dialogue among us all. Each country, however powerful, has more to gain by accommodation and co-operation than by withdrawal into individual isolation or adoption of policies to maintain the solidarity of the strong. That is why we advocate a new international economic order based on equality and justice. Unfortunately, over the past three years the procedural hurdles to the launching of global negotiations have not been overcome.
14.	The advanced countries have held consultations regarding their own problems and the accumulated burdens of the economically weakest. Nothing concrete has emerged. Intentions are offset by supposed domestic compulsions. The Summit of Industrialized Nations at Williamsburg in May and the sixth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in June and July have shown up once again the fear of the unfamiliar, of lowering easy, safe, existing protective barriers and releasing restrictive rules. Why should these countries be afraid of the demands of the weak? It is time for bolder moves in trade and in financial and technological cooperation and a daring new initiative to eliminate global poverty by the end of the century. The demand of the developing countries for a North-South dialogue is all too often seen as yet another plea of the have-nots which has to be resisted by the haves. The world today is too complex for such a simplistic division. Political independence is not an end to problems, but only a recognition of the realities of governance in adverse circumstances.
15.	Ideas and initiatives come through discussion, through collective counsel. At New Delhi the non-aligned felt the universal need for further communication and more informal discussions with one another, hence the suggestion that the current session of the General Assembly could be an occasion for heads of State or Government leaders of the developing and the developed countries, the non-aligned and the aligned, the North and South, West and East of common parlance, to be together for just a few days to think and talk about the great problems of peace and security, disarmament and development. We expect no dramatic results, but the immensity of our challenges calls for persistence. Every attempt may take us just a little further in promoting a climate of peace.
16.	It is gracious indeed of so many heads of State and Government to listen to this call of the Movement of Non- Aligned Countries. We are having informal meetings individually and collectively, joined by the President of the General Assembly and the Secretary-General. Could 1983 mark a watershed in the history of the United Nations? This great world body was founded as a group of nations united in a wartime alliance. With the entry of newly freed countries, the end of the decade saw its expansion into a much bigger body. The next 30 years have brought about near universality in its composition. Today, because of the unique authority entrusted to it in controlling military crises through its instruments and its influence on social and economic developments through its various specialized agencies, the United Nations is an integral part of the lives of nations and individuals. It has not yet come near the beginnings of a global approach. Its progress has to be halting and tentative, sometimes unavoidably ineffectual in facing up to immediate problems, because of the very nature of its origin and institutional structure, particularly the ideological divide, which was not envisaged by those who drew up the Charter. It is our task to improve this institution to make it capable of facing difficulties which were not foreseen 40 years ago.
17.	Some issues arouse intense feeling in individual nations, others our common indignation. One such is the persistence of racialism. How can the denial of freedom to the majority of the people of South Africa and the people of Namibia be condoned? I affirm our total support for the freedom struggle of the people of Namibia, under the leadership of the South West Africa People's Organization [SPK4PO], and to the Governments and peoples of the front-line States, which have to endure pressure and provocation. Almost my own first conscious thoughts were admiration for those who fought for freedom and concern for those who suffered. Nelson Mandela, a flaming symbol of freedom, and many others are behind prison bars, but their voices cannot be stilled; they resound the world over.
18.	The turmoil in West Asia remains the most serious threat to peace. Driven from their homes, the Palestinian people are in physical and mental agony. We support the valiant efforts of the Palestine Liberation Organization [PLO] to secure their legitimate rights. The occupation of the land of others will not guarantee Israel's security. The Palestinians must be masters in their home, and all States of the region should live within secure international frontiers. The voice of the non-aligned spoke out firmly at the New Delhi summit for a peaceful settlement which ensures justice. This call was endorsed and reaffirmed by the International Conference on the Question of Palestine, held at Geneva in August and September. All parties concerned should begin the process of reconciliation.
19.	The sufferings of the people of Lebanon, caused by the intervention of foreign forces, have been of great concern to all of us. Here again, the Israeli aggression triggered the crisis. We are relieved to learn of the ceasefire, which we hope will be maintained. All foreign forces should be withdrawn and the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Lebanon should be respected by all.
20.	The crisis in Central America must be urgently defused. We should demand and support efforts to create a climate of negotiation without external interference. India and the other non-aligned countries have welcomed the peace initiatives of the Contadora Group.
21.	The non-aligned have always stood for non-interference and non-use of force. The complex situation in Afghanistan can be solved only on the basis of these twin principles. We fully support the representative of the Secretary-General in working for a solution which takes into consideration the concerns of all the involved parties. The tragic and wasteful Iraq-Iran war harms both countries. Conflicts in other regions also, including Kampuchea, admit only of political solutions.
22.	Militarily, today's leading countries are incomparably more powerful than in the days when a single gunboat could silence and immobilize millions. The weak are not so weak, nor the strong so strong. The essence of the concept of non-alignment is peaceful coexistence and the promotion of constructive co-operation. The "non" in non-alignment relates to the importance of resisting attitudes of irreconcilable hostility. The positive aspects are the desire for friendship with other nations irrespective of patterns of government—which are their own business —and to strengthen the fabric of our own nations.
23.	In India we work for self-reliance in action and self- respect in thought, which Bertrand Russell called "the better half of pride". But this pride is for human achievement and human potential. Its justification would be our ability to discern the future beyond the gloom of the present.
24.	The safety of the weak is the strength of the strong. That is why the weakest and the poorest amongst us, within each society and in the international community, must be shielded from the inclemencies of the international climate. Continued disparities also aggravate political tensions and lead to instability. The strong, with the help of the rest of the international community, can think of measures to contain the enormous destructive potential which gives them illusions of strength but whose very power is troublesome. It is a welcome sign that the two most powerful nations are engaged in negotiations on vital strategic matters and have not allowed even serious incidents to deflect them. The myriad other problems concerning the environment, the optimum utilization of the resources of our planet and the reorganization of political and economic systems at the global and State levels need our co-operative endeavours.
25.	The Industrial Revolution gave a major turn to history. Out of it emerged industrial capitalism and, as a reaction to it, Marxism in its various forms. Together these have given rise to the great social upheavals of our time. The two have followed different paths but their ethos is basically materialistic. All that begins must end. And the seeds of the ending are present from the very beginning. What we have witnessed—the two world wars, the possible approach of a third, so much more destructive and disastrous, and the struggle for power—are the end of the road for the existing order of competing systems. Out of this chaos a new order is struggling to be born. This is our last chance of appealing to the old and entrenched not to infect the new with its diseases: neocolonialism, monopoly, economic oppression, class divisions and big-Power politics, as well as the idea that power is invincible and can feed on itself, with militarization as the ultimate tool.
26.	For us, the non-aligned, and for all who are deeply concerned with the future of humanity, the question is whether we help the birth of this new creation or throttle it before it can draw breath. The matter is not simple, because history has proved time and again that ideas and movements can be obstructed, but not stopped. How long can a few pockets of affluence continue to exert influence on the large populations, the natural resources, the cultural strength of the others? How long can allies and supporters, who may not have a base in their own countries and who are not in tune with the changing times, be perpetuated? You cannot kill an idea by killing its adherents. The newborn will not die; the birth can be delayed but the cost will be much higher and the affluent will have to pay. When peaceful change is thwarted, violent upheaval occurs. Previously, the end of a civilization brought destruction and trauma in its trail. If we keep to past trends, we too will be engulfed by circumstances. But today we have the opportunity, which may well be the first in human history, for humankind to bridge the transition from the old to the new in a conscious way, to build a new era, to move together to a new future.
27.	The barriers which have been put up to shut out the new are the different faces of colonialism—economic, technological and the powerful weapons of food and information. These are the walls at which we raise our voices. That is why we lay stress on a new economic order, a new information order, preserving cultural identities. Walls do not move and can be got around.
28.	Vast knowledge and technological advances concentrated in the hands of a few can lead to a new type of oppression, the barbarity inherent in technological excellence when it is monopolized by the powerful and used for their ends. What just a few years ago were considered as interesting fantasies are today perilously close to the facts of contemporary living. Brainwashing is not confined to any one system or one part of the world, to say nothing of the other cruelties of deprivation.
29.	The shape of this new order is not clear. What form the future will take is being moulded right now by our actions. When I speak of the new order, I am not talking merely of more effective and more widespread use of technology, however dramatic it may be, of which we read so much and about which there are many prognoses. I speak of entirely different thought processes and emotional reactions m the use of technology. We must imbue technology with deeper understanding of the difficulties of others and ensure protection against any further technological colonialism. The new order cannot be confined to the economic or social or cultural. It must encompass all of these and yet be much larger. We must create a new international order of humanity, where power is tempered with compassion, where knowledge and capability are at the service of all humanity.
 

﻿208.	 Mr. President, at the outset, permit me to congratulate you on your election to the presidency of the thirty-eighth session. Since this year marks the 200th anniversary of the birth of Simon Bolivar, the election of the representative of a Bolivarian country to the presidency is also an expression of esteem by the international community of the ideals of Bolivar, beyond being a tribute to your nation, Panama, and indeed to the Americas as a whole. We know that your vast experience and skill will stand us in good stead in our deliberations.
209.	I should also like to express our appreciation to your predecessor, the Deputy Foreign Minister of Hungary, Mr. Imre Hollai, for the able manner in which he carried out his tasks as President of the thirty-seventh session.
210.	Israel wishes to congratulate also from this rostrum Saint Christopher and Nevis on its accession to independence and to welcome it on its admission to the United Nations. We wish its people peace and prosperity.
211.	The official closing of the thirty-seventh session on 19 September marked the passage of yet another year of turbulence and incertitude. But as we begin this new thirty-eighth session, we see amply demonstrated once again the aspirations of Member States for peace and tranquillity, for equality and justice in our world. This, after all, should be the common denominator for all of us who have been meeting in this Hall. And yet it is a sad comment on the ingenuity of the human race that so little has been done in these last 38 autumns to go beyond the hopes invested in the United Nations in 1945.
212.	New wars have been erupting perennially, some more bloody than the greatest battles fought in the Second World War, and old conflicts have continued to smoulder without let-up. Significantly, the greatest problems which have faced mankind since the end of the Second World War have been dealt with outside this Organization, although it was founded on the belief that the concert of nations can and must stand up to its trials and travails together and out of common accord.
213.	It is indeed gratifying to observe the family of nations grow from year to year. We welcome new partners in our common endeavours, for the United Nations will either stand or fall on the principle of universality based on equal sharing of opportunities and burdens in a pluralistic world. But reality must not be cast aside; the United Nations is patently incapable of meeting its challenges, as it is, regrettably, an organization which has been hijacked to serve the narrow interests of those who would do anything to advance their particular and selfish causes, and theirs alone. The United Nations has become a forum of mercantile transactions of favours, of a complacent trampling of the principles and purposes of the Charter. These are the sad realities within which we live—realities which, however, we are not compelled to accept or adopt.
214.	There is today no evident correlation between the hopes of nations and the United Nations role in the realization of those hopes; no rational connection between the aspirations and expectations expressed at the beginning of each General Assembly session and the many acrimonious debates in committees and the flood of paper resolutions that emerge at the tail end of the sessions. This is not only the point of view of Israel; it has been dwelt upon by several Assembly Presidents in the past.
215.	Israel, of course, has had its own share of disillusionment with the United Nations. The persistence of Israel's adversaries' hatred and rejectionism has been largely tolerated here without prohibition or hindrance, primarily because of a great transfer of wealth, gratuitous and unprecedented, from the highly industrialized nations of the West to some Arab countries and the resultant concentration over the last decade of economic influence in the hands of the oil-producing Arab nations.
216.	Yet, however frustrating Israel's experience with the United Nations has seemed to be, my country has not relinquished the first flush of hope that the founding of the United Nations produced in the wake of the Second World War. Beyond its own political preoccupations at the United Nations, Israel has been observing with great concern those economic and social problems which consistently mar relations among nations.
217.	Economic issues, as well as those of war and peace and arms control, have given more cause for fear than for hope in the past year. Insecurity and distress continue to afflict the greater part of humanity.
218.	The deliberations on economic issues conducted between developed and developing nations, as well as those among the developing nations themselves, progress far more slowly than the rate at which these problems continue to grow. The gravity of these issues requires unrelenting endeavour.
219.	Israel, for its part, is willing, within the means at its disposal, to make its contribution to the advancement of international economic co-operation. In this spirit, we have recently presented our "transitional economy plan", already circulated at the thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly. The aim of the plan, which is based on Israel's own experience, is the application of low-cost improvements to the rural sectors of various societies. Dozens of developing countries and international economic organizations have already expressed their interest in advancing this programme and in implementing the ideas relevant to their needs and special circumstances. We are happy to note that some developed countries have shown eagerness to incorporate parts of this project into their own development strategy for the developing and least developed countries.
220.	Israel believes in both collective and individual efforts to fight hunger on this planet and has participated actively, through its international co-operation programme, in alleviating this scourge. The United Nations system should be the central vehicle for the required international co-operation. Its ability to carry out this role efficiently must depend to a large degree on its observance of the principles of universality in participation and adherence to genuine objectives of economic development.
221.	Unfortunately, we have been witnessing an ever growing attempt to politicize international economic efforts by the injection of elements of global and regional conflicts. The developing countries are ultimately the main victims of this attitude, as precious resources for development are channelled into futile and senseless exercises totally unrelated to the pressing economic needs of the greater part of mankind.
222.	No less disturbing is the insufficient progress in the international handling of the arms race and security- building measures. Israel has long been concerned about the danger posed by nuclear armaments. It has, therefore, consistently supported the objective of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons.
223.	Israel naturally examines these problems from the perspective of the Middle East. We have concluded that the most credible barrier to the proliferation of nuclear weapons in our region would be to make the Middle East a nuclear-weapon-free zone. To that end, Israel has made proposals based on the precepts of the Latin American model which had led to the conclusion of the Treaty of Tlatelolco.
224.	It is only logical that the initiative for the establishment of such a zone should originate with the States in the region, and the preliminary consultations necessary for achieving this aim must be carried out directly among them; they should be conducted in good faith and be addressed to issues pertinent to the establishment of such a zone.
225.	It is clear that only free and direct negotiations among all Middle Eastern States can ensure real progress towards the conclusion of a convention which would establish a system of mutually binding obligations on all States of the region. My delegation has been advocating this approach in the annual General Assembly debates; it introduced a draft resolution, contained in the annex to a letter dated 9 June 1981/ and formed part of the consensus on the subject. Our initiative gained wide- ranging support, and recognized leaders and experts in the field of disarmament paid tribute to Israel's position. Israel's proposal, however, was unfortunately turned down by hostile States in the region.
226.	Israel is fully aware of the many political differences between the States of the Middle East. None of those differences should be permitted to stand in the way of the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone. Israel, for its part, stands ready to commence negotiations on this matter among the interested States of our region at any time and without any preconditions.
227.	In recent years, the suppression of human rights by many Governments around the world has reached alarming proportions. It persists in all but a few countries and is in clear violation of the principles enshrined in various international treaties and in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. In the Middle East itself, many of the Arab regimes flagrantly violate these rights by persecuting political, ethnic and religious groups and minorities; by imprisoning political opponents without trial on a widespread scale; by humiliating, torturing and, indeed, executing many political prisoners; by staging at times large-scale massacres of their own citizens, as was the case in Hama, Syria, in February of last year; and by suppressing such fundamental liberties as freedom of expression and assembly.
228.	The Jewish people have known for centuries what it is like to suffer at the hands of cruel authoritarian regimes. Israel abhors such manifestations of repression. My country supports all sincere efforts to foster respect for and safeguarding of human rights. At the same time, it deplores attempts in this Organization and elsewhere hypocritically to divert legitimate concern for human rights in directions which serve objectionable and narrow political interests.
229.	Unfortunately, the Soviet Union's continuing harassment of Soviet Jewry remains one of the most persistent and glaring human rights problems faced by the world today. In spite of the many international agreements to which the Soviet Union is a signatory, such as the Helsinki accord,' hundreds of thousands of Jews in that country are being systematically denied the basic human right to emigrate and to be reunited with their families in Israel. At the same time, those who have been formally denied exit permits have been forced to live as outcasts in Soviet society, often for lengthy periods, having been deprived of their means of livelihood, exposed to the whims of the authorities and subjected to all manner of harassment. In some cases, Jews who apply to leave for Israel or who seek to preserve their Jewish heritage and identity are arrested and imprisoned and languish in Soviet jails and labour camps under the most inhuman conditions.
230.	Indeed, as the gates of emigration have been nearly sealed, officially inspired anti-Semitism, with the inevitable strong racist overtones, is being increasingly manifested in the Soviet media and in various forms of discrimination. Regrettably, the United Nations has yet to take appropriate action on this matter, which must distress decent people everywhere and which is certainly worthy of the Organization's attention.
231.	Unfortunately, the United Nations, and the General Assembly in particular, have also done very little of a constructive nature to alleviate international tension and defuse the many conflicts which have continued to plague much of the world for several years now. The cause of neither peace nor world security has been advanced in this past year. The past year has seen the escalation of the confrontation between the super-Powers, which in turn has had grave repercussions throughout the world, particularly for the smaller nations. International tension was greatly increased when the Soviet Air Force recently deliberately shot down a South Korean airliner—an act that was overwhelmingly condemned by the international community. Most of the armed conflicts and local wars raging around the globe year ago continue to exact a heavy toll in casualties despite destruction and suffering. In Afghanistan, Kampuchea foreign intervention continue, with hundreds of thousands having been killed or injured thus far and millions rendered homeless. The Middle East is torn apart by violent inter-Arab rivalries and by a number of conflicts, of which the Arab- Israel conflict is but one. Iraq and Iran are locked in a bitter, prolonged war which has now entered its fourth year and has already claimed the lives of hundreds of thousands. Internecine strife, encouraged by Syria, has rent Lebanon. Libya has pushed ahead with its imperialistic ambitions in Chad, while seeking to subvert also other regimes in Africa and elsewhere. Various disputes have also been plaguing the western hemisphere.
232.	Although usually stemming from local factors, much of the unrest throughout the world, including the Middle East, has been sharply exacerbated by Soviet policies which have exploited tensions to generate instability and thereby broaden the scope of Soviet influence. Whether directly, as in Afghanistan, or indirectly, through such proxies as Viet Nam, Syria and Libya, the Soviet Union has, instead of contributing to world peace, aggravated crisis situations and even sparked the outbreak of hostilities. Unfortunately, this holds true also for Soviet involvement in the Arab-Israel conflict.
233.	The last decade has demonstrated that the solution of the Arab-Israel conflict is indeed possible, provided that the parties to the conflict are sincere in their efforts to resolve it. Once again it must be stressed that progress in this regard was made entirely outside the United Nations. Indeed, instead of contributing to the promotion of peace in the Middle East, the Assembly and other United Nations organs have often added to the violent rhetoric which has fanned the flames of the Arab-Israel conflict. Were we to judge matters as they are reflected in these chambers, one might easily conclude that the conflict is insoluble. However, in the real world of the Middle East itself—as distinct from the world of the United Nations—progress has been achieved, as we have seen in the cases of the Israel-Egypt peace treaty and in the recent Israel-Lebanon agreement. Once States engage in serious and direct negotiations which acknowledge their mutual legitimate needs and interests, agreement has been shown to be possible.
234.	The United Nations, manipulated by powerful blocs and automatic majorities, has generated a basic misconception concerning the essence of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
235.	The essence of the conflict has always been and remains the persistent enmity of Arab States towards Jewish national renaissance. For decades now Arab leaders have obstinately maintained that the whole region from the Atlantic Ocean to the Persian Gulf must be exclusively Arab. This intolerant and exclusivist attitude has been reflected in their repressive policies directed against various non-Arab national groups in the Middle East. This, and no other, has been the primary cause also of the ongoing Arab-Israel conflict.
236.	Unfortunately, after several costly wars started by Arab States in their bid to destroy Israel, many of the Arab countries have apparently not yet realized that their designs concerning Israel are both wrong and futile. Thus, what they have been unable to achieve on the battlefield, they are now trying to achieve in the diplomatic arena. This has been demonstrated again at this podium during the last few days by the extreme language and content of the speeches made by, among others, the Foreign Ministers of Syria and Iraq.
237.	Significantly and most regrettably, representatives of Arab countries habitually referred to as "moderates" have not objected but acquiesced. Such indeed is their "moderation", which should be duly taken note of by all those nations here at the United Nations which have either deliberately or, at the very least, unwittingly aided and abetted a campaign which strives to delegitimize my country in order to dismantle it by stages.
238.	In the context just described, Arab enmity towards the State of Israel has been demonstrated very clearly in the case of the terrorist organization known as the PLO, an artificial framework which was created by the Arab Governments in the early sixties. That grouping of rival terrorist factions has always depended on the continued support of the Arab States and their allies for its very existence, as has been evidenced most vividly during and since the destruction of the PLO infrastructure in and around Beirut last year.
239.	Too many people have resorted to wishful thinking when referring to the PLO. Smooth phrases and eloquent double-talk cannot hide the PLO's true intentions and nature. Its criminal goal remains the destruction of Israel, whether in one fell swoop or in stages. In pursuing this objective, the PLO terrorists have perpetrated bloody atrocities which have struck at all, Jews and non-Jews, young and old, men, women and children. The PLO's true character and objectives must have become evident recently even to those who in the past were taken in by PLO phraseology.
240.	The continuing tragedy of Lebanon is a consequence of the havoc wreaked by the PLO and its allies over the past decade. Knowing full well the potential for subversion inherent in the PLO, Arab Governments were unwilling to tolerate the presence of this terrorist organization on their own countries' soil and, as a result, dumped that group upon Beirut and on the people of Lebanon. As a consequence, Lebanon's sovereignty was eroded and the country was tom apart by violent strife.
241.	It is well known that Israel stands for the full restoration of Lebanese sovereignty, of Lebanese independence, of Lebanese territorial integrity, of the unity of Lebanon within its internationally recognized boundaries, as well as for the restoration of the authority of the lawful government of Lebanon within that country. Israel believes that in order to permit the attainment of that goal, all foreign forces must be withdrawn from that country. Alongside these objectives, and bearing in mind the experience of recent years, Israel's legitimate security needs must also be guaranteed and Lebanese territory must never be used again for attacks upon our citizens.
242.	The agreement concluded by Israel and Lebanon on 17 May 1983 is linked to these requirements. Israel was and remains determined to proceed towards full and speedy implementation of this agreement aimed at the restoration of Lebanese sovereignty. However, it must have become clear to everyone by now that Syria and the PLO have no more intention of respecting Lebanese sovereignty today than they did in the past.
243.	We have all heard Lebanon's emphatic and repeated demands for the withdrawal of the Syrian forces and the PLO from its territory. At the last session, Lebanese President Amin Gemayel used this rostrum to call for "the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of all non-Lebanese forces from Lebanon". In a letter to the Twelfth Arab Summit Conference at Fez, a year ago, Lebanon explicitly demanded the termination of the Syrian and PLO presence in that country. Lebanon reiterated its demands as recently as last month. On 2 September, the Lebanese Foreign Minister wrote to the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States insisting again on Syrian and PLO withdrawal and he repeated this demand in his statement from this rostrum during the last meeting. Yet all this has been to no avail. Not only has Syria paid no heed to these demands, but it has increased its involvement in Lebanon and is engaged in direct warfare against the legitimate Government of that country. President Assad, backed diplomatically and militarily by the Soviet Union and assisted by Palestinian terrorists, continues his ruthless operations to keep Lebanon in disarray in an attempt to force Lebanon to submit to Syrian domination. Resorting to its well-known tactics of threats and extortion, Syria continues to undermine Lebanon's path to regaining its sovereignty. This is pursued by Syria directly or by proxy, and its uninhibited brutality stops at nothing.
244.	Israel's withdrawal from the Shouf Mountains, a first step in the direction of total withdrawal, was announced well in advance in order to provide the Lebanese Government and army with a chance to extend its control over that area. They were prevented from doing so by Syria and its proxies, which turned Lebanon once again into a battleground, exploiting existing enmity between groups there and encouraging all-out war against its legitimate Government.
245.	Israel welcomes the fact that a cease-fire has now been declared in Lebanon and hopes that the cessation of hostilities will endure, leading to true reconciliation, free of outside interventions and dictates. We are following the situation closely and are looking forward to the establishment of conditions which will ensure security and tranquillity along the Israel-Lebanon border. Under no circumstances will Israel agree to return to the state of affairs which prevailed until 16 months ago, when Lebanese territory was used as a base for terrorist operations against our citizens. Israel sincerely hopes and wishes to see an independent Lebanon in which a strong and stable regime exercises control throughout the country.
246.	Earlier, I had occasion to note that the United Nations has been systematically exploited in recent years as an instrument of Arab warfare against Israel. The most recent effort in this regard was the ill-conceived international conference at Geneva several weeks ago. As part of the manipulation of United Nations organs during the past decade by countries arrayed against Israel, that conference predictably served as an arena for anti-Israel slogans and made no attempt whatsoever to examine honestly and objectively the causes of the Arab-Israel conflict.
247.	Arab-Israel reconciliation can and must emanate from direct negotiations without outside interference. There is place neither for dictated nor for imposed solutions. Any overt or covert attempts to circumvent free and direct negotiations between the States of the region can only delay the peace process. A blatant example of such attempts is the so-called Fez "peace plan" with its calculated ambiguity and double-talk. It is intended to serve those who wish to evade direct negotiations and seek to impose long-standing and extreme Arab demands, thereby undermining the cause of peace. Any equitable and realistic solution will have to take into account the basic fact that on the territory of the former Palestine Mandate two national States have now been in existence for over three decades, one Arab and one Jewish. I refer, of course, to the Kingdom of Jordan and the State of Israel.
248.	The contribution of the United Nations and the world community at large should be to encourage discourse and dialogue rather than attitudes and trends which perpetuate and continued hostility to my country. Regrettably, the United Nations has allowed itself to be drawn into a biased position, has become entangled in a mushrooming web of unbalanced resolutions, has put itself into a straitjacket of partisan committees and has squandered vast resources and funds for dubious purposes. The time has surely come for-all to realize that a solution to the Arab-Israel conflict will be possible only if it takes full account also of the rights, interests and needs of Israel. First and foremost among these is the inalienable right of the Jewish people to self- determination and sovereignty in its homeland, the land of Israel.
249.	The Camp David accords reached after intensive direct negotiations with Egypt, with the participation of the United States of America, show what can be achieved if the parties involved approach the problem in a spirit of conciliation. These accords which fully take into account the legitimate rights and interests of the parties involved, have also set the stage for a future treaty with Jordan and have offered the Palestinian Arabs living in Judea, Samaria and the Gaza district an active role in shaping their own future, initially within the framework of autonomy and afterwards during the negotiations to determine the final status of the areas in question. Anyone sincerely interested in the well-being of the Palestinian Arabs, as well as in a true peace which would take into account both the interests of Israel and those of its Arab neighbours, should welcome the progress exemplified by Camp David. By contrast, those who wish to perpetuate the Arab-Israel dispute for selfish political reasons will no doubt continue to support one-sided resolutions in this body and will seek to undermine those initiatives which have brought us closer to a genuine Arab-Israel peace.
250.	Israel welcomes the voices of reason that have come out of African capitals declaring that their contribution towards the promotion of dialogue in the Middle East will be more credible and effective when their relations with both Israel and its neighbours are normalized. In the past, the potential inherent in the relations between Israel and the developing countries in Africa and elsewhere was realized in achievements which have proved useful and of significant mutual benefit.
251.	Israel would welcome the resumption of ties and expansion of co-operation and friendship with all those who/believe, as we do, that all nations, whether or not they agree on every issue, should engage in mutual relations and dialogue. In our opinion these are elementary requirements if we are to advance the prospects of peace and co-operation in our world, The purposes of the United Nations, as defined in Article 1 of the Charter, are to maintain peace, to develop friendly relations between nations, to achieve international co-operation in the solution of international problems and to act as a centre for harmonizing the actions of countries. These noble purposes, to which the founders of the United Nations dedicated themselves in 1945, are ill served by the Organization's present unchecked drifting into their abandonment through impotence. Above all, the principle of the sovereign equality of nations has often been set aside in deference to the dictates of bloc politics and military and economic blackmail.
252.	Despite this regrettable trend, Israel remains prepared actively to support a new, positive approach. An initial step in this direction could be the jettisoning of the heavy burden of politicization in the specialized agencies, thus rendering them as useful and efficient as they were meant to be.
253.	Israel still believes that the dim record of the past must not cloud our belief in the future. The Government of Israel is prepared today as it has always been to negotiate with the neighbouring Arab States an equitable solution to the Arab-Israel conflict.
254.	From this rostrum I wish to address myself to the Arab peoples of our region and to inquire whether 36 years of war and bloodshed have solved any problems. Are we better off as a result of so many years of conflict than we would have been had our nations lived side by side in peace? Could not the billions squandered on arms procurements have been put to better use in solving urgent domestic problems, such as poverty, hunger, illiteracy and a widening social gap between rich and poor? For how long will your governments be able to divert your legitimate concern with social injustice by pursuing hostile policies against my country, policies which can only perpetuate the violence which has cost our societies so much? Indeed, for how long will your Governments be prepared to sacrifice the flower of youth on the bloody altar of war?
258. Continued hostility and war have brought our region much grief and suffering. Would it not behave us to begin a new chapter in the history of our troubled region? Would it not be better for us to turn the Middle East into an area marked by co-operation and progress? Thousands of years ago from our region went forth a vision of universal peace. Together we could fulfil that vision in our region and be a source of inspiration to the rest of the world. Therefore let us meet in a spirit of reconciliation. Let us replace tension with tranquillity, misery with prosperity, hatred with friendship. Above all, instead of war, let us have peace.
﻿266.	 Sir, may I begin by congratulating you on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly. This is an appropriate recognition both of your own personal achievements and of the important role your country is playing in international affairs. New Zealand will fully support you in your endeavour to make this session a productive one, just as we fully support the Secretary-General in his efforts to make the United Nations more effective in the search for peace and development.
267.	Less than two weeks ago I had the pleasure of representing New Zealand at the independence celebrations of the new State of Saint Christopher and Nevis. Today I join others in congratulating the international community's newest Member in being represented for the first time at the United Nations. It is a salutary reminder to us all that one of the first acts of such a young and small country has been to register, in a formal sense, its interest in this Organization. We in New Zealand have no difficulty understanding that. By most counts, we are ourselves a young and small country. Our welfare can be profoundly influenced for better or worse by external developments very largely outside our control. Some four decades ago, when the Charter of the United Nations was negotiated, we held high hopes that through international co-operation we would achieve a measure of political and economic security which a country like New Zealand could not hope to realize alone.
268.	Time and experience have tempered our earlier expectations. In recent years we have seen the Soviet Union invade Afghanistan in flagrant violation of the Charter. Similarly, the invasion of Kampuchea by Viet Nam has been followed by nearly five years of occupation, thereby preventing the political settlement that the Assembly has urged repeatedly. The essential character of the apartheid system remains intact, in spite of the strongest condemnation by the international community. Day by day we witness the continuing suffering of various peoples and countries in the Middle East, indicating to us once more that peace and security cannot be achieved by force of arms alone. In one of those areas of conflict- Lebanon—New Zealand welcomes the cease-fire and hopes that it paves the way for a more lasting settlement among the parties involved.
269.	The Antarctic region stands in sharp contrast to these troubled areas throughout the world. For over 20 years the Antarctic Treaty" has succeeded in making Antarctica an area of international co-operation and preventing it from becoming the object of international dissension. The Treaty is open to any Member of the United Nations and it remains in force indefinitely. It makes a very effective contribution to achieving the purposes of the United Nations. We assume that any study carried out by the Organization will fully recognize this fact and seek to reinforce the Treaty rather than to weaken it.
270.	Antarctica is one example of what can be achieved by practical international co-operation. The South Pacific is another. At least once a year the heads of all the independent Governments in our region meet together in the South Pacific Forum to talk over common problems and to work out ways of dealing with them. So far we have succeeded in keeping our part of the world peaceful. We are, however, concerned about the continuation of nuclear testing in the South Pacific. We appreciate the offer made by the French Government to allow qualified experts from countries in the area to visit the testing site and check the effectiveness of the safety precautions followed by the French authorities. But the question is not merely one of safety precautions; it is about the use of a relatively peaceful part of the world for an essentially warlike purpose.
271.	We realize that this problem cannot be dealt with on a purely regional basis, and that is why New Zealand, like other countries in the South Pacific and elsewhere, attaches great importance to the negotiation of a comprehensive test-ban treaty. To be effective, such a treaty would need to be fully verifiable. Given good will and effort on all sides, we believe this problem can be overcome. The conclusion of a comprehensive test-ban treaty would do much to strengthen the 1968 Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and to limit the nuclear arms race.
272.	The part of the world in which New Zealanders live is one of the few areas of relative tranquillity. Nevertheless we are from time to time sharply reminded of the limitations both of international law and of normally accepted standards of civilized behaviour. The ruthless and totally unjustified attack by the Soviet Union on a civilian airliner has provided such a reminder. The Soviet Union must accept full responsibility for this act of brutality. What is truly outrageous is that the Soviet Government claims this action was fully in accordance with Soviet law. In plain language they seem to be saying that if tomorrow a civilian airliner from any one of our countries mistakenly flew over Soviet territory then they reserve the right to shoot it down.
273.	The limits to international co-operation are thus plain—all to plain—to see, yet the membership of the United Nations remains intact, and we welcome to the fold a new Member from the Caribbean region.
274.	The reason, I suggest, is obvious. However difficult it has been to develop habits of international cooperation on these major political issues, there is no practical alternative for the overwhelming majority of countries.
275.	I believe that today this applies with equal force to the international economy. International economic linkages are such that in practical terms no single country any longer has freedom of action. That is the consequence of several decades of sustained growth in world trade, production and investment. The interdependent world economy has arrived on our doorsteps, and the world has little idea how to manage it.
276.	The theory behind economic interdependence is not new. We always knew that the health of any individual economy was linked in no small measure with the health of its major trading and investment partners. There is nothing novel in pointing to the close connections between, say, trade and financial flows.
277.	What is new is that the practical significance of those linkages has increased to such an extent and with such rapidity that we have failed to adapt sufficiently our institutions and our thinking so as to be able to cope with those linkages.
278.	New Zealand respects the competence of the principal economic institutions such as IMF, the World Bank and GATT. As originally conceived after the war, they each had their role—IMF was concerned principally with short-term balance of payment adjustment and maintaining exchange rate stability, the Bank was concerned with development and GATT dealt with trade.
279.	The growth of interdependence has totally blurred these tidy dividing lines. The long-term resolution of the debt burden built up over recent years is inextricably linked with the resolution of the problems of protectionism. The old phrase that debt is deferred trade sums up the reality that it is only through increased exports that the interest and principal repayments can ever be met.
If protectionism chokes off that possibility, then the debt problem assumes very different proportions.
280.	It is not just a question of interdependence between issues such as debt and trade, development and growth. It is also a question of the interdependence between countries, between regions, between North and South.
281.	The current economic crisis facing many less developed countries has obscured the fact that until recently the growth performance of many of those countries was particularly strong. It has been estimated that in the 25-year period 1950 to 1975 the per capita gross Rational product of the developing countries as a whole grew at an average rate of 3.5 per cent per annum. Even though we knew this left a number of countries with unacceptable levels of poverty, this was a remarkable historic achievement. It was matched by creditable progress in such crucial indices as a steady rise in life expectancy and adult literacy.
282.	Because of these developments it was clear by the beginning of the 1980s that it was no longer accurate to see the concept of dependence flowing one way only. By the 1980s the economic health of developed countries was beginning to be influenced profoundly by the economic performance of their less developed neighbours.
283.	This is what interdependence means. It was visibly demonstrated last year when the expected recovery of the developed and affluent countries members of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development [OFCD] did not eventuate in the second half of 1982 very largely because of a sudden downturn in the demand for their exports to the less developed world. Faced with acute financing difficulties caused by a contraction in commercial bank lending, many of the more heavily indebted countries had no option but to pursue adjustment policies based largely on slashing imports. This impaired their own development needs. It impaired the OECD's recovery.
284.	From the suffering of the Second World War a system for international economic co-operation was developed. Those who designed that system had in mind a world economy that was very different from the interdependent world economy we live in today. In many respects those post-war arrangements achieved their central objectives. Many of the key elements, such as currency convertibility, are still as relevant today as they were then. The successes of that system of trade and payments created the global economy we have today. I believe the international community must now move on to the next phase of international economic co-operation and begin the task of managing that interdependence.
285.	To describe the scope and magnitude of that task I have used the term "a new Bretton Woods". For over a year, at a variety of international forums, I have urged the international community to initiate the comprehensive examination of the world's trade and payments system that is the first necessary step towards a new Bretton Woods. The conference as such should be regarded as the last step, the culmination of the most careful preparatory process of analysis and discussion.
286.	During that time there has been considerable debate over the future of the trade and payments system. There have also been unmistakable signs of a recovery in the United States economy, and the immediate danger of default by the most heavily indebted countries has been averted by various rescue operations.
287.	The key question, I believe, is whether the recovery and these rescue operations will in practice set back the growing consensus in favour of a comprehensive examination of the underlying structural difficulties facing the world economy. There is a serious danger that this will be the case. The remedy, however, lies entirely in our own hands.
288.	Let me first summarize the international debate as I believe it has evolved over that period. In February 1983 the Brandt Commission's second report proposed a major review of the world's trade and payments system." In March the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries endorsed the Indian Prime Minister's call for a conference on money and finance for development. Following the meeting of OECD ministers in May, at which I repeated my call for a Bretton Woods-type conference, the French President made a very similar proposal. Then, at the Williamsburg Summit the leaders of the industrialized countries issued a somewhat tentative call for their ministers of finance to work with the Managing Director of IMF to prepare the groundwork for what might develop into a high-level international monetary conference. However qualified that endorsement may have been, it was a response from the developed world to the growing weight of opinion favouring a careful examination of these international economic issues. The middle ground, if not clearly delineated, was at least becoming visible.
289.	Finally, at the meeting of Commonwealth finance ministers, which concluded in Trinidad and Tobago less than two weeks ago, ministers of finance from 44 countries, representing the diversity of wealth, population and size that is the key characteristic of that grouping, commended the general thrust of a major report entitled "Towards a New Bretton Woods".
290.	This was a report compiled by eminent experts from nine Commonwealth countries. Its work on conditionally, liquidity problems, the role of special drawing rights, protectionism and sovereign debt, to mention only a few of the issues covered in the report, will, I hope, be sifted and refined. As the first attempt by an international institution to outline the agenda for such a fundamental examination of the trade and payments system, it deserves careful consideration by the wider international community.
291.	Surveying the debate over the past 12 months as a whole, therefore, international opinion seems to have been evolving in a promising direction. We were beginning to move away from the sterile confrontations that have been the hallmark of international economic debate even in recent years.
292.	However, we now face the possibility that the recovery—welcome as it is—may have the somewhat predictable result of unravelling a good deal of that growing consensus. If the international community has been increasingly ready to consider the scope for changes to the trade and payments system, it has no doubt been due to the long period of stagflation we have been through. Equally, now that the first clear signs of a recovery in the United States and certain other industrial economies are evident, some of the pressure to examine these long- term issues is off. It may be only realistic to expect that debate to be influenced by short-term fluctuation in the real economy. It would, I suggest, be reasonable to expect a little more vision.
293.	In spite of the misgivings of many Governors and the continuing, though privately expressed, disquiet of the international banking community, a message to emerge from the annual meetings of IMF and the World Bank was, regrettably, all too clear. With some of the major industrial countries there was a mood that can be expressed quite simply: now that the recovery is under way, let us put aside all this talk of changes to the trade and payments system.
294.	I believe that view is more than short-sighted; it is tragically misplaced. The recovery of industrial countries, in itself undoubtedly the best piece of economic news we have had for some years, will not come to grips with the deep-seated changes that have occurred in the world economy since the formation of the Bretton Woods institutions.
295.	In 1982 the world economy went backwards. World production declined by an estimated 2 per cent, and the volume of world trade declined by 2.5 per cent. Had this continued into 1983 I believe it would have put nearly impossible strains on world economic and political stability. The recovery certain developed countries are now experiencing has to be seen against that perspective. It has turned the tide against the forces of contraction of world output and trade unprecedented in our post-war experience. The recovery in demand will strengthen many commodity prices and thus may offer some relief to those countries which, like New Zealand, have suffered disastrous declines in their terms of trade during the last decade. Finally, however, the recovery is not a panacea for the problems of debt, protectionism and development.
296.	In the first place the recovery is cyclical in nature and confined to relatively few countries. Even for them the persistence of high interest rates is a serious threat to sustained recovery of their economies.
297.	Recovery will not tackle the underlying roots of protectionism, since clearly, the growth of protectionist action predates the recession. Protectionism, which is by no means confined to the OECD countries, will persist in the developed world if only because no one is predicting growth rates which will reduce the number of unemployed, roughly 35 million, in the OECD area.
298.	Recovery will not do much to alleviate the debt burdens of many developing countries. The Commonwealth study "Towards a New Bretton Woods" estimates that there are as many as 40 countries which have been reported to have agreed to debt reschedulings or to be in substantial payments arrears. In the 10-month period to June 1983 the value of cross-border debt being renegotiated with commercial banks has been calculated as being over 20 times larger than in any previous year. Debt of this magnitude is a powerful force for uncertainty, a threat to the recovery and a source of instability for these Governments, whatever their political system.
299.	Nor can I see any reason why the recovery should reverse the mood—so obvious in most countries—which has been aptly described as "aid weariness". The New Zealand political system is no more immune to that than any other democratic country. However, my experience with our small but highly effective aid programmes in the independent countries of the South Pacific has convinced me that the prevailing modem view of aid is profoundly misplaced.
300.	I have advocated putting aid on a firmer basis, possibly by issuing special drawing rights to the countries in greatest need. In any such distribution there may be a useful role for the World Bank, in part because that would put the Bank's finances on a more assured basis.
301.	These are only some of the medium- and longer- term issues which I believe the modest recovery in the OECD area will do little to address.
302.	The ideas, the issues involved, although technical in nature, have profound political implications. Many countries represented in the Assembly have witnessed directly the political consequences that flow from economic dislocation. Economic growth and stable financial markets will not of themselves preserve the fabric of world peace, but they are powerful positive forces all the same. Many of the elements of the post-war system of economic co-operation are under strain. I believe we, as an international community, now need to develop new political levers to tackle some of the underlying difficulties. We must move beyond the ad hoc responses that have developed to cope with severe, long-term current account deficits. We must reassure heavily indebted countries that there will be adequate financing available while they pursue the long-term process of structural adjustment. The original political mandate of GATT, which is now all but exhausted, must be renewed.
303.	The difficulty in all this is to move beyond general expressions of concern to initiate a process which might come to grips with some of these fundamental issues facing the world trade and payments system.
304.	Of course, if the complacent mood prevalent in some countries persists there is little that can be done. In that case, the middle ground that I believe was becoming visible until very recently will quickly disappear. We will quit the field and leave it to extremists of varying points of view. We will return to the dubious pleasure of the sterile confrontations of past years.
305.	I do not pretend to have a blueprint for the process that might lead to a comprehensive examination of the trade and payments system. There are many possible approaches, involving different timetables and different combinations of people and institutions. The study "Towards a new Bretton Woods", to which I referred earlier, has one such proposal worthy of the Assembly's consideration. Ultimately, the process must be tailored to the needs of the main participants so as to command their support.
306.	It is not hard, however, to describe in general terms the criteria for a successful examination of the trade and payments system.
307.	First, the basic work must be undertaken by experts of the highest standing, otherwise its analytical competence would be subject to easy and probably fatal challenge.
308.	Secondly, these experts must enjoy the confidence of major Governments and have ready access to their political advice. In that way, we might avoid proposals that are completely outside the limits of political possibility.
309.	Thirdly, any such group must be of manageable size. In my view this implies a small group of around 15 to 25 members broadly representative of the international community and working closely with the major international economic institutions. We would probably end up with something analogous to the structure of the Interim Committee and the Executive Board of IMF. Unlike the Interim Committee, however, it would be concerned with all the fundamental long-term trade and payments issues, rather than simply determining the current policy of IMF.
310.	Fourthly, a conference, involving participation on a far wider international basis, should be seen as a conclusion rather than a beginning. The Commonwealth finance ministers saw a Bretton Woods-type conference in this context very much as an end to the process rather than a commencement.
311.	It is more difficult to be definitive about the timetable when agreement on the process described above still escapes our grasp. I believe there is an urgent need to begin the task now, and I believe that the general proposition has wide support. If we accept the projections which imply an annual rate of growth in the key industrial countries of 3 to 4 per cent into 1984, then this gives us some flexibility to implement any changes agreed at what we might call the study group level. If we delay the start of our examination too long, then we face the possibility of yet another cyclical downturn in the world economy. A return to an even less auspicious macro-economic climate could sound the death-knell to the implementation stage of the exercise.
312.	The point requires no labouring. There is a real and pressing need to get on with the job of re-examining the system and working out how to adapt it to the needs of the period we live in. Delay is dangerous. To avert the threat, we should aim to have broad international agreement to implementing changes in the trade and payments system by, say, 1985. The process of preparing for it should begin straight away, certainly by the beginning of 1984. The time for action is now.
 




﻿58.		First of all, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your election to the important post of President of this session of the General Assembly. Your wealth of experience, including your profound knowledge of the Organization, is an excellent guarantee of the effectiveness of the work of the General Assembly.
59.	I should like to take this opportunity to convey our gratitude to our friend and comrade Mr. Imre Hollai, the representative of the fraternal Hungarian People's Republic, for his skilful conduct of the proceedings of the General Assembly last year.
60.	We would also like to welcome the entry into the United Nations of a new State, Saint Christopher and Nevis.
61.	There are today 158 Member States of the United Nations. It is worth recalling that this reality of the contemporary international scene has quite a definite political meaning.
62.	The solution to the crucial problem—the problem of war and peace—depends precisely on the States Members of the United Nations, on the way they construct relations among themselves and on the way they act in the world arena.
63.	Under the Charter of the United Nations these States have pledged to "live together in peace with one another as good neighbours".
64.	If only all of them abided by that Charter provision It would not then be necessary so vehemently to voice the urgent need to defend peace and to dispel the storm clouds gathering over it.
65.	That is what the Soviet Union is once again doing today.
66.	Our planet is practically caving in under the unprecedented burden of arms with unheard-of destructive power. Should it happen that those arms are actually used, the very survival of human civilization will be in question.
67.	The situation is compounded by the fact that the forces heating up the international atmosphere in order to further their pathological ambitions have now sharply intensified their activities.
68.	The reckless actions of those forces, combined with the enormous potential of lethal weapons, have produced, figuratively speaking, an explosive mixture which has added an entirely new dimension to the threat to peace.
69.	Given the present situation, the task of preventing war has now acquired particular urgency.
70.	At a time when all mankind is threatened with a nuclear catastrophe it is the duty of all those who have anything to do with the political decision-making process to put concern for peace above all else.
71.	This is what the peoples of the world are entitled to demand of their political leaders, their Governments and parliaments and, of course, international organizations, above all the United Nations, which is designed to be "a centre for harmonizing the actions of nations" in maintaining international security.
72.	On all continents the people's anti-war movement is growing and its activities in the struggle to preserve peace are increasing. This is only natural, for people cannot and will not live today in a permanent state of anxiety about tomorrow.
73.	The course pursued by some Members of the Organization is contrary to the age-old human yearning for a peaceful life embodied in the purposes and principles of the Charter and to the interests of the peace-loving majority of States. The credo of the architects of this course is revealed by the Washington-imposed decisions of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization bloc. Their policy is aimed at achieving military superiority, a vantage point from which they wish to dominate and dictate to others.
74.	It would appear that the nuclear arsenals of the United States and NATO are filled to capacity, and yet the assembly lines continue to chum out military hardware in a kind of frenzy. Every item of military hardware that exists is being either increased or replaced by another even more destructive.
75.	Armaments programmes costing many billions are being approved one after another. Whatever objections are raised—and they are being raised in this regard by sober-minded politicians and authoritative public figures in the United States itself—the United States Administration has but one thing to say: there is not the slightest doubt that we must arm and preferably two or three times over.
76.	There have been fierce clashes over deployment of the MX strategic missile and, indeed, as to whether it is necessary at all, but the decision was both to deploy the MX and to develop the Minuteman—yet another intercontinental missile.
77.	There were arguments over whether or not to build the B-l bomber. The decision was to go ahead with two new types of strategic bomber, at the same time.
78.	Other kinds of nuclear and other systems are also being put into mass production. The barbaric neutron weapon and new chemical weapons are being stockpiled. Next on the list is the development of systems for waging warfare in and from outer space.
79.	Under the pretext of an alleged shortage of nuclear weapons in areas where they already exist, attempts are being made to add to them, and where they do not exist, attempts are being made to deploy them.
80.	The intention has been expressed to move nuclear weapons as close as possible to the borders of the Soviet Union and its allies, to introduce into Western Europe new American medium-range missiles, that is to say Pershing II and cruise missiles.
81.	To the south and to the east the land and waters are also being saturated with nuclear weapons. A11 this is taking place over a wide geographic area, from Diego Garcia to Okinawa, across the vast expanse of the Indian Ocean and the Pacific.
82.	In order to justify the unchecked escalation of their militaristic preparations they are deliberately whipping up war hysteria and do not stop short of staging the crudest provocations.
83.	We, for our part, have already set forth our view, based on principle, of the incident involving the intrusion of the South Korean aircraft into Soviet airspace.
84.	It is impermissible for anyone to infringe the sovereignty of States, and this includes the inviolability of their borders. This is a universally recognized rule of international law and is fully consistent with the Charter of the United Nations. Anyone that attempts to violate our borders must know that he will have to bear the full responsibility.
85.	We have expressed our regret at the loss of human life. The initiators of this anti-Soviet act of provocation are entirely to blame for this tragedy. No matter what scurrilous slander or dishonest devices they resort to, they will never be able to cover up their tracks and conceal the true aims of their crime.
86.	To the impartial observer there cannot and should not be the slightest doubt as to the nature of these aims. An act of sabotage against peace was committed to further militaristic policies and the inflation of military budgets.
87.	In an attempt to change in their own favour the military-strategic situation in the world they invoke the security interests of the United States and its allies.
88.	It is the right and duty of each country to protect its own security, just as it is its right and duty to work for the strengthening of universal peace.
89.	But nowadays international and national security are interrelated to a greater extent than ever before. Neither can be reliably ensured when the United States and NATO are spurring the arms race and pursuing a policy based on a "position of strength".
90.	Such a policy, however it may be packaged, is the exact opposite of a policy which ensures international security.
91.	Certain quarters in the United States have become partial to ringing phrases. Of late a formula that has gained currency at the highest level is "peace through strength", which means, of course, the strength of the United States. This has been proclaimed as its policy.
92.	In both ancient and modern history there have been quite a few attempts to be the strongest and to rule the world. It is common knowledge how these all ended.
93.	Through costly experience mankind has distilled a different notion of what should be the basis of peace and security: the renunciation of the threat or use of force and peaceful co-operation among States. That is what inspired the creation of the United Nations. That is the one and only foundation upon which peace can rest.
94.	The myth of the "Soviet threat", invented to deceive the peoples, is being used on a particularly wide scale today. In his own time V. I. Lenin aptly characterized those who "shout about red militarism . . . pretend that they believe this absurdity and throw charges of this kind right and left", making use of their "skill in concocting false arguments and in throwing dust in the eyes of the masses".
95.	Since the Great October Revolution peace and friendship among peoples has been the sign of our socialist State. We remain faithful to that sign.
96.	There has been a great deal of talk about the USSR being "excessively armed" and having military superiority. It has been claimed that the West needs to dose the existing gap. Yet the facts—and the West is just as well aware of them as we are—confirm beyond doubt that in all areas—strategic nuclear arms, medium-range weapons in Europe, the conventional armed forces of NATO and of the Warsaw Treaty—there is approximate equality between the two sides.
97.	Statements about national security interests are riddled with falsehoods. They are turned inside-out so that those interests conflict with the security interests of other countries and peoples.
98.	Those who like to hold forth about the sanctity of international obligations and to preach morality in relations among States are violating elementary norms of decency, showing disrespect not only for statesmen and States but also for the United Nations. Moreover, as was pointed out in a recent statement by Mr. Andropov, this question as to whether this international Organization, whose task it is to maintain peace and security, can be located in a country in which an unbridled militaristic psychosis is spreading and the good name of the Organization is being insulted.
99.	The contenders for the role of master of the destinies of the world brazenly proclaim as a sphere of their vital interests any particular area of the world they take a fancy to, an area perhaps that is even thousands of miles away from the United States. They are prepared to stake such claims all over the globe.
100.	Thus, the sphere of the United States "vital interests" includes for example, the Middle East, where new anti-Arab deals and designs violating the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people are being pushed through. Step by step the United States is forcing its presence, including its military presence, on that region.
101.	Israel is being encouraged to continue its policy of aggression. Tel Aviv has absolutely no wish to end its adventure in Lebanon. Palestinian refugees in that country are being subjected to acts of genocide. Lebanon has been forced into accepting a capitulation agreement. Attempts are being made to turn the State of Lebanon into a United States-Israeli protectorate and virtually to dismember that country.
102.	Constant pressure is being exerted on Syria to make it change its steadfast course in Middle East affairs.
103.	As a result, the Middle East continues to be a focal point of the danger of war, while a peaceful settlement remains out of reach. All this is damaging to both the vital interests of the peoples of the region and the interests of international security.
104.	The Soviet Union consistently advocates the elimination of the consequences of the Israeli aggression, supports the legitimate rights of the Arab peoples, including the right of the Arab people of Palestine to establish a State of their own, and advocates a just and comprehensive settlement and the convening of an international conference on the Middle East with the participation on an equal footing of all the parties concerned, including the PLO, the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people.
105.	The hegemonistic policy of "vital interests" is well matched by the tools used to implement it. They include the "central command" set up to carry out interventionist operations against almost 20 sovereign States in the Middle East, in South-West Asia and on the African continent.	
106.	The "rapid deployment force", whose mission is to prevent internal changes in various countries if such changes are not to Washington's liking, is in a constant state of readiness. It can be said that the creation of such forces has become a vogue among NATO powers. The events in Chad show where this can lead.
107.	What about the extensive worldwide network of United States military bases? They too are being equipped for use against peoples and countries fighting for their freedom and defending their sovereignty. The areas where this struggle is going on are being surveyed for sites for new military bases.
108.	Aircraft carriers and battleships are being dispatched to the shores of those who are unwilling to submit to foreign diktat. Modern "gunboats" ply the waters off the coasts of many independent countries.
109.	Libya has been chosen as a target for a show of force in the Mediterranean.
110.	A United States armada is stationed in the Indian Ocean. It is no accident that Washington is opposed to the proposal of the non-aligned countries to turn that region into a zone of peace and is impeding the convening of an international conference on the Indian Ocean.
111.	The Soviet Union cannot ignore the threat to its security emanating from that quarter, especially since the United States has broken off and refuses to resume the Soviet-American talks on the limitation and subsequent curtailment of military activities in that region. Our country has been and remains in favour of the withdrawal from that area of all naval forces not belonging to the littoral States and supports the idea of creating a zone of peace in the Indian Ocean.
112.	Large United States naval contingents are concentrated off Central American countries, along both the Atlantic and the Pacific coasts. Land and air forces are being concentrated.
113.	The purpose of all this must be clear to everyone. The whole policy of the United States serves but one purpose: that of containing the liberation movement of the peoples, to obstruct the process of the strengthening of national independence and democratic change in Latin American countries.
114.	At the same time the United States authorities dismiss the very idea that they assume the overt role of policeman. They prefer to call it "assistance to fiends". Yet their friends include anti-popular regimes steeped in blood and infamy.
115.	They are shielding the military junta in El Salvador from the wrath of the people by supplying it generously with money and weapons. They are sending their military advisers there to supervise repressive operations being carried out by the puppet regime.
116.	Brutal pressure is being brought to bear on Nicaragua, whose people have taken a strong stand in favour of the progressive development of their country. Nicaragua is being threatened from the sea, gangs of mercenaries and pirate aircraft are infiltrated into its territory, and neighbouring States are incited to hostility against it.
117.	Washington will not succeed in concealing the fact that it is organizing aggression against Nicaragua, thus posing a threat to peace in Central America and exacerbating the international situation in general.
118.	No amount of demagoguery about the  'scheming of Moscow and Havana" will hide the true causes of the growth of the liberation movement in the countries of the region: imperialist oppression and the poverty of the masses. Do they really expect anyone to swallow their bait? Latin America and the world at large are fully aware of the actual state of affairs.
119.	Washington does not like the fact that the Cuban people are following the path of socialism they themselves have chosen. Cuba's independent policy and its role in the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries go against the grain. Cuba is being subjected to open threats and subversive actions.
120.	Interference in the internal affairs of Central American States must be unconditionally stopped. The proposals put forward by Nicaragua and supported by Cuba open up the possibility of easing tensions and bringing about a political solution of the existing problems. The course pursued in particular by Mexico and other countries of the Contadora Group also appears to be positive in that respect.
121.	There has been much effort to make things look as if the current aggravation of the international situation dates back to well-known events in Afghanistan.
122.	One might assume that even those who were inclined to take that assertion on trust are now beginning to see through its absurdity. The enemies of the Afghan people will not reconcile themselves to the fact that the Afghan people have decided to rid themselves of medieval darkness and have begun building a democratic society.
123.	The situation around Afghanistan—and I am stressing the external aspects of the problem—can be settled on the basis of the proposals made by the Government of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, which proposals the Soviet Union fully supports. Military incursions into Afghanistan as well as any outside interference in its affairs, must be stopped.
124.	The talks being conducted through the representative of the Secretary-General are of positive significance. They would be more fruitful if the Pakistani side were to display greater political foresight.
125.	The policy pursued by outside forces is behind the aggravation of the situation in South-East Asia. That policy is aimed primarily against Viet Nam, Laos and Kampuchea, whose peoples are defending their independence and are engaged in building a new and peaceful life. There have been persistent attempts to pit against the countries of Indo-China their neighbours, the States of the Association of South-East Asian Nations.
126.	The Soviet Union has been and remains on the side of the people of Viet Nam, Laos and Kampuchea. We support the proposals to turn South-East Asia into a zone of peace, good-neighbourliness and co-operation, and we support the initiatives of the three countries of Indo China to open a political dialogue among the States of the region. 
127.	Those who are blowing the so-called Kampuchean question out of proportion are not acting in good faith. The people of Kampuchea have chosen the political system for their country and they themselves choose the ones to make friends with and to rely upon.
128.	Alarming shifts are taking place in the policy of Japan, whose ruling circles seem to be pleased with the role currently assigned to it as NATO's partner in the Far East. The accelerated militarization of that country adds to tensions in the Far East.
129.	This policy can hardly be in the interests of Japan itself and it certainly does not help Japan to develop good relations with neighbouring States.
130.	Our country stands for the development of Soviet- Japanese relations on the basis of the principles of good- neighbourliness and cooperation, but of course this presupposes reciprocity.
131.	The fact that the Korean question remains unresolved does not enhance the stability of the situation in the Far East. The proposals of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea providing for the withdrawal of United States troops from South Korea and the creation of the conditions for the reunification of that country by peaceful means, without outside interference, offer a suitable basis for the settlement of this question. The USSR is in sympathy with this position and supports it.
132.	With the connivance of Western Powers and in the shelter of their neo-colonialist policies, the racist regime of Pretoria has been making aggressive moves against neighbouring States in southern Africa. These include, primarily, the undeclared war being waged against the People's Republic of Angola. Such criminal acts should be condemned and stopped.
133.	The United Nations and the Security Council must bring to bear the weight of their authority in favour of the early decolonization of Namibia, which is still being blocked by South Africa and its protectors. We are confident that the Namibian people will throw off the fetters of colonialism and win freedom and independence for their country, under the leadership of the South West Africa People's Organization their patriotic vanguard.
134.	The people of Micronesia, which the United States is unlawfully attempting to hold on to and to convert into a United States military springboard in the western Pacific, are entitled to express their will freely.
135.	Britain is pursuing a course aimed at the entrenchment of the colonial status and the militarization of the Falkland (Malvinas) Islands, while refusing to negotiate in accordance with the decisions of the United Nations.
136.	A consistently realistic analysis leaves no doubt that the source of the increasingly alarming trends in the international situation resides, as pointed out in a recent statement by Mr. Y. V. Andropov, in the militaristic policy of 6he United States, which is posing a grave threat to peace. The essence of that policy is to try to ensure dominant positions in the world for the United States without taking into account the interests of other States and peoples and to block and reverse the objective process of the world's development.
137.	Such a policy is bound to destabilize the world situation still further and to disrupt normal relations among States. Indeed, what guarantee is there that such an adventurist course will not have irreparable consequences?
138.	The conclusion that must follow is that practical steps are needed to prevent the worst from happening. The dangerous shift in world developments must be redressed so as to bring about an improvement in international relations.
139.	The Soviet Union and the countries of the socialist community are doing everything in their power to achieve that goal.
140.	The socialist society, as one which is confident of its creative potential, has no need of an arms race or war. It has demonstrated and will continue to demonstrate its advantages in the process of peaceful competition with capitalism, and it is our conviction that the future belongs to socialism.
141.	However, we do not seek to impose our world view on anyone, and we believe that ideological differences should not be allowed to affect relations among States. This is a behest of Lenin, and our country will continue to abide by it.
142.	In his statement of 28 September Mr. Andropov said:
"The transfer of ideological contradictions to the sphere of inter-state relations has never benefited the one who resorted to it in external affairs. This is simply absurd and inadmissible at present, in the nuclear age. Transformation of the battle of ideas into military confrontation would be too costly for the whole of mankind." 
Those forces in the United States and some other NATO countries which shape their foreign policies shrink from nothing in painting a distorted picture of the international situation and laying the responsibility for the exacerbation of that situation at the door of the Soviet Union.
143.	Every possible propaganda means has been mobilized to that end. Statements have been pouring forth in torrents from platforms large and small, spewing out uncivilized invective and insults. That technique is used to camouflage their own policy, which is against the interests of the peoples.
144.	They will not succeed in casting aspersions on the socialist system and on our civic, social and moral values. No amount of malicious slander can possibly lessen the honest and peaceful policy of the USSR and of the entire socialist community. We and our allies firmly repudiate these calumnies and will give them the response they deserve.
145.	The development of friendly relations among States, the peaceful coexistence of countries with different social systems, strict respect for the right of peoples to independence and social progress—these are the immutable principles upheld by the socialist countries in their foreign policy.
146.	On the basis of a common world outlook and unity of purpose, these States fully co-operate and co-ordinate their policies in the interests of strengthening the foundations of international peace. They are asserting themselves as a powerful factor which has had a positive impact on world events.
147.	The countries of the socialist community have made the prevention of nuclear war the centrepiece of their foreign policy.
148.	Who among responsible leaders and sober-minded, thinking people in general could fail to agree that this is the most urgent task of our time?
149.	There have already been so many speeches made on this subject, here in the United Nations and elsewhere, since the advent of nuclear weapons, but a solution has yet to be found.
150.	The degree of progress in limiting and reducing nuclear arms will largely determine the nature of the international situation in the forthcoming period.
151.	The present moment is particularly crucial with regard to the situation developing in the matter of the limitation of nuclear arms in Europe.
152.	The plans of the United States to deploy, under cover of a NATO decision, new nuclear missiles in some Western European countries have long been poisoning the political atmosphere on that continent and beyond. The implementation of these plans would have an adverse effect on the entire European and international situation and would significantly exacerbate nuclear confrontation.
153.	We believe that plans and ideas with regard to what is to be done with nuclear weapons—both in their totality and as regards nuclear systems in Europe—should be reversed.
154.	The Soviet Union has supported the most radical solution, that is, that all such nuclear systems, both medium-range and tactical, should be removed from Europe. This would really be the zero option. However, NATO has pointedly made it clear that it is not ready to accept this.
155.	We have proposed that the deployment of any new medium-range systems in Europe be cancelled and that all existing systems, both of the USSR and of NATO, be reduced by approximately two thirds; in other words, two thirds of the road towards totally ridding Europe of these weapons would have been covered.
156.	Surely, it is quite clear what the Soviet Union is calling for in proposing this far-reaching step, which it is of course understood would not be the last word in the solution of this problem.
157.	Why, then, has such a furor been created around the supposed desire of the USSR to gain the advantage in medium-range nuclear systems?
158.	Why has it been concealed that the Soviet side is prepared, as has been repeatedly stated at the very highest level, not to have in Europe a single missile, a single aircraft or a single warhead in excess of what NATO countries would have? _
159.	Where is the objectivity in this approach? Any politician who claims to be objective is supposed to know at least the basic relevant facts and to make an honest assessment of them.
160.	Recently the Soviet Union demonstrated once again its desire to reach agreement. Our initiative envisages that once a mutually acceptable agreement has been reached, including the renunciation by the United States of the deployment of new missiles in Europe, the USSR, while reducing its own medium-range missiles in the European part of our country to a level equal to the number of missiles possessed by Britain and France, would eliminate all the missiles affected by that reduction, including a considerable number of SS-20 missiles.
161.	This renders totally groundless allegations that the USSR intends to retain the SS-20 missiles which are affected by the reduction, merely relocating them from Europe to the East.
162.	Progress at the talks is being held up by the United States position, which in practice amounts to a demand for unilateral disarmament by the Soviet Union while the arsenals of medium-range nuclear weapons of the NATO countries would remain intact.
163.	This position is merely disguised by talk about some flexibility on the part of the United States at the Geneva talks, Another instance of this so-called flexibility
has just materialized, and the deception contained in it has become clear this time too. Mr. Andropov has stated: "To leave aside details, the essence of the so-called new move in the United States position, which is billed as 'superb', boils down to a proposal to agree, as before, on how many Soviet medium-range missiles should be eliminated and how many new American missiles should be deployed in Europe in addition to the nuclear potential already possessed by NATO.
"In brief, it is proposed that we talk about how to help the NATO bloc to upset to its own advantage the balance of medium-range nuclear systems in the European zone. And this move is presented brazenly as something new." 
164.	The unacceptability of such an approach is so obvious as to indicate only one thing: a persistent reluctance on the part of our negotiating partners to search for a solution based on equality and equal security and their intention to station their missiles on European soil at any cost.
165.	Whether or not agreement is to be reached depends on the United States and on NATO as a whole. The current round of Soviet-American talks on the limitation of nuclear weapons in Europe is crucial in this sense.
166.	If Washington's position remains so unconstructive, if Washington goes so far as actually to deploy new United States missiles in Europe, then we of course will have to take countermeasures to preserve the balance of forces on both a European and a global scale.
167.	It is to be hoped that Washington and other NATO capitals will ponder again and again the existing situation and the grave consequences which would result from another twist in the arms race.
168.	The Soviet Union and the Warsaw Treaty States do not seek military superiority, but they will not allow anyone to acquire military superiority over them. They have invariably advocated equality, and equality at the lowest possible level.
169.	The USSR proposals in the negotiations on the limitation and reduction of strategic arms are also based on the same approach. They call for, among other measures, a substantial reduction—a reduction by more than a quarter—of the total number of strategic delivery vehicles with a concurrent reduction to agreed equal limits of the aggregate number of nuclear weapons carried by these delivery vehicles. Our proposals arise from an interest in strengthening overall military strategic stability while strictly observing the principle of equality and equal security.
170.	In the negotiations on the limitation of reduction of strategic weapons the United States has taken a one-sided approach. The position of the Washington Administration is actually aimed at promoting, rather than halting, the strategic arms race in areas where the United States sees advantages for itself.
171.	The fatal consequences of a nuclear war are not to be regarded as fictional conjectures. Its flames would not spare a single country or people.
172.	This is the unanimous view of the most eminent scholars and competent military and civilian experts.
173.	There is and can be no justification for any actions that push the world towards the abyss, or for doctrines and designs based on the admissibility of a nuclear war and the possibility of winning it.
174.	Guided by these considerations, the Soviet Union proposes the inclusion in the agenda of this session of the General Assembly of an important and urgent item entitled "Condemnation of nuclear war". 
177. Such war must be condemned resolutely, unconditionally and for all time as the most hideous of crimes that can be committed against the peoples. We propose that States Members of the United Nations declare as criminal acts the formulation, promotion, dissemination and propagating of political and military doctrines and concepts designed to substantiate the "legitimacy" of the first use of nuclear weapons and in general the admissibility of unleashing nuclear war.
178. The USSR is submitting a draft declaration on this point to the Assembly for its consideration. Its adoption would contribute to generating a political climate which would make more difficult the actions of those who are devising plans calling for the first use of nuclear weapons.
179. The approval of this declaration, following the Declaration on the Prevention of Nuclear Catastrophe adopted in 1981 on the initiative of the Soviet Union, would be a major move by the United Nations towards removing that threat.
180- The condemnation of nuclear war should be effectively backed up by practical steps to curb the nuclear arms race.
181.	In this context a freeze on nuclear weapons by all States which possess them would be an extremely timely and truly tangible measure. The idea of such a freeze has been winning ever-increasing support in the world, in both nuclear and non-nuclear countries.
182.	Our country proposed some time ago, in the course of negotiations on the limitation and reduction of strategic arms and on the limitation of nuclear weapons in Europe, that both strategic weapons and medium-range weapons in Europe be immediately frozen for the duration of the negotiations.
183.	Now the Soviet Union is submitting an urgent and important question entitled "Nuclear arms freeze" to this session of the General Assembly for its consideration.
184.	Our proposal is for a cessation, under effective verification, of the build-up of all components of nuclear arsenals, including all kinds of delivery vehicles and weapons, a renunciation of the deployment of new kinds and types of such weapons, the establishment of a moratorium on all tests of nuclear weapons and of new kinds and types of delivery vehicles, and a halt in the production of fissionable materials for the purpose of creating arms.
185.	A simultaneous quantitative and qualitative freeze on nuclear weapons by all nuclear Powers is the best way to achieve this goal. Our country is prepared to agree that initially this be done by the USSR and the United States on a bilateral basis as an example to other nuclear States.
186.	Giving practical effect to this initiative would markedly raise the degree of trust among the nuclear- weapon countries and would make it possible to move decisively towards breaking the vicious circle of the arms race. This would also promote the reduction and, eventually, the complete elimination of nuclear weapons.
187.	We express the hope that States Members of the United Nations, above all the other nuclear Powers, will take a responsible and constructive stand on our proposal and will support it.
188.	The Soviet proposal entitled "Conclusion of a treaty on the prohibition of the use of force in outer space and from outer space against Earth" submitted to the current session for consideration, has been prompted by concern for preventing the militarization of outer space, an issue which is becoming extremely important.
189.	Positive action on this initiative, which is a follow- up to our 1981 proposal made here at the United Nations for a treaty on the prohibition of the stationing of weapons of any kind in outer space, would be in keeping with the urgent task of ensuring peaceful, and exclusively peaceful, use of outer space in the interest of and for the benefit of all people.
190.	Specifically, the idea is to have a comprehensive ban on the testing and deployment of any space-based weapons designed to destroy targets on Earth, in the air or in outer space.
191.	At the same time, provision is made for the complete renunciation of the development of new anti-satellite systems and the elimination of existing systems. If it would be of any help, we are also prepared to conduct separate talks on anti-satellite systems, including talks with the United States on a bilateral basis.
192.	The obligation assumed by the USSR not to be the first to place any kind of anti-satellite weapons in outer space is yet a further manifestation of its desire to see the problem of such weapons solved in a radical way. This unilateral moratorium declared by our country is to last for as long as other States, in particular the United States, refrain from placing anti-satellite weapons of any kind in outer space.
193.	The initiatives we are taking at this session are a logical extension of our foreign policy, based as it is on principle, and of the convincing peace-oriented proposals that the Soviet Union has been putting forward in recent years.
194.	Among the many other steps taken by the Soviet Union in the key areas of international life, I would like to single out the following.
195.	There is the obligation by the USSR not to be the first to use nuclear weapons. If such an obligation were assumed by all the nuclear Powers, this in practice would be tantamount to a prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons. Our appeal for this remains in force.
196.	There is also the proposal for a treaty on the complete and general prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests. This is consistent with the task of preventing the possibility of developing new kinds of nuclear weapons and of strengthening the non-proliferation regime. The Committee on Disarmament should as a matter of priority take measures with a view to producing the draft of such a treaty.
197.	Furthermore, there are proposals for banning neutron weapons as well as for preparing an international convention on the prohibition and elimination of chemical weapons.
198.	These and other Soviet initiatives aimed at limiting the arms race and bringing about disarmament deserve the most serious attention.
199.	I would like to make special mention of the joint proposal of the socialist countries for a treaty on the mutual non-use of military force and the maintenance of peaceful relations between the States of the Warsaw Treaty and the North Atlantic alliance. The obligation not to use weapons of any kind—nuclear or conventional—that is to say, not to use force at all, would help to dispel mutual fear and distrust. The initiative is gaining increasing prominence in European and world politics.
200.	It has always been our view that the problem of security on the European continent should be treated with particular circumspection. It is precisely here in Europe that the two militarily most powerful groupings of States —the Warsaw Treaty and NATO—are facing each other. 
201.	In view of all this, not a single move in Europe leading to the easing of tensions and the positive development of relations among States could be redundant or superfluous.
202.	It is time to break the deadlock in the talks on the mutual reduction of armed forces and armaments in central Europe, where the level of military confrontation is particularly high. The draft agreement submitted at Vienna by the socialist countries creates real conditions for narrowing the gap between the positions and for reaching agreement.
203.	The Conference on Confidence- and Security- building Measures and Disarmament in Europe scheduled for next January at Stockholm will play an important role in enhancing European and international security. The USSR, to the extent it can, will seek to ensure that the work of the Conference is fruitful and lives up to the expectations placed in it by political circles and broad sectors of public opinion in European and other countries.
204.	The Soviet Union attaches great importance to preserving and expanding its diverse ties with the countries of Western Europe. We intend to continue to maintain relations with them along the lines traced by the. Helsinki Final Act in a spirit of trust and co-operation.
205.	The successful conclusion of the Madrid meeting of representatives of States participating in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe is quite rightly viewed as an indication that the policy of detente, which has been so beneficial for all the peoples of Europe, has a great deal of vitality.
206.	Even though there has been a coolness in relations in the current international situation, this proves that despite considerable divergences in their policies, States with different social systems are capable of solving together problems that are not at all easy to solve, and of searching for and finding areas of agreement.
207.	We would like to believe that appropriate conclusions will be drawn from this, and not only as regards Europe and relations among European States.
208.	This November marks the fiftieth anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between the Soviet Union and the United States. The whole history of Soviet-American relations makes it abundantly clear that whenever these two States have followed a course of mutual understanding and co-operation, their peoples as well as universal peace and security have gained thereby.
209.	It has been our invariable view that the maintenance of normal stable relations between the Soviet Union and the United States is in their mutual interest, and we are in favour of their overall improvement and peaceful co-operation.
210.	It is not through any choice of ours that Soviet- American relations are currently marked by tensions which also affect the international situation.
211.	Today, the urgency of the problem of preventing the threat of war requires that each State be fully aware of the degree of its responsibility and to reaffirm, both in word and in deed, its commitment to the policy of peace. The Soviet Union is in favour of combining our efforts on the broadest possible basis in order to achieve this noble goal.
212.	In the service of peace there is room for action by every country, regardless of its social system, its level of economic development, its size or its geographic location.
213.	Such an important State as the People's Republic of China can do a great deal to ease international tension and eliminate the danger of nuclear war.
214.	The Soviet Union is ready for a political dialogue with China on questions of bilateral relations, as well as on central problems connected with strengthening peace and international security. The positive development of Soviet-Chinese relations, which should be constructed with due account being taken of and mutual respect for the interests of each side and, naturally, without detriment to third countries, would benefit our two peoples and promote a better political climate in the world arena.
215.	We welcome the growing activity of the countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America in defending international peace. They need lasting peace to solve the difficult problems of their national and social development.
216.	The results of the non-aligned forum held this year at New Delhi have once again demonstrated the anti-war and anti-imperialist orientation of the Movement of Non- Aligned Countries.
217.	The policy of peace of India, the current Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement, enjoys well-deserved prestige. The Soviet Union and India are linked by bonds of friendship and close co-operation which are highly valued by both sides.
218.	The Soviet Union pursues a course of principle with regard to the elimination of all manifestations of inequality and exploitation, the building of confidence in economic ties between States and the establishment of just international economic relations.
219.	The peoples of developing States have a real awareness of the magnitude and nature of our assistance in helping them to overcome their economic backwardness. In this area the Soviet Union is doing more than any developed capitalist country.
220.	The Soviet Union supports the demand for the early launching, within the United Nations, of "global negotiations" on major economic problems, as envisaged in decisions of the General Assembly, and also the idea of the convening, within the framework of the United Nations, of an international conference on these subjects.
221.	We have been and we remain sympathetic to the developing countries which are striving to do away with the tyranny of monopoly capital and free themselves from neo-colonialist exploitation.
222.	Our country is firmly on the side of those who, to this very day, are fighting for their freedom and independence, those who are being forced to repel the aggressor or being threatened with aggression. This stand is inseparable from our struggle for lasting peace on Earth.
223.	In the present alarming international situation there is also need for the mobilization of the entire impressive potential of the United Nations as an instrument for maintaining international security. The Soviet Union has supported and will continue to support consistently and resolutely United Nations efforts to remove the threat of nuclear war, curb the arms race, eliminate the existing hotbeds of international tension and prevent the emergence of new ones and to develop relations of peace and co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
224.	No matter how complicated the situation, real possibilities exist for overcoming the difficulties of this period in international relations. Mr. Andropov stressed in his statement of 28 September:
"The Soviet leadership does not hesitate about which line to follow in international affairs in the present critical situation . . . Our course remains aimed at preserving and strengthening peace, lessening tension, curbing the arms race and expanding and deepening co-operation between States. This is the unfailing will of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, of all Soviet people. These are, we are convinced also the aspirations of all peoples."
225.	We appeal to all States to draw sensible conclusions in the existing situation, conclusions that are in keeping with the most profound aspirations of the peoples, and above all to exert efforts urgently to solve the problem common to all mankind, that of eliminating the risk of nuclear war.
226.	People must feel secure about their future.
 

﻿1.	Thank you for granting me the honor of speaking today, on this first day of the general debate at the thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly. Once again I come before this body preoccupied with peace. Last year I stood in this chamber to address the special session on disarmament. I have come today to renew my nation's commitment to peace. I have come to discuss how we can keep faith with the dreams that created this Organization.
2.	The United Nations was founded in the aftermath of the Second World War to protect future generations from the scourge of war, to promote political self- determination and global prosperity, and to strengthen the bonds of civility among nations. The founders sought to replace a world at war with a world of civilized order. They hoped that a world of relentless conflict would give way to a new era, one where freedom from violence prevailed.
3.	Whatever challenges the world was bound to face, the founders intended this body to stand for certain values, even if they could not be enforced, and to condemn violence, even if it could not be stopped. This body was to speak with the voice of moral authority. That was to be its greatest power.
4.	But the awful truth is that the use of violence for political gain has become more, not less, widespread in the last decade. Events of recent weeks have presented new, unwelcome evidence of brutal disregard for life and truth. They have offered unwanted testimony on how divided and dangerous our world is, how quick the recourse to violence.
5.	What has happened to the dreams of the founders of the United Nations?
6.	What has happened to the spirit which created the United Nations?
7.	The answer is clear: Governments got in the way of the dreams of the people. Dreams became issues of East versus West. Hopes became political rhetoric. Progress became a search for power and domination. Somewhere the truth was lost that people do not make war, governments do.
8.	And today, in Asia, Africa, Latin America, the Middle East and the North Pacific, the weapons of war shatter the security of the peoples who live there, endanger the peace of neighbors, and create ever more arenas of confrontation between the great Powers. During the past year alone, violent conflicts have occurred in the hills around Beirut, the deserts of Chad and the Western Sahara, in the mountains of El Salvador, the streets of Suriname, the cities and countryside of Afghanistan, the borders of Kampuchea, and the battlefields of Iran and Iraq.
9.	We cannot count on the instinct for survival to protect us against war. Despite all the wasted lives and hopes that war produces, it has remained a regular, if horribly costly, means by which nations have sought to settle their disputes or advance their goals.
10.	And the progress in weapons technology has far outstripped the progress toward peace. In modern times, a new, more terrifying element has entered into the calculations—nuclear weapons. A nuclear war cannot be won and it must never be fought. I believe that if governments are determined to deter and prevent war, there will not be war. Nothing is more in keeping with the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations than arms control.
11.	When I spoke before the twelfth special session, devoted to disarmament. I affirmed the United States Government's commitment, and my personal commitment, to reduce nuclear arms, and to negotiate in good faith toward that end.
12.	Today, I reaffirm those commitments. The United States has already reduced the number of its nuclear weapons worldwide and, while replacement of older weapons is unavoidable, we wish to negotiate arms reduction; and to achieve significant, equitable, verifiable arms control agreements. And let me add, we must ensure that world security is not undermined by the further spread of nuclear weapons. Nuclear non-proliferation must not be the forgotten element of the world's arms control agenda
13.	At my last visit here, I expressed hope that a whole class of weapons systems—the longer-range intermediate nuclear forces—could be banned from the face of the earth. I believe that to relieve the deep concern of peoples in both Europe and Asia, the time was right, for the first time in history, to resolve a security threat exclusively through arms control. I still believe the elimination of these weapons—the zero option—is the best, fairest, most practical solution to the problem. Unfortunately, the Soviet Union declined to accept the total elimination of this class of weapons.
14.	When I was here last, I hoped that the critical Strategic Arms Reduction Talks would focus, and urgently so, on those systems that carry the greatest risk of nuclear war—the fast-flying, accurate, intercontinental ballistic missiles which pose a first strike potential. I also hoped the negotiations could reduce by one half the number of strategic missiles on each side and reduce their warheads by one third. Again, I was disappointed when the Soviets declined to consider such deep cuts, and refused as well to concentrate on these most dangerous destabilizing weapons.
15.	Despite the rebuffs, the United States has not abandoned and will not abandon the search for meaningful arms control agreements. Last June, I proposed a new approach toward the START negotiations. We did not alter our objective of substantial reductions, but we recognized that there are a variety of ways to achieve this end. During the last round of Geneva talks, we presented a draft treaty which responded to a number of concerns raised by the Soviet Union. We will continue to build upon this initiative.
16.	Similarly, in our negotiations on intermediate-range nuclear forces, when the Soviet leaders adamantly refused to consider the total elimination of these weapons, the United States made a new offer. We proposed, as an interim solution, some equal number on both sides between one and 572. We recommended the lowest possible level. Once again, the Soviets refused an equitable solution and proposed instead what might be called a "half zero option"—zero for us, and many hundreds of warheads for them. That is where things stand today, but I still have not given up hope that the Soviet Union will enter into serious negotiations.
17.	We are determined to spare no effort to achieve a sound, equitable and verifiable agreement. For this reason, I have given new instructions to Mr. Nitze at Geneva, telling him to put forward a package of steps designed to advance the negotiations as rapidly as possible. These initiatives build on the interim framework that the United States advanced last March and address concerns that the Soviets have raised at the bargaining table in the past.
18.	Specifically, first, the United States proposes a new initiative on global limits. If the Soviet Union agrees to reductions and limits on a global basis, the United States for its part will not offset the entire Soviet global missile deployment through United States deployments in Europe. We would, of course, retain the right to deploy missiles elsewhere.
19.	Second, the United States is prepared to be more flexible on the content of the current talks. The United States will consider mutually acceptable ways to address the Soviet desire that an agreement should limit aircraft as well as missiles,
20.	Third, the United States will address the mix of missiles that would result from reductions. In the context of reductions to equal levels, we are prepared to reduce the number of Pershing II ballistic missiles as well as ground-launched cruise missiles.
21.	I have decided to put forward these important initiatives after full and extensive consultations with our allies, including personal correspondence that I have had with the leaders of the Governments of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and Japan and frequent meetings of the NATO Special Consultative Group. I have also stayed in close touch with other concerned friends and allies. The door to an agreement is open. It is time for the Soviet Union to walk through it.
22.	I want to make an unequivocal pledge to those gathered today in this world arena. The United States seeks and will accept any equitable, verifiable agreement that stabilizes forces at lower levels than currently exist. We are ready to be flexible in our approach—indeed, willing to compromise. We cannot, however, especially in light of recent events, compromise on the necessity of effective verification.
23.	Reactions to the Korean airliner tragedy are a timely reminder of just how different the Soviets' concept of truth and international co-operation is from that of the rest of the world. Evidence abounds that we cannot simply assume that agreements negotiated with the Soviet Union will be fulfilled. We negotiated the Helsinki Final Act,' but the promised freedoms have not been provided and those in the Soviet Union who sought to monitor their fulfillment languish in prison. We negotiated a biological weapons convention, but deadly yellow rain and other toxic agents fall on Hmong villages and Afghan encampments. We have negotiated arms agreements, but the high level of Soviet encoding hides the information needed for their verification. A newly discovered radar facility and a new inter-continental ballistic missile raise serious concerns about Soviet compliance with agreements already negotiated.
24.	Peace cannot be served by pseudo-control of arms. We need reliable, reciprocal reductions. I call upon the Soviet Union today to reduce the tensions it has heaped on the world in the past few weeks and to show a firm commitment to peace by coming to the bargaining table with a new understanding of its obligations. I urge it to match our flexibility. If the Soviets sit down at the bargaining table seeking genuine arms reductions, there will be arms reductions. The Governments of the West and their peoples will not be diverted by misinformation and threats. The time has come for the Soviet Union to show proof that it wants arms control in reality, not just in rhetoric.
25.	Meaningful arms control agreements between the United States and the Soviet Union would make our world less dangerous; so would a number of confidence- building steps that we have already proposed to the Soviet Union.
26.	Arms control requires a spirit beyond narrow national interests. This spirit is a basic pillar on which the United Nations was founded. We seek a return to this spirit. A fundamental step would be a true non-alignment of the United Nations. This would signal a return to the true values of the Charter, including the principle of universality. The Members of the United Nations must be aligned on the side of justice, rather than injustice; peace, rather than aggression; human dignity, rather than subjugation. Any other alignment is beneath the purpose of this great body and destructive of the harmony that it seeks. What harms the Charter harms peace.
27.	The founders of the United Nations expected that Member nations would behave and vote as individuals, after they had weighed the merits of an issue—rather like a great, global town meeting. The emergence of blocs and the polarization of the United Nations undermine all that the Organization initially valued.
28.	We must remember that the Movement of Non- Aligned Countries was founded to counter the development of blocs and to promote cooperation between them. Its founders spoke of the right of smaller countries not to become involved in others' disagreements. Since then, membership in the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries has grown dramatically, but not all the new members have shared the founders' commitment of genuine non- alignment. Indeed, client Governments of the Soviet Union which have long since lost their independence have flocked into the Movement and once inside have worked against its true purpose. Pseudo non-alignment is no better than pseudo-control of arms.
29.	The United States rejects as false and misleading the view of the world as divided between the empires of the East and the West. We reject it on factual grounds. The United States does not head any bloc of subservient nations, nor do we desire to. What is called "the West" is a free alliance of Governments, most of which are democratic and all of which greatly value their independence. What is called "the East" is an empire directed from the center, which is Moscow. 
30.	The United States today, as in the past, is a champion of freedom and self-determination for all peoples. We welcome diversity; we support the right of all nations to define and pursue their national goals. We respect their decisions and their sovereignty, asking only that they respect the decisions and sovereignty of others. Just look at the world over the last 30 years and then decide for yourselves whether the United States or the Soviet Union has pursued an expansionist policy.
31.	Today, the United States contributes to peace by supporting collective efforts by the international community. We give our unwavering support to the peacekeeping efforts of this body, as well as to other multilateral peace-keeping efforts around the world. The United Nations has a proud history of promoting conciliation and helping keep the peace. Today, United Nations peace-keeping forces or observers are present in Cyprus, Kashmir, on the Golan Heights and in Lebanon.
32.	In addition to our encouragement of international diplomacy, the United States recognizes its responsibilities to use its own influence for peace. From the days when Theodore Roosevelt mediated the Russo-Japanese War in 1905 we have a long and honorable tradition of mediating or dampening conflicts and promoting peaceful solutions. In Lebanon, we, along with France, Italy and the United Kingdom, have worked for a cease-fire, for the withdrawal of all external forces, and for restoration of Lebanon's sovereignty and territorial integrity. In Chad, we have joined others in supporting the recognized Government, in the face of external aggression. In Central America, as in southern Africa, we are seeking to discourage reliance upon force and to construct a framework for peaceful negotiations. We support a policy to disengage the major Powers from third-world conflict.
33.	The Charter of the United Nations gives an important role to regional organizations in the search for peace. The United States efforts in the cause of peace are only one expression of a spirit that also animates others in the world community. The Organization of American States was a pioneer in regional security efforts. In Central America, the members of the Contadora Group are striving to lay a foundation for peaceful resolution of that region's problems. In East Asia, countries of the Association of South-East Asian Nations have built a framework for peaceful political and economic co-operation that has greatly strengthened the prospects for lasting peace in their region. In Africa, organizations such as the Economic Community of West African States are being forged to provide practical structures in the struggle to realize Africa's potential.
34.	From the beginning, our hope for the United Nations has been that it would reflect the international community at its best. The United Nations at its best can help us transcend fear and violence and can act as an enormous force for peace and prosperity. Working together, we can combat international lawlessness and promote human dignity.
35.	If the Governments represented in this chamber want peace as genuinely as their peoples do, we shall find it. We can do so by reasserting the moral authority of the United Nations.
36.	In recent weeks, the moral outrage of the world seems to have reawakened. Out of the billions of people who inhabit this planet, why, some might ask, should the death of several hundred shake the world so profoundly? Why should the death of a mother flying toward a reunion with her family or the death of a scholar heading toward new pursuits of knowledge matter so deeply?
Why are nations which lost no citizens in the tragedy so angry?
37.	The reason rests on our assumptions about civilized life and the search for peace. The confidence that allows a mother or a scholar to travel to Asia or Africa or Europe or anywhere else on this planet may be only a small victory in humanity's struggle for peace. Yet what is peace if not the sum of such small victories?
38.	Each stride for peace and every small victory are important for the journey towards a larger and lasting peace. We have made progress. We have avoided another world war. We have seen an end to the traditional colonial era and the birth of 100 newly sovereign nations. Even though development remains a formidable challenge, we have witnessed remarkable economic growth among the industrialized and the developing nations. The United Nations and its affiliates have made important contributions to the quality of life on this planet, such as directly saving countless lives through its refugee and emergency relief programmes. These broad achievements, however, have been overshadowed by the problems that weigh so heavily upon us. The problems are old, but it is not too late to commit ourselves to a new beginning, a beginning fresh with the ideals of the Charter.
39.	Today, at the beginning of this thirty-eighth session, I solemnly pledge my nation to upholding the original ideals of the United Nations. Our goals are those that guide this very body. Our ends are the same as those of the founders of the United Nations, who sought to replace a world at war with one where the rule of law would prevail, where human rights were honored, where development would blossom, where conflict would give way to freedom from violence.
40.	In 1956 President Dwight Eisenhower made an observation on weapons and deterrence in a letter to a publisher. He wrote:
"When we get to the point, as we one day will, that both sides know that in any outbreak of general hostilities, regardless of the element of surprise, destruction will be both reciprocal and complete, possibly we will have sense enough to meet at the conference table with the understanding that the era of armaments has ended and the human race must conform its actions to this truth or die."
He went on to say,
". . .we have already come to the point where safety cannot be assumed by arms alone . . . their usefulness becomes concentrated more and more in their characteristics as deterrents than in instruments with which to obtain victory . . .".
41.	As we persevere in the search for a more secure world we must do everything we can to let diplomacy triumph. Diplomacy, the most honorable of professions, can bring the most blessed of gifts, the gift of peace. If we succeed, the world will find an excitement and accomplishment in peace beyond that which could ever be imagined through violence and war.
I want to leave you today with a message I have often spoken about to the citizens of my own country, especially in times when I have felt they were discouraged and unsure. I say it to you with as much hope and heart as I have said it to my own people. You have the right to dream great dreams. You have the right to seek a better world for your people. A11 of us have the responsibility to work for that better world and, as caring peaceful peoples, think what a powerful force for good we could be. Let us regain the dream the United Nations once dreamed.
