72. First of all, please allow me, Sir, on behalf of the Chinese delegation, warmly to congratulate you, the outstanding representative of Zambia, on your election to the presidency of the thirty-ninth session of the General Assembly. I believe that the current session will fulfil its mission successfully under your presidency. I also wish to thank your predecessor, Mr. Jorge Illueca, for his contribution to the thirty-eighth session. At the same time, I should like to take this opportunity to extend a warm welcome to China's close neighbour, Brunei Darussalam, on its admission to membership in the United Nations.
73.	As representatives of the Governments of various countries of the world, we meet here every year to hold extensive exchanges of views on the international situation and to explore ways to maintain world peace, ensure international security and promote human welfare. This fact itself testifies to the importance of the United Nations and its historic mission.
74.	Reviewing international developments over the past year, people cannot but feel worried. With the suspension of their disarmament negotiations, the two nuclear superpowers have stepped up their deployment of intermediate range missiles in Europe and adopted confrontation measures, thus further escalating their nuclear arms race. This poses a new threat to all European countries and deeply disturbs all countries in the world. Over the past year, while the two wars of aggression in Asia went on unchecked, a new armed invasion occurred in Central America. The Middle East is still fraught with crises, and the flames of war in the Gulf region are spreading, causing widespread concern. Basically, the tension and sharp contradiction in southern Africa are not yet relaxed.
75.	Meanwhile, the serious economic difficulties of many developing countries show clearly that the global North South contradiction is sharpening and the gap between the rich and the poor widening. Therefore, I think no one will deny that peace and development, generally speaking, remain the two fundamental questions bearing upon the interests of all the peoples in the world today. I should like to take this opportunity to offer some observations on the two questions on behalf of the Chinese Government.
76.	At present, what concerns and disturbs people most is the threat of a nuclear war. Despite innumerable rounds of talks on nuclear disarmament and a variety of proposals to this end, nuclear weapons have continued to increase and nuclear stockpiles have reached extremely dangerous proportions. As is universally recognized, the two superpowers ought to bear the main responsibility on this question. It is they that possess over 95 per cent of the world's total nuclear weaponry, and it is they alone that are in a position to fight a nuclear war. Should they choose to use only a small portion of their nuclear arsenals, not only would the people of these two nuclear Powers suffer, but the people of the whole world would be plunged into an unprecedented holocaust. For this reason, the numerous small and medium sized countries and people throughout the world are fully justified in demanding that they immediately halt their nuclear arms race and take the lead in drastically cutting back their nuclear weaponry.
77.	The arms race between the two nuclear Powers is extending to outer space. Both sides are stepping up the development of antiballistic missile weapon systems so as to reinforce their strategic offensive capabilities through improved strategic defensive means. Recently they have made some gestures on the question of outer space weapons, each mounting negotiation offensives against the other. However, as people can see, negotiations have not really started and yet each of the superpowers is busy shifting the responsibility for obstructing and sabotaging the talks on to the other. This cannot but arouse suspicion. Do they really intend to hold talks or just to use them to cover up their arms race in outer space?
78.	As the arms race between the two nuclear Powers escalates, the danger of a nuclear war will increase with each passing day. Though already possessing an oversaturation and overkill nuclear capacity, each of the superpowers is doing its utmost to gain supremacy over the other on the pretext of maintaining parity and equal security, lest the other side should surpass it in terms of quantity and quality of nuclear weapons. This practice of progressive escalation of nuclear armaments cannot but arouse doubts as to whether or not they truly have a sincere desire for disarmament. What the people of the world want is genuine and effective disarmament to ensure that people can live in peace and security.
79.	The Chinese Government and people always stand for nuclear disarmament. We hold that efforts should be made to promote progress in conventional as well as nuclear disarmament. The small quantity of nuclear weapons China possesses is solely for the purpose of self-defence. We have solemnly declared time and again that at no time and in no circumstances will China be the first to use nuclear weapons and that it unconditionally undertakes not to use nuclear weapons against nonnuclear States and regions. China has never participated in the nuclear arms race, nor does it intend to participate in that race or to shirk its responsibility in regard to nuclear disarmament.
80.	China's position on nuclear disarmament can be summed up in the following three basic points. First, our fundamental position is the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of all nuclear weapons. Secondly, as a practical step towards nuclear disarmament, we propose that, after the Soviet Union and the United States have taken the lead in putting an end to testing, improving and manufacturing nuclear weapons and have agreed on substantially reducing their nuclear arsenals, a broadly representative international conference should be convened with the participation of all nuclear States to work out together concrete measures for further nuclear disarmament. Thirdly, before all this materializes, for the sake of reducing the threat of nuclear war and showing good faith in nuclear disarmament, all nuclear States should undertake not to be the first to use nuclear weapons and unconditionally pledge not to use, or threaten to use, nuclear weapons against nonnuclear States and nuclear free zones and should reach agreement on mutual non-use of nuclear weapons.
81.	We support the just demand of the people of the world for the prohibition of nuclear weapons and the prevention of a nuclear war, and we appreciate all reasonable proposals conducive to nuclear disarmament and the maintenance of world peace. To promote progress in nuclear disarmament, we are ready to exchange views, within the United Nations or in other forums, on such issues as the prevention of nuclear war, the cessation of the nuclear arms race, and nuclear disarmament, provided all the other nuclear States agree to do so.
82.	As things now stand, we cannot but emphasize that it is of great urgency to demand that the two nuclear Powers stop their nuclear arms race, halt the deployment of new intermediate range missiles, resume negotiations on nuclear disarmament and reduce and destroy those nuclear missiles already deployed in Europe, Asia and elsewhere, and immediately stop extending their arms race to outer space. We stand for the early conclusion of a treaty on the prohibition of the arms race in outer space and a ban on research, testing, development, manufacture, deployment and use of all weapons designed for outer space warfare, as well as destruction of all the existing outer space weapon systems. AH this is highly necessary for demilitarizing outer space and ensuring the peaceful use of outer space by mankind.
83.	China has always opposed the development, production and use of all biological weapons detrimental to mankind. The Standing Committee of the Chinese National People's Congress has already adopted, on 20 September 1984, the decision on China's accession to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction. From now on, China will join other countries to combat all acts that violate this Convention and to work hard for its further improvement so as to advance the whole process of disarmament.
84.	A major cause of the turbulence and tension in the world today is the commission in international relations of such acts as infringement of the sovereignty of other countries, invasion and occupation of their territories, interference in their internal affairs and the use of force against them in violation of the basic principle of the sovereign equality of all States as set forth in the Charter of the United Nations.
85.	We are of the view that all nations, big or small, strong or weak, rich or poor, should be treated as equals and that they should respect one another, live in harmony and engage in mutually beneficial cooperation. The affairs of a country should be determined by the people of that country themselves. External interference of all kinds is illegal and impermissible.
86.	In pursuing their foreign policies, all countries should observe the norms guiding international relations and abide by the Charter. However, the superpowers, on the strength of their size and power, often try to impose their own will on others, thinking they may do whatever they please. Instead of respecting the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of other countries, they have pursued hegemonism and power politics and even carried out armed aggression against weak and small countries. With their support, certain regional hegemonists do not scruple to play the tyrant and have tried to annex territories of their neighbours by force. At this important rostrum of the General Assembly we have condemned more than once the big and small hegemonist Powers for their acts of aggression in violation of the Charter and in breach of international security. Today we once again strongly condemn these acts. People throughout the world will go on denouncing the hegemonists, with full justice, so long as they persist in such acts of aggression.
87.	At present there exist many "hot spots" in the world. Some areas may become "hot spots" tomorrow. Kampuchea is still being trampled upon. The war of aggression against Afghanistan is being intensified and expanded. The situation in the Middle East and Central America remains complex, tense and volatile. In southern Africa, the racists and colonialists are obstructing national independence and threatening the security of neighbouring countries. Some of these "hot spots" have resulted from direct aggression by the superpowers; others have turned into international crises because of their meddling, intervention or behind the scenes support and manipulation. To cool down the "hot spots", relax tensions and resolve contradictions, the prerequisite is to stop interference, control and infiltration by the superpowers and their followers so that the parties concerned in each country or region may seek reasonable solutions to their respective internal problems through peaceful negotiations.
88.	As an old Chinese saying goes, "Common fear leads to unity; common greed leads to rivalry." This is how the world situation stands today. On the one hand, the two superpowers are in rivalry for world hegemony; and on the other, the large numbers of small and medium sized countries are steadily strengthening their unity and supporting one another in the struggle against hegemonism. It is our belief that, in the face of unjust action where the strong bullies the weak and the big oppresses the small, the international community has the responsibility and obligation to speak out for justice and struggle against such acts in order to uphold the norms governing international relations and the principles of the Charter. Far from helping world peace and stability, tolerance towards aggressors will only inflate their arrogance.
89.	The struggles of the world's people against hegemonism, imperialism, colonialism and racism are all just struggles, to which the Chinese Government and people will, as always, give firm support.
90.	We support the position of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea in favour of the holding of tripartite talks, the easing of tension in the Korean Peninsula and the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea, and calling for the withdrawal of United States troops from South Korea.
91.	We support the people of Afghanistan in their heroic struggle to safeguard national independence and resist foreign aggression. We oppose the efforts of the Soviet Union to intensify its aggression against and devastation of Afghanistan, and we demand the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan.
92.	We have always stood by the Arab people and supported their just struggle against Israeli aggression and expansion and the just struggle of the Palestinian people to regain their legitimate national rights; and we demand Israel's withdrawal from Lebanon and from all the other Arab territories it has occupied since 1967.
93.	We support the just struggle of the people of Namibia for national independence and that of the people of South Africa against apartheid and racial discrimination, and we demand the withdrawal of the troops of South Africa from Namibia and the cessation of military threats to the neighbouring countries.
94.	We support the Latin American people and the Contadora Group in their endeavour for peace and stability in Central America and demand that the outside forces stop their acts of military intervention and infiltration in this region.
95.	Here I would like, in particular, to say a few words about the question of Kampuchea. Almost six years have passed since Viet Nam invaded and occupied the independent and sovereign State of Democratic Kampuchea by armed force. Viet Nam refuses to give up its wild ambition of annexing Kampuchea despite repeated setbacks on the battlefield in its successive "dry season offensives". It has time and again played the trick of the so-called partial withdrawal in an attempt to cover up its refusal to withdraw its troops. Its demand to make its troop withdrawal conditional upon the exclusion of one of the patriotic resistance forces of Kampuchea has revealed all the more clearly that to this day it lacks the sincere desire to solve the Kampuchean question.
96.	We hope to see a fair and reasonable solution to the question of Kampuchea at an early date. But a political settlement of this question must be predicated on the withdrawal of all the Vietnamese aggressor troops from Kampuchea. In our view, whether one firmly opposes aggression by Viet Nam and demands the withdrawal of its troops is a fundamental test as to whether one gives resolute support to the just struggles of people subjected to aggression, safeguards the independence of sovereign States, works for the maintenance of world peace and security and upholds the basic norms of international relations. We support the legitimate status and authority of the tripartite Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea, headed by Prince Norodom Sihanouk. We believe that, after the withdrawal of Vietnamese troops, the various Kampuchean political forces will become united on a broad basis and that the Kampuchean people will be able to decide their own future through a United Nations supervised general election, free from outside aggression and interference. We hope to see Kampuchea become an independent, peaceful, neutral and nonaligned State.
97.	The Chinese Government pursues an independent foreign policy, firmly opposes hegemonism and resolutely stands by all peoples who are subjected to oppression and aggression. China will never attach itself to any big Power or group of Powers, nor yield to any outside pressure. We support the Movement of Non Aligned Countries and will not enter into alliance with any big Power. We do not practise the so-called equidistant diplomacy, or play cards or ally ourselves with one big Power against the other. In our external relations we have always followed the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence initiated jointly by China, India and Burma 30 years ago. They are: "mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual nonaggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence". In accordance with these principles, China has improved relations with neighbouring countries, concluded a number of boundary treaties and treaties of peace, friendship and cooperation, and developed friendly relations with many countries in Asia, Africa, Latin America, Europe, North America and Oceania. The Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence have long been written into China's Constitution and are the basic norms China follows in handling its relations with all countries.
98.	We want to live in peace and to develop normal relations with all countries. Even though some countries have differences of one kind or another with us for this or that reason, we are ready to seek a settlement of the differences in a spirit of mutual understanding and consultation so that our relations with them may gradually improve.
99.	Over the past three decades, the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence have stood the test of international vicissitudes and have shown great vitality. Experience shows that they are the basic norms governing relations between States and that they constitute an important weapon against hegemonist interference and aggression. In line with the trend of history and in response to the call of our time, they reflect the aspirations and interests of the people of all countries and have thus won their appreciation and support. Whether relations between countries are good or bad depends on whether or not those countries adhere to the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. If those Principles are adhered to, countries with different social systems can live in amity and engage in friendly cooperation. But if they are not adhered to, even countries with similar social systems may fall out and enter into confrontation or even conflict. We stress the importance of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence here because they are in accord with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations. So long as all countries strictly adhere to the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence in their mutual relations—whether between big Powers, or between big and small countries, or between small countries—it will not be difficult to have international tensions relaxed, and world peace will surely be preserved.
100.	The peace and stability of the world depend on the sustained growth of national and international economies. The development of the third world has become one of the biggest challenges mankind faces today.
101.	This year marks the tenth anniversary of the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, which were adopted by the General Assembly on 1 May 1974, at its sixth special session. At that session 10 years ago [2209th meeting], Deng Xiaoping, Chairman of the Chinese delegation, pledged China's support for the just position of the third world countries calling for the restructuring of the inequitable and irrational international economic order. Despite the persistent efforts made by the developing countries to remove external constraints imposed on their economic development and improve North South relations, the actual results are far from satisfactory. Up to now, global negotiations have not been launched, and the immediate measures for solving the current urgent problems affecting the developing countries have failed to materialize. That this is still a far cry from the objectives set forth in the Declaration and the Programme of Action adopted at the sixth special session of the General Assembly is the result of international obstacles from certain quarters.
102.	At present, economic recovery in the West is still very unsteady, and the economic prospects in developing countries remain grim. These countries are faced with such difficulties as economic stagnation, lack of funds, export restrictions and a heavy debt burden. Their development is being seriously hindered.
103.	The grave difficulties of the least developed countries, particularly the desperate plight of many such countries in Africa, ought to receive close attention and deep sympathy from the whole world. In the areas south of the Sahara, more than 100 million people are plagued by famine, with vast numbers of women and children on the verge of death, as a result of long years of economic stagnation and a drop in per capita income for years running, coupled with the threat of continued drought and reduction of grain output. It is urgent that the international community take concerted action in response to their appeal for help in coping with the difficulties. All developed countries have the obligation to give them adequate aid of all kinds and to help them to overcome their economic difficulties and alleviate the people's sufferings.
104.	The grave debt problem is an urgent issue facing developing countries, Latin American countries in particular. The total volume of external debt incurred by the third world as a whole has reached a staggering figure. Recently, the continued rise in the interest rates of United States banks has further increased the burden on debtor countries. In our view, settlement of the debt problem is a responsibility which the creditor countries, commercial banks and international financial agencies should shoulder together with the debtor countries. The principle for settling this problem should be the promotion of debt service through development. The debtor countries should be asked to adopt readjustment policies aimed at promoting their economic growth, and not to impose a recessionist policy. The creditor countries should take such measures as lowering high interest rates, improving terms of payment, reducing trade restrictions, increasing governmental development aid and providing adequate credits and loans so as to reduce the burden of the debtor countries. We appreciate and support the reasonable proposals put forward by debtor countries for settling the debt problem, and the responsible attitude they adopt. We hope that, through their own sustained efforts and with the attention and help of the international community, the debtor countries will be able gradually to extricate themselves from their difficult position so that the current debt crisis may be eased and overcome.
105.	Protectionism is another urgent problem that affects the economic growth of the developing countries. We have noted with concern that, with the gradual recovery of the economies of developed countries, protectionism is on the rise rather than on the decline. This has become a major obstacle to the economic recovery and development of the developing countries. We call on the major developed countries immediately to adopt effective measures to honour their promises made at various international forums and to halt and reverse the trend of increased protectionism against the developing countries so that the latter may increase their export earnings and create conditions for the expansion of their imports and the growth of their economies.
106.	The world economy is an integral whole. Its stability and growth cannot be based on the affluence of the few and the impoverishment of the many. Without the economic growth of the developing countries, it will be difficult for the developed countries to achieve sustained economic recovery and expansion. The truth is quite obvious and has come to be appreciated and supported by more and more persons with breadth of vision in the West. It is regrettable that some major developed countries have thus far failed to consider in earnest the practical difficulties and urgent demands of the numerous developing countries. These developed countries have remained indifferent to the North South dialogue and global negotiations and have opposed a restructuring of the old international economic order. Theirs is a short-sighted policy.
107.	The Group of 77 has already put forward a series of practical proposals that have taken into consideration the interests of all countries concerned. In order to remove the obstacles in the way of launching global negotiations, they have time and again made major efforts and proposed that the global negotiations be carried out in two phases. The International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade, adopted by the General Assembly in 1980 also gives expression to the common desire of the international community to establish the new international economic order and to revitalize the world economy.
108.	The midterm review and appraisal of the implementation of the Strategy should mainly be aimed at ensuring the full implementation of the series of policy measures set forth in the Strategy. The developing countries have proposed the convening of another international conference on money and finance with the object of promoting development. We hope that all countries concerned will strive to create conditions for the early convocation of that conference. It has been our consistent view that the solution of the immediate problems facing the developing countries should be closely linked with the effort to achieve the long-term objective of establishing the new international economic order. We support all proposals that proceed from the overall interests of the world economy and that help to improve North South relations and promote development in the third world. We are ready to join the other developing countries in making unremitting efforts to establish the new international economic order.
109.	There is great potential for increased cooperation among third world countries with their vast territories and rich resources. While North South negotiations are at a stalemate, South South cooperation among developing countries is making further progress. South South cooperation is not only an effective way for the developing countries to strengthen collective self-reliance in overcoming difficulties and developing their economies, but also an important impetus to the North South dialogue and a booster to their negotiating positions. The Chinese Government is ready to play its part in promoting South South cooperation in accordance with the principles of equality and mutual benefit, stress on practical results, diversity in form and common progress.
110.	Peace and development are two major issues in the world today. They also constitute the primary objectives of China's domestic and foreign policies. The Chinese people are now engaged in a large-scale socialist modernization drive. Their goal can be attained only through long years of efforts in a peaceful international environment.
111.	This year marks the thirty-fifth anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China. We have scored great achievements in these 35 years, particularly in the years since 1979, which have witnessed the sustained growth and coordinated development of China's economy. True, we made detours and paid our price, but we gained experience as well. It is our basic experience that economic development must be based on the actual conditions of one's own country: there is no readymade model to copy and one has to blaze one's own trail. A period of 35 years is far too short for us to turn China, with its large population and vast territory, into a modernized, prosperous and strong socialist country. Thirty five years are not enough, not even another 35 years. China will continue unswervingly to pursue its foreign policy of peace and will make every possible endeavour for the maintenance of world peace.
112.	Based on the idea of "one country, two systems", the Chinese Government has decided to resume the exercise of sovereignty over Hong Kong in 1997 and establish a Hong Kong Special Administrative Region. That is to say, in view of the history of Hong Kong and its realities, a special administrative region where the capitalist system will remain unchanged for 50 years is to be established in a socialist country. This idea, based as it is on China's actual conditions, conforms to a common aspiration and the interests of the 1 billion Chinese people, including our compatriots in Hong Kong. Thanks to their joint efforts, the Chinese and British Governments have reached and initialled an agreement on the question of Hong Kong. The settlement of this question will contribute significantly to the lofty cause of the reunification of our great motherland and to stability and peace in Asia.
113.	China's foreign policy remains firm and consistent, as it is based on the fundamental interests of the people of China and of the rest of the world. We support the people of all countries in their struggle to safeguard sovereignty and independence and develop their national economy and in their struggle against the arms race and the threat of war and hegemonism and in defence of world peace. China wishes to live in peace and develop normal relations with all other countries in the world, including the United States and the Soviet Union. China stands for the easing of world tensions and the settlement of all international disputes through peaceful consultations and earnest negotiations. China also hopes to see the two superpowers, the United States and the Soviet Union, end their nuclear arms race and global rivalry and improve their bilateral relations in the interest of world peace and international security.
114.	Only with peace can there be development. Without development, there can be no stability; and without stability, peace is out of the question. Peace and development are inseparable. They are the two major objectives which the world's people have most at heart and to which the United Nations is committed. We must march towards these two major objectives, however numerous the difficulties and obstacles may be. We are convinced that with the concerted efforts of the people all over the world these objectives can definitely be attained.
115.	It is nearly 40 years since the founding of the United Nations, which, having traversed a path by no means smooth and uneventful, today shoulders an even heavier responsibility for the maintenance of world peace and international security. We appreciate and support the Secretary General’s statement in his report on the work of the Organization expressing the desire and demand to make the United Nations work better. As one of the founders of the United Nations and one of the permanent members of the Security Council, China is determined to make the greatest endeavour possible, together with other countries, to uphold the Charter and strengthen the role of the United Nations.

﻿May I first extend to you, Mr. President, the congratulations of the Federal Republic of Germany on your election to your high office. We consider your personality, your extraordinary talents and your longstanding deep commitment to the cause of the United Nations to be a guarantee of success in accomplishing your difficult tasks. We see in you the representative of a continent and a country with which we are linked by traditionally good and friendly relations.
2.	I wish to express also the gratitude of my country to your predecessor, Mr. Jorge Illueca, for the competent way in which he guided the work of the thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly.
3.	At the same time, I wish to thank the Secretary General and his collaborators for their untiring efforts and for the excellent work done in the past year in the interest of strengthening the United Nations and of peace in the world.
4.	It gives me particular pleasure today to welcome Brunei Darussalam to this forum as a new Member State. We entertain good bilateral relations with Brunei Darussalam and feelings of friendship for it as a member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
5.	In his thought-provoking report on the work of the Organization, the Secretary General recalls the historical achievements of the United Nations. We support his appeal that the great potential of this international Organization for the prevention and settlement of conflicts be utilized and strengthened.
6.	The essential characteristics of the world today are the relationship between the industrial countries of the North and the developing countries of the South and the relationship between the democratic industrial countries of the West and the communist industrial countries of the East. West and East account for the greater part of the North. The North is a house divided, but the South, too, is torn by tension and antagonism.
7.	We need dialogue between North and South. Internal tensions within North and South obstruct and slow down this dialogue. North and South must, therefore, reduce their internal tensions and dedicate their intellectual and material resources to a common effort aimed at the development of an international order based on equality, accommodation of interests and cooperation; an international order in which everyone has a fair chance, in which people can develop their strengths and abilities; an international order in which human rights are respected and social justice is applied to all.
8.	This calls for what I would term an international domestic policy, a policy rooted in the conviction that the future of one's own country can only be assured if the future of all countries is assured.
9.	The most pressing North South problem is the debt crisis in many developing countries, particularly in Latin America. The Presidents of Argentina and Venezuela have made pointed reference to this situation in their statements to the Assembly. The effects of the debt crisis are felt by South and North. Forceful measures of adjustment are required if the debtor countries are to recover economically. Such measures have political and social repercussions in those countries. Jacques de Larosiere, Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund [VMF], said recently:
"It must be realized that there are social and political limits to economic adjustment. The advantages gained by a country from servicing its debts and pursuing a policy of adjustment must be worth the cost in terms of the human misery caused by the adjustment."
Only in this spirit can the problem be solved.
10.	The crisis is confronting the North, too, with difficulties. The necessary import restrictions by the debtor countries mean export reductions for industrial countries. The international banking system has been put under heavy pressure. This crisis can be solved only by the common effort of North and South. The debt servicing commitments and the servicing ability of the developing countries must be brought back into harmony. We need longer-term rescheduling strategies to support successful adjustment efforts by debtors. Mexico has furnished proof that it is possible to adjust successfully. We have reason to hope that the other countries, too, after a painful initial adjustment phase, will manage to move on to the second phase, in which adjustment and growth again go hand in hand.
11.	We shall overcome the debt crisis only through intensive dialogue and cooperative solidarity. We therefore welcome the comprehensive dialogue on this subject scheduled to take place early next year within the IMF and the World Bank.
12.	If economic recovery and development are to take place in the third world, a package of coordinated measures is necessary.
13.	First, the industrial countries must ensure their own stable growth.
14.	Secondly, protectionism must be fought. Markets must remain open and become more open to exports from the third world. Deeds must be made to match the many words in favour of liberalized trade.
15.	Thirdly, the over-high international interest level must fall. How can permanent growth be achieved in the developing countries in the face of today's level of real interest?
16.	Fourthly, the developing countries need more direct investments from abroad. The industrial countries must therefore continue their investment promotion policy. The developing countries, for their part, must create a favourable investment climate. Direct investments not only transfer capital but also transfer technology and managerial experience and provide easier access to the world market. The transfer of technology to the third world must be promoted with the utmost energy. An agreement on balanced codes for transnational enterprises and technology transfers would encourage investment.
17.	Our special attention and assistance must be devoted to the world's poorest countries. Since 1971, the number of least developed countries has risen from 25 to 36. Their economic growth, and especially their food production, are not keeping pace with population growth. Their debt burden is oppressive. They need increasing official development assistance. For this reason, the Federal Republic of Germany has always given particular consideration to those countries in its development cooperation. For years it has been providing them only with grants. !t has remitted the public debt of most of those countries.
18.	The situation is particularly dramatic in many African countries. Africa needs international solidarity and the coordinated efforts of the international community. Food security must be at the heart of these efforts; acute need must be combated; self-sufficiency must be strengthened. Africa is therefore a focus of our development cooperation. Substantially more than 40 per cent of our entire aid is channelled into that continent. In response to the appeal by the Secretary General, we provided an additional 50 million deutsche mark for special food security action in 1984. The World Bank report on sub-Saharan Africa reinforces our intention to allocate additional funds to Africa in 1985.
19.	At this point I should like to appeal to the industrial countries with State trading organizations to bring their development aid into an acceptable relationship with their economic power and their arms expenditure. They too should open their doors more widely to exports from developing countries. They absorb only 5 per cent of all exports from developing countries, whereas more than two thirds of such exports go to the Western industrial States.
20.	According to estimates by the International Conference on Population, held at Mexico City from 6 to 14 August 1984, the population of the world will almost double in the next 40 years, despite ail the efforts to decelerate population growth. That will multiply the number and the seriousness of the problems facing humanity. We who live today bear responsibility for ensuring that our children and grandchildren inherit a world which permits them to live in human dignity. The danger is growing that "spaceship Earth" will no longer be able to carry mankind.
21.	The universal nature of this danger to the future is forcing the community of nations to pool its resources. More people need more food, drinking water, clothing, accommodation, schools, employment, hospitals and recreation facilities. All these things are not even sufficiently available to the majority of those living now. And yet we must provide them for more than 8 billion people, and time is short.
22.	An increase in population will also impose greater strains on the environment. Even now, we see the deserts spreading, valuable soil becoming salinated and eroded, and vegetation in industrial countries being threatened by acid rain. Year by year, numerous types of animals and plants disappear irretrievably. Seas and inland waters are becoming polluted. Hydrocarbon combustion is jeopardizing the world climate. Industrial waste, refuse and sewage pose enormous technical and financial challenges to the world community. UNEP must become the driving force of a worldwide environmental policy. But all international cooperation is in vain if environmental protection is not practised at home, in our own countries. Polluted air and poisoned water do not stop at national boundaries. For this reason, we are talking and negotiating with all our neighbours in the West and the East on joint action to combat the dangers of pollution. The Conference on the Environment, held at Munich, provided an important stimulus for a joint approach on trans-boundary pollution. In the interest of combating environmental pollution at its source, more account must be taken than has been done hitherto, in public and private economic cooperation with the third world, of the need to protect the natural sources of life.
23.	In the densely populated and highly industrialized Federal Republic of Germany, environmental problems surfaced earlier than elsewhere. We have therefore been able to gather extensive experience in recognizing, measuring and fighting pollution. We are prepared to share this experience with all interested parties.
24.	The major tasks of economic growth and environmental protection, development and the provision of food cannot be solved without the potential offered by the new forms of high technology. New technological developments should serve all mankind; they must not be misused as instruments of power.
25.	Gene technology, for instance, will provide the third world with new and great opportunities with regard to agriculture and the solution of the food problem. It appears possible that plants which can yield fruit even in difficult soil and climatic conditions will be developed using the methods of gene technology. It appears possible also that harvests can be considerably increased and the use of chemical fertilizers drastically reduced. The international research programmes to promote agriculture in developing countries must make full use of the opportunities offered by gene technology.
26.	But this very form of technology makes us aware that new advanced technology not only presents us with opportunities but also confronts us with dangers which we must control from the outset. Respect for creation must guide us in our use of gene technology and must make us vigilant about any misguided attempt to manipulate human heredity. Human dignity demands that such manipulation be banned and made impossible from the outset. That is a topic for the United Nations, too.
27.	Cooperation between North and South must reduce the prosperity gap, overcome hunger and want, disease and ignorance, and ensure respect for fundamental human rights.
28.	The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights must occupy a central place in the work of the United Nations. Peace and human rights belong together. Anyone who violates human rights is thereby breaking commitments he has assumed on the basis of the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenants on Human Rights; he is infringing international law.
29.	For the Federal Republic of Germany, an active policy of support for human rights is a pillar of its policy for peace. A draft convention against torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment—a draft convention which we support and to which we attach great importance—has been submitted to the General Assembly. We appeal to all Member States to accept the draft convention and the control procedures for which it provides and to let it become effective. Torture, one of the most dreadful scourges of mankind, must be banished from the world. No one should be delivered into the hands of torturers, and no torturer should go unpunished.
30.	We welcome the favourable reaction to our proposal for an optional protocol prohibiting capital punishment. I ask for further constructive cooperation. I address my appeal also to those States which do not yet want to give up the death penalty.
31.	Racism, particularly	in South Africa, constitutes a fundamental violation of human dignity. We appeal to the Republic of South Africa to clear the way for the realization by all its citizens of elementary human rights.
32.	The United Nations needs institutions that permit better protection of human rights. The appeals for the appointment of a high commissioner for human rights and for the institution of a court of human rights point the way to this goal.
33.	The Charter of the United Nations represents a magnificent effort to overcome the inherited structures, based on the possession and projection of power, and to create new structures for peace. But the United Nations has not yet united the nations of the world. The world is still marked by rivalry between nations and power blocs, rooted in distrust. That is the result of bitter historical experience. World history has taught nations to be prepared for the possibility of force from outside.
34.	Force is still being used. The Afghan people long for the right to preserve in peace their independence, their self-determination and the faith of their fathers. Laos and Kampuchea are fighting for their independence. In the Gulf war, people are still dying a senseless death. Central America is riven by tension from without and within. The independence of Namibia is still being withheld. In South Africa, people are discriminated against because of their colour. There will be no rest for the Middle East as long as violence and not negotiations are the order of the day. Without an undertaking to refrain from the use of force, without the realization by the Palestinian people of their right to self-determination, without recognition of the right of all States, including Israel, of their right to exist, there will never be a lasting and just peace in the Middle East.
35.	We must strengthen the peace-making influence of the United Nations. The Secretary General has rightly pointed out that there should be less talk about the inefficiency of the United Nations and more about a lack of willingness on the part of States to tap its potential. To this end, the principle of universality must remain inviolate. Despite all our differences, we must always so conduct the dialogue as to make its continuation seem desirable to all participants. We all know how difficult it is to settle or even to restrict conflicts once they have broken out. That is why conflicts must be nipped in the bud. For this purpose we need an effective early warning system permitting the Security Council and the Secretary General to act swiftly. We support the proposals made by the Secretary General on this matter.
36.	In the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization, the Federal Republic of Germany, along with other delegations, has submitted proposals on the prevention of international conflicts.
37.	Our refugee initiative, aimed at reducing the horrendous flow of refugees through political cooperation, also serves the purpose of stifling potential conflicts.
38.	Observance of the prohibition of the use of force is the first step that must be taken. An undertaking not to use force does not mean renouncing convictions, values and interests. It focuses on the form and the means used by States to settle their differences. The undertaking to refrain from the use of force is one of the fundamental and indispensable principles for ordering the peaceful coexistence of States. The policy of the Federal Republic of Germany is a policy for peace, embedded in the commitment to refrain from using force. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization, to which we belong, is built on this foundation. In their Bonn Declaration of 10 June 1982, the allies stated:
"Our purpose is to prevent war and, while safeguarding democracy, to build the foundations of lasting peace. None of our weapons will ever be used except in response to attack."
39.	We know that military strength alone cannot guarantee a peaceful future. Disarmament and arms control are therefore integral parts of our security policy. In Europe, East and West face each other with huge arsenals; throughout the world, enormous resources, which could otherwise help us and the developing countries shape our future, are spent on arms. The prevalent distrust can be measured by reference to world arms expenditure figures. Confidence-building and disarmament are demands addressed to the entire international community, to East and West, to North and South alike.
40.	Today, no region of the world can find peace and security on its own. Arms control in Europe strengthens peace and stability in the world. The worldwide and regional dialogue on disarmament and arms control has not been interrupted. Pessimism and resignation must not doom our efforts, which must be guided by the will to utilize the available instruments to pursue an active policy. That means, above all, that negotiations must take place. This principle must apply everywhere and in respect of all weapons. No weapons system must be excepted. No one may consider only his own security interests; the legitimate interests of others must also be acknowledged. No one may seek security at the expense of others.
41.	We welcome the fact that President Reagan, speaking from this rostrum [4th meeting], proposed to the Soviet Union a comprehensive disarmament dialogue. That dialogue is in the interest of all peoples. The United States and the Soviet Union bear a particular responsibility on account of their nuclear potential and their obligations deriving from the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
42.	Like the President of the United States, we favour the resumption of nuclear arms negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union without preconditions. We support the American desire for drastic reductions in the field of intercontinental strategic weapons. As hitherto, we want global renunciation of land based intermediate range missiles by the United States and the Soviet Union. We support every balanced agreement made to this end.
43.	We call for arms control with regard to outer space while there is still time.
44.	At the Vienna Talks on Mutual Reduction of Forces, Armaments and Associated Measures in Central Europe, we want to achieve parity in conventional forces in Central Europe by means of mutual troop reductions.
45.	We urge the participants in the Conference on Confidence and Security building Measures and Disarmament in Europe, meeting at Stockholm, to agree to concrete, militarily significant and verifiable measures for security and confidence-building. Such measures must apply to the whole of Europe.
46.	We advocate that the undertaking to refrain from the threat or use of force be made concrete and be reaffirmed within the mandate given to the Stockholm Conference. It must apply among all States within the alliance systems and to the actions of participating States throughout the world.
47.	We call for a fresh initiative in the process of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe. The Finnish proposal that the tenth anniversary of the Helsinki Final Act be marked by a conference at a political level merits support.
48.	We appeal to all Members of the United Nations to enter into the process of confidence building in all parts of the world in a practical and serious manner, thereby improving worldwide the conditions for disarmament and arms control.
49.	It remains important, in view of the universal increase in military expenditure, to publish military budgets and make them comparable. We call for a United Nations register providing information on arms exports and imports throughout the world.
50.	We want a worldwide, comprehensive and verifiable ban on chemical weapons. It is not sufficient to ban chemical weapons in Europe only, thereby preserving the option of using them in other parts of the world.
51.	The commitments entered into as a result of disarmament negotiations must be verifiable. The Federal Republic of Germany will contribute its share to achieving success in disarmament negotiations.
52.	Europe has experienced the horrors of two world wars. The European Community was born of these experiences. We seek European Union. The peoples joined in that union will develop their strengths and capabilities in such a way that Europe can take its rightful place in the world.
53.	Franco German friendship is an example of how the lessons of history can be taken to heart. The joint commemoration by the Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany and the President of the French Republic of the war dead at the Verdun military graves is a symbol of reconciliation and friendship.
54.	The States of the European Community want to master the future together. But Europe is more than the 10 States—soon to be 12—of the European Community. We seek cooperation with all the States of Europe. We Germans are aware of the responsibility deriving from the history of our country and from our situation at the heart of Europe. The Federal Republic of Germany has linked its fate firmly to that of Europe. Our policy is a policy for peace in Europe. With the other States participating in the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, we want to create, on the basis of the Helsinki Final Act a rueful order in Europe in which cooperation can develop freely between States, irrespective of the differences in their systems. We seek a peaceful order in which, as envisaged in the Helsinki Final Act, nations, can determine their own fate and live free from the fear of violence, threats and restriction of their liberty and in which people can enjoy the exercise of their lawful rights and the fruits of peaceful international exchanges.
55.	It is a policy for peace in Europe too when we declare, as stated in the letter on German unity, that our political aim is to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will regain its unity through free self-determination.
56.	The treaties concluded between my country and our Eastern neighbours in the 1970s cleared the way for the Helsinki Final Act. We stand by every word of those treaties. The Federal Republic of Germany respects the territorial integrity of all States within their present boundaries. It proceeds from the existing situation in Europe. It makes no territorial claims on anyone and will not do so in the future either. The Federal Republic of Germany considers the borders of all States to be inviolable and will continue to do so. We call upon all States to educate their young people in peace and in respect for other nations and other opinions. Education in hatred jeopardizes peace; polemics against the peaceful intentions of other nations poison the political atmosphere.
57.	The Federal Republic of Germany wishes to breathe life into the treaties concluded with its Eastern neighbours. We want the Helsinki Final Act to be implemented in all its parts. We want to continue the process of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe. That process has improved the situation in Europe; it has stood up under severe strains in the international climate. The contribution of all participants in the Conference, large States as well as small, will remain indispensable to security and cooperation in Europe. We want cooperation with all the States adherents to the Warsaw Pact. We want cooperation—political, economic, technological and environmental. We want close cultural exchanges.
58.	We shall resolutely and patiently pursue our charted course towards compromise and understanding. We shall not let ourselves be disheartened or confounded. We shall consistently pursue with the Soviet Union the dialogue and cooperation based on the Treaty of Moscow—and continued even during difficult times. That Treaty, like the long-term economic agreement, opens up great vistas that must be exploited.
59.	The desire for German Polish understanding and reconciliation determines our thinking and action towards the Polish nation. The Treaty of Warsaw, concluded on 7 December 1970, breached once and for all the vicious circle of injustice and retaliation. It was one of the most important milestones in German and European post-war politics.
60.	Our cooperation with the German Democratic Republic, even at times of East West tension, is an expression of the historically rooted responsibility of both German States for peace in Europe. This responsibility must also prove its worth in the joint solution of human and technical problems. People must be able to experience personally the benefits of detente. In this respect we have made progress. It is our wish that both German States should continue along the route marked out by the Basic Treaty normalizing relations and the Helsinki Final Act. It is our wish that they should set an example by meeting their obligations under the Final Act. In this way we shall live up to the requirement inherent in the recognition of our joint responsibility.
61.	An improved relationship between the United States and the Soviet Union is vitally important to East West relations and to world peace. Contemplation of the principles of equality and mutual consideration embodied in the United States Soviet declaration of 1972 could smooth the way for such a development. President Reagan, in his statement to the Assembly [4th meeting], expressed the determination of his country to cooperate with the Soviet Union in securing world peace. That ought to meet with a favourable response from the Soviet Union. We can offer no substitute for dialogue between the United States and the Soviet Union, but we, like other medium and small sized States, make our contribution to improving East West relations, and it is no mean contribution.
62.	Europe, so often afflicted by wars and the source of many wars in other parts of the world, must today serve as the starting point for initiatives aimed at peace and cooperation in all parts of the world. For this reason, as a member of the European Community, the Federal Republic of Germany also relies in its relations with the third world countries on a policy that seeks, as stated in the second Lome Convention, "to reinforce, on the basis of complete equality between partners and in their mutual interest, close and continuing cooperation in a spirit of international solidarity".
63.	We seek friendship and partnership on an equal basis with the countries of the South. We support the principle of genuine nonalignment because it preserves independence and provides protection from foreign hegemonic aspirations. The Movement of Nonaligned Countries is increasingly becoming a stabilizing factor in international politics.
64.	The most populous country in the world, the People's Republic of China, is of great importance to world stability. We are gratified to note that China is opening its doors to Asia and to the world at large and is exercising its co-responsibility for international peace and cooperation.
65.	The regional groupings offer small and medium sized States the opportunity to pool their resources and together to maintain their independence. The European Community cooperates closely with the States members of ASEAN and the Andean Pact within the framework of cooperation agreements. We advocate close cooperation between the members of the European Community and the States of the Gulf Cooperation Council. We are playing our part to ensure that the Euro Arab dialogue will be further intensified.
66.	In a few days the Foreign Ministers of the States members of the European Community, together with Spain and Portugal, will be meeting at San Jose with their counterparts from the countries of Central America and the Contadora Group to launch a political dialogue and to lay the foundations for economic cooperation between the European Community and Central America.
67.	North and South must talk to one another, negotiate with one another and find joint solutions to the present and future problems of humanity. The North South dialogue will be successful only if it is conducted in awareness of the equal dignity of all the world's cultures. The subject of cultural exchanges between North and South must not be banished to the fringe of talks; it must be at the very heart of such talks. Our world is full of cultural prejudices that are often rooted in ignorance. We all have more to learn from one another. The North may be richer than the South, but it is not thereby wiser, more human or more cultivated. The cultures of North and South must each recognize the equality of the other in its own cultural dignity. It is a matter of the mental attitude with which we encounter other peoples.
68.	How often has arrogance towards other peoples arisen from contempt for their cultural identity and achievements. To understand a country, one must understand its culture. Experience of the equivalence of cultures is not inbred in peoples. It requires intensive cultural exchanges. We are prepared to give; we are prepared to take. Cultural exchanges contribute to the establishment of a peaceful international order.
69.	During these days the nations of the world have turned to United Nations Headquarters in New York in hope and anxiety. They are uneasy. It is not merely the presence of tensions that worries them, it is the apparent increase in those tensions, and they wonder what will happen if the tensions continue to increase.
70.	The problems confronting us are serious and difficult. No one expects us during these days to discover a magic formula that will solve them all at once. But the nations are right to expect one thing, namely, that we should give signs of hope, signs that the Governments of the world have recognized the danger, signs that they can halt the rising tensions. The nations do not want to hear us repeating long familiar, irreconcilable positions or apportioning blame. They want to know what specifically we intend to do in order to serve the common cause of peace. We must not disappoint them.
71.	I have explained how my country fulfils its responsibility. The Federal Republic of Germany faces the challenge of peace with the confidence of a country whose citizens can freely develop and freely help to build a humanitarian and just world. This great aim of a just and humanitarian world should guide us as we celebrate the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations in 1985 and as we observe in 1986 the International Year of Peace.

﻿First of all, I should like to pay a tribute to you, Sir, as President of the General Assembly. Your farsighted opening address matches our own concerns and positions on many points. Through you I should also like to salute the country you represent here, Zambia, and its President, Kenneth Kaunda, a tireless advocate of peaceful evolution in southern Africa.
117.	It is an honour for me to lead, for the fifth time, the French delegation to a session of the General Assembly. This session, which welcomes the admission of the 159th Member of the United Nations, Brunei Darussalam, is a noteworthy opportunity also for me to affirm from this rostrum, as did the President of the French Republic at the thirty eighth session and the Prime Minister at the thirty-seventh session the importance France attaches to the building of an international order defined in terms of law and watched over and nurtured by the organs of the United Nations family: the  Security Council, which enjoys permanent decision-making power, as defined in the Charter of the United Nations; the General Assembly, which gives each State the right of political expression; and the specialized agencies, including those of Bretton Woods, whose spheres of jurisdiction have been and will continue to be specified and enlarged as necessity dictates.
118.	The duty of the international community, of the United Nations, is to provide a framework, a means of expressing the aspirations of our peoples to justice, security and independence and to try to find answers to the problems that arise among our nations. If the United Nations fails in this task, current conflicts will worsen and others will be added to them; whole regions of the world will become arenas of confrontation. This we know. We also know—and I will return to this point later—that the whole of economic life is threatened by potentially explosive situations that might be catastrophic for some and would spare none.
119.	This is another way of saying that my Government once again this year endorses the Secretary General's report on the work of the Organization [A/39/1] and wishes to be associated with that veritable manifesto for the multilateralism and universality of the United Nations. We also note the frankness and clear-sightedness of the criticisms that he has deemed it necessary to express of the work of the United Nations itself: his condemnation, for example, of the proliferation of resolutions that go unapplied, or his concern at the ever-growing politicization of a great many technical and economic problems.
120.	These preliminary remarks are especially important in view of the fact, which we should have the honesty to recognize, that these past 12 months have not brought much satisfaction to most of the world's peoples. The train of poverty has lengthened as a result of economic deterioration and the contraction of world trade. Natural disasters have at times assumed catastrophic proportions. In another forum—the Development Committee of the World Bank—my colleague, the Minister of Cooperation and Development, has described the tragedies of Africa. Think of the legions of refugees driven from their villages, and sometimes their countries, by hunger, fear and the threat of annihilation. Think of the famine and the encroaching desert. It is essential to recognize forthwith that the problems of that continent are priority problems and to underscore the importance of meetings on this subject, from the Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa, held at Geneva from 9 to 11 July 1984, to the debate on the World Bank's interesting special report on Africa.
121.	Poverty and decline, which seem to many irremediable, are affecting other parts of the third world also. All too often, and almost everywhere, hope of improvement is fading, expectation of a new development is waning, resignation is setting in, despair is becoming more widespread.
122.	In short, I repeat, negative trends seem to me to have cast dark shadows the last few months. At best, there has been stagnation; in general, ground has been lost and the overriding feeling is not optimistic among the weak and the poor, which is to say the vast majority of the world.
123.	Things are scarcely better on the political level. There is the impression that nothing is being resolved between East and West. For months the superpowers have refused to talk with each other. One of them sought to make the resumption of the negotiations which were broken off for more than a year subject to preconditions that prejudged the outcome. Advice was given to the closest allies to put their contacts on hold as well. Admittedly, a ray of hope has filtered through at this session—the encouraging news that meetings have finally been scheduled.
124.	Elsewhere, wars and the threats of war persist. The bloody conflict between Iran and Iraq continues; the Israeli Arab confrontation shows no sign of abating; the integrity of Lebanon has not been restored; the independence of Namibia is being continually postponed; Cyprus is torn apart; foreign forces in Afghanistan and Cambodia have not been withdrawn; insecurity and the fear of outside intervention still dominate the scene in Central America. The single bright spot is the decision on the immediate withdrawal of all foreign forces from Chad, a move that should enable the people of that country to shoulder their responsibility fully and to regain their unity, on the initiative of their Head of State.
125.	How can we fail to remember, above and beyond the violations of the rights of peoples and States that I have just cited, the increasing attacks on human rights? A id we hear growing and swelling the demand of ever larger numbers of people for justice, freedom and equality. Yes, these past 12 months have been sad and discouraging.
126.	In the face of such a situation, which has deteriorated over the years—and I am referring particularly to the world economic disorder, which I shall refer to again—the international community has no right to remain silent. Still less has it the right to remain inactive if it does not wish to dash the hopes of the peoples of the industrialized world, born in the aftermath of the massacres of the Second World War, and the hopes of the developing countries, born in the wake of the great wave of independence.
127.	I should now like to review the various items.
128.	In the East West confrontation, no one will deny that primary responsibility in the normal course of events belongs to the two superpowers. Therefore, we expect those Powers to re-establish contacts and dialogue.
129.	The first objective has to be, as the President of the United States said the day before yesterday, to reverse the arms build-up, particularly the build-up of nuclear weapons, to avoid unleashing a new arms race triggered by the portentous announcement of imminent progress in new technologies—I am thinking in particular of space technology—and to revitalize and actively pursue the process of bringing about balanced and controlled arms limitation.
130.	Concerned members of the international community can and must contribute actively to such progress. France, for its part, attaches great importance to the Conference on Confidence and Security building Measures and Disarmament in Europe, meeting at Stockholm, which should make it possible to restore a certain level of confidence among the countries of Europe, from the Atlantic to the Urals, in the field of conventional forces. In any case, my country will be active in the quest for a balance of forces, which is a prerequisite for peace. Its own military nuclear effort will remain exclusively on the level of defensive deterrents. Last year, at the thirty eighth session, speaking from this rostrum, President Mitterrand outlined our position on the various discussions on this subject, namely, the strategic arms reduction talks and the negotiations on intermediate range nuclear forces, which we hope will be resumed at an early date, and our participation in possible nuclear disarmament negotiations, once existing arsenals have been reduced to quite different and less unreasonable proportions and once other conditions have been met. Our position has not changed since then.
131.	France also intends to participate actively in international efforts to prevent, under effective monitoring, particularly serious developments—I would remind members of our active participation in the discussions on chemical weapons—and in the efforts to control the new alarming and destabilizing progress in the most disturbing areas of future technology. That is the reason for the initiative taken by France at the recent meetings of the Conference on Disarmament, at Geneva, regarding the use of space for antimissile and anti-satellite activities. It is also the reason for our considerable interest in any initiative on this matter. 
132.	France, a loyal partner in the Atlantic Alliance—need I reaffirm this?—nevertheless retains its freedom of judgement and action. Together with its close partners, it will encourage closer relations among the peoples of Europe, whom history united for centuries and then divided over the course of the last 40 years.
133.	The peoples of Europe themselves have indeed the desire, the right and the possibility of contributing decisively to the easing of tensions. Let the right of each to express his own identity and freely to choose his future be recognized and we shall see new ties developing among European countries of different and even opposing ideologies and alliances, because our peoples want to know one another better, to rediscover together the old elements of their common past, to expand economic and cultural ties and to seek occasions for meetings and direct contact among individuals.
134.	It is important, moreover, that the differences between the superpowers, the rivalry between East and West, do not prevent the rest of the world from living its life. We are convinced of the importance of nonalignment when it is in keeping with the national will. True nonalignment can and should strengthen international stability. We are determined to help this. My President underscored this point a year ago when he actively took part in the Meeting of Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Heads of Delegation of the Nonaligned Countries held in New York from 4 to 7 October 1983 and organized by the President of the Movement of Nonaligned Countries, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, Prime Minister of India. Members will have noted that relations between my country and the nonaligned countries have increased and gained in trust and depth over the past few years.
135.	The desire to affirm the identity of each quite naturally includes systematically encouraging the expansion of relations among neighbours, thus furthering regional cooperation. France, which has known so many wars with its neighbours over the centuries, has rediscovered the close friendship that is only fitting with its great German neighbour. It has embarked irreversibly on the construction of the European Community in all areas—commercial, economic and political It has found in that entity a greater strength and a better potential for hearing what is happening in the world and for being heard in it. In this way, France confirms and strengthens its capacity for independence.
136.	What France wishes and accomplishes for itself and its neighbours it also wishes for all others in the world. Every time a possibility of regional organization appears, my country will support it, regardless of the location. Members should not be surprised, therefore, at our commitment to the Organization of African Unity [OAU], the League of Arab States and also, farther from Europe, ASEAN, the Andean Pact countries, and others.
137 Quite naturally also, cooperation among regions should be encouraged. This is one way to advance relations between neighbouring countries while still preserving the real independence of all, even the weakest among them and those experiencing a period of difficulty or needing external aid at this time. Members must not think that the second Lome Convention linking the 10 member States of the European Community to 65 African, Caribbean and Pacific countries is the result of mere chance, any more than is the meeting to be held at San Jose the day after tomorrow which is to bring together the 10 member States of the European Community, the two candidates for admission—Spain and Portugal—and the five countries of Central America in the presence of the four countries that are members of the Contadora Group—and I could give many other examples. This is a well-thought-out policy.
138.	In the global context, it is possible to trace the main lines of the action that my Government finds desirable in the face of today's major issues.
139.	First of all, I should like to refer to the subject of warfare, and above all where there has been the greatest bloodshed in the past two years—I mean, between Iran and Iraq. The repeated appeals of the United Nations, and particularly the resolutions of the Security Council, must be heeded by the two belligerents and not just by one of them.
140.	The use of inhumane weapons should be renounced so as to spare the civilian populations. A tribute should be paid to the Secretary General for his efforts and the initial results he has obtained. Everything possible must be done to bring about a return to the customary freedoms in that region, particularly freedom of navigation. In this way, progress will be made towards ending this terrible connect, which will cease to have a raison d'etre once the parties return to the borders recognized by the international community and once the issues in dispute can, for the most part, be dealt with at the negotiating table.
141.	Elsewhere, there are grave tensions that could lead to war: I am referring to Cyprus, for example, whose sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity cannot be called into question. We are encouraging the Secretary General in his noteworthy efforts.
142.	I am also thinking of Central America. The Central American countries should be encouraged to settle their mutual disagreements through a series of discussions and arrangements among themselves, in accordance with the principles set forth in the revised Contadora Act on Peace and Cooperation in Central America, with all interference in internal affairs and all outside intervention rejected. The political forces should thus be able to voice their own opinions and the republics of Central America should be helped finally to overcome economic and social situations that are a legacy of the past. Threats and aggression are no longer acceptable.
143.	I am also referring to peoples that have been divided, the heroic people of Korea, for example. Over the centuries they have asserted their identity and unity only to find themselves subsequently drawn by war into an intolerable division, while in fact they have a right to unity. We hope the Koreans will soon sit among us as other peoples do.
144.	Then, there are places where human rights are violated by outside intervention or constraints, by the unwanted occupation of foreign troops: in Afghanistan, where armed intervention by foreign forces increases as resistance by the people increases; in the Middle East, where the Palestinian people are suffering and despair of seeing their rights recognized, of knowing at long last the homeland which will be theirs; where the State of Israel, for lack of guaranteed security—which is its inalienable right— within the borders that have been recognized by the international community, pursues a policy incompatible with the indispensable recognition of the rights 
of the other peoples of the region; where Lebanon, which has already suffered so much, is unable to secure respect for the Security Council resolutions concerning the southern part of its territory and to obtain an end to all foreign presence; in southern Africa, where Council resolution 435 (1978), on Namibian independence, continues to be disregarded, even defied, while the war continues in Angola, with the presence and participation on that territory of South Africa's army; in Western Sahara, whose people have a right to self-determination; in Cambodia, that country of a great and ancient civilization, bled white by appalling genocide and now occupied by its neighbours to the east.
145.	What horrors these clear violations of the rights of peoples and States have entailed! And all too often these violations go hand in hand with scorn for human rights, with the negation of fundamental values that should be the basis of any society, as the Charter of the United Nations has recognized and affirmed.
146.	France will speak out, will voice its condemnation, will take action wherever the lives and dignity of individuals are threatened, wherever people are held in constraint and deprived of their basic freedoms. It will continue to express its reprobation everywhere, with the same words and the same conviction. This pledge holds true for Governments and countries that are very different from one another—from the countries that signed the Helsinki Finn Act to the countries east and south of Africa and on the South American shores of the Pacific. Everywhere we shall strive to alleviate suffering and obtain the freedom of those who are unjustly imprisoned, those whose names are known and stand as symbols, from Shcharansky to Mandela and the countless others who are anonymous expiatory victims.
147.	The United Nations deserves support and a tribute on this level: the Commission on Human Rights; conventions that are constantly being refined and improved on; resolutions condemning racism and discrimination. It is also beginning—and I welcome this—to stress the global nature of the problem, by opening debate on economic and social rights and thereby moving, in conditions that France finds right and opportune, towards an enlargement of the definition of fundamental human rights. Such progress of law at the world level deserves constant encouragement.
148.	But there are other serious threats to fundamental human rights that have to be considered. We must ask ourselves why the current world economic crisis is so serious and our market economy system powerless to contend with that crisis and resolve the economic disorder that has prevailed in the world for a number of years now.
149.	After 1945, a certain economic order governed the industrialized world. There was monetary order, agreed upon at Bretton Woods; although it was, of course, threatened when the dollar left the gold standard, order nevertheless persisted and exchange parities were relatively stable. There was budgetary order; the industrialized countries made every effort to balance their budgets. There was a degree of predictability in the prices of raw materials. There was order in trade—admittedly, largely fuelled by the needs of reconstruction after the massive destruction of the war and the population growth that immediately followed it. All these elements of order opened the door to a category of society that in the nineteenth century was called the proletariat—in other words, the most underprivileged in the industrialized countries—and, since then, the developing countries.
150.	It seemed that growth was assure and would go on forever. Countries that had untapped or inadequately developed resources in the world decided—quite rightly—to equip themselves to exploit their wealth. They invested in people. Hundreds of thousands of young persons were sent off to receive higher education; infrastructures were developed; business capital was increased.
151.	In all our countries in Europe and in the third world, a larger production apparatus emerged, accompanied by more onerous administrative, economic and social structures. This was achieved at the price of a high level of indebtedness—a level justified, however, in a period of seemingly assured growth and when borrowing was carried out in predictable and reasonable conditions. At the same time, especially in countries that were still largely rural, a trend towards urbanization led to the migration of hundreds of thousands of peasants, who settled in urban communities where the future seemed to lie in industrial production and the service sector. All this seemed rational and reasonable.
152.	Then, suddenly, the game changed: the markets of the industrialized countries, having reached the saturation point, closed up. There was no longer any expansion. Countries, including France and others in the industrialized world, which had had a labour shortage for a number of years suddenly had an excess labour force and unemployment.
153.	At the same time, disorder had set in: monetary disorder, with its corollary of sizeable fluctuations in exchange rates; budgetary disorder, with huge deficits forcing States to turn to the financial markets; and the dizzying climb of interest rates. The Bretton Woods system had disappeared, and quite naturally the most economically powerful country irresistibly attracted the world's liquidities; its currency, the dollar, soared while its interest rates increased under the effect of the budget deficit.
154.	The market economy world became chaotic and unpredictable. A, the same time, growth ceased everywhere. The effects of the current remarkable recovery in the United States have still not changed the direction of this development. Markets saturated elsewhere are no longer able to absorb additional purchases; indeed, many markets are actually deteriorating from year to year.
155.	For the third world, this development has been—and I shall not mince words—catastrophic: the more a country's economy advanced, the mere serious the phenomenon. Such countries had counted on economic growth; they were thus deprived of the whole apparatus needed for amortization, at a time when nothing was generating the necessary resources for his. The surpluses of the oil producing countries have disappeared. In other developing countries, debt has climbed to its current levels: $700 billion for the third world as a whole, $350 billion for Latin America.
156.	Debt servicing had become intolerable burden, since there was no longer any growth in revenue. Higher interest rates only exacerbated the situation. Since 1982 in every country in Latin America, debt servicing, had it been undertaken without any adjustment, would have far exceeded the total liquidity accumulated in the reserves. At that point, a reversal set in. The gross domestic product fell. Imports declined drastically, by 60 per cent in some countries in the space of three years. Consequently, the industrial countries were themselves affected, especially those that depend very much on their relations with the third world, as is the case of France. The negative growth in the third world has thus been an important factor in the increase of unemployment in the industrialized countries. The purchasing power of our countries declined abruptly as a result. The vicious circle of depression and deflation was complete.
157.	What, then, have been the responses?
158.	International organizations have found palliatives—that is, means of responding immediately to immediate problems, and they deserve great praise for this. They have found answers even as the major international banks have been endangered, with the total of precarious debt far exceeding their capital.
159.	answers have been found for the short term, and, more rarely, for the medium term. The Paris Club has examined the cases of 25 countries in 18 months. The quid pro quo of this rescheduling had to be the adoption of strict and rigorous policies, which the IMF has defined with the remarkable professionalism that is characteristic of it. It has dealt with 45 countries.
160.	The third world countries concerned accepted the measures imposed with great courage. For the most part, they indicated their determination to go ahead with monetary adjustments, to accept realistic pricing for services and foodstuffs, to freeze wages, to increase taxes, to fight capital outflows. In short, they accepted tremendous suffering for their peoples in acknowledgement of pledges that had been made and were to be respected. Shall we recognize sufficiently the courage it took in each country and in meetings such as those at Cartagena in June and at Mar del Plata this month?
161.	What has been the price of this? First of all, the creation of a disinflationary phenomenon which reduces singularly an essential element of world growth; secondly, the imposition of the sacrifice of ambitions and the abandonment of policies that leaders considered and presented as the way to ensure greater justice; and, lastly, an increase in the number of the jobless.
162.	But the hundreds of thousands of men and women who migrated to towns lost the protection of the rural world without finding a new system of security in exchange. Without jobs, what will become of these uprooted people? Does this not spell hopelessness for generations of young people? It was reasonable to bank on growth and development; yet now this wager has generated trouble, doubt and danger.
163.	This approach has settled nothing, for without development why should the future be any improvement on the present? Postponing the due date of a debt in the hope that tomorrow the debtor country will be in a better position to service it is meaningless unless between today and tomorrow there is growth, development, increased income and an improved repayment capacity.
164.	But the evolution over the past two years has tended to discourage investment: interest rates are high, exchange rates are unstable, the banks that provided most of the financing have lost confidence. In 1983, for the first time, the net flow of capital towards the South was negative. No further comment is necessary.
165.	Meanwhile, the international meetings that have followed one on the heels of another have at best succeeded in providing a timid analysis of the phenomenon—the sixth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, held at Belgrade in 1983; the Fourth General Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, held at Vienna last August. International assistance funds are declining in real value: the replenishment of aid is inadequate; UNDP has had to cut back on its commitments. France stands out as an exception because we have increased official development assistance over the past three years; we are alone or almost alone in this.
166.	I know that the description is a bleak one and perhaps it will be considered exaggerated. However, we must look to the future. For the past two years, a favourable line of thought has been emerging; in all the industrialized countries and in all the countries of the third world, the same analysis has appeared.
167.	Whatever sets off the concern or the criticism—interest rates, indebtedness, budget deficit, monetary instability, lack of liquidity, difficulties for the banks—the reasoning is global. We know it must encompass all subjects, for they are linked, and it concerns all countries—interdependence is complete. We also know, however—and this was underscored at the London Economic Summit of the seven industrialized countries, held in London last June— that each country, each case, has its own specific characteristics. Thus, a global analysis is coupled with specific ways of utilizing the means. There is now a remarkable community of views as far as the analyses and reasoning are concerned. This should give us a chance to activate and mobilize powerful economic forces.
168.	What should be done? Obviously, I shall not give a simple answer. The problem is too serious and too complex for a single answer. Action is called for in several areas.
169.	We must first try to replace the current disorder by a more stable and predictable situation, particularly in the areas of currency and raw materials. We must rebuild an international economic order.
170.	In the monetary field, as my colleague, the Minister of the Economy and Finance, pointed out once again in Washington a few days ago, we must be able to act on interest rates. This is asserted by everyone in every part of the world. Their level is a major obstacle to recovery. Real interest rates have never been so high; they must return to reasonable levels. Therefore, we must attack the root cause, namely, the excessive deficit in Government spending, which leads to a destabilizing public drain on the financial markets.
171.	Actions over a longer term are also called for in order to lay the foundations of genuine international monetary reform, as the President of my country emphasized at length at the 1983 meeting of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development in Paris. This does not mean going back to the Bretton Woods agreements, which reflected another period, but greater stability and reasonable predictability of exchange rates must be ensured. The European Community has largely succeeded in achieving this with the European Monetary System, and we believe that it is also possible within a triad of the dollar, the yen and the European currency unit [ECU].
172.	I shall not dwell on the subject of raw materials, although it is an essential one. It is true that prices have experienced a certain upward movement but they remain erratic, and the lack of predictability has awesome consequences for the rationalizing of the supply demand relationship and for the ability of the producer country to forecast the pace of its development through self-financing. So we must continue to organize these markets by drawing up new agreements in instances where these are economically feasible; by renewing existing agreements and making them more effective; and, lastly, by establishing the Common Fund for Commodities already agreed to by more than 75 countries.
173.	Once some order has been re-established, efforts will have to be made to consolidate the financial recovery of the most heavily indebted developing countries, which are also often those with the most promising future, otherwise they would not have found a lender.
174.	The emergency solutions so effectively implemented by the IMF must be complemented by and coordinated with more far-reaching action. The London Economic Summit of the industrialized countries, like the meeting of Cartagena of Latin American countries, emphasized—correctly, in our view—the need for better integration of debt rescheduling plans in the medium term. This means defining plans for adjustment over a reasonably long period and coordinating them with rescheduling operations over a period of several years. It also means strengthening joint action by the IMF and the World Bank in order to ensure a better relationship between adjustment and development. In this way, austerity and growth will be linked. The economic effects of action of this kind will be coupled with the psychological effects of renewed hope among those bearing the unavoidable burden of the disciplines adjustment imposes.
175.	Of course, these organizational efforts will be really valuable only if sufficient resources are channelled to the developing countries to finance economically sound projects and developments, thus giving a new stimulus to growth. This means making use of all sources of financing.
176.	Concerning official development assistance, bilateral and multilateral assistance must at last reach the level the United Nations has called for, of which I have already spoken. The funds provided by the international community should approach the volume recommended by those responsible in this area. It is heart-breaking that the seventh replenishment of the IDA is limited to $9 billion, while the big contributors were almost unanimous in accepting $ 12 billion. The IFAD and the other programmes of the United Nations and its family must be funded, as must the regional development banks, whose activities are worthy of attention. The special fund for Africa, already mentioned, should have priority in this respect. France pledges a special contribution once this fund has been set up.
177.	The adoption of such policies by Governments and by the international community should help restore confidence and revive the potential for action by the banking sector. In fact, anything that can encourage public and private investment in the third world is a step in the right direction, it being understood that the recipient countries are entitled to set the main guidelines for such investment.
178.	Concerning shorter-term flows, in particular capital from commercial banks, the private sector must be encouraged to maintain and consolidate these flows. This is in their own interest and they must be convinced of this. No pressure, no outside incentive can replace confidence. Private flows will be permanently ensured and consolidated only if confidence is re-established in the determination to build sound bases and in the prospects for debtor country stability and development. The agreements recently signed with some countries testify to this.
179.	Such confidence should also be easier to rebuild if international and governmental public financing institutions, in particular the IMF and the World Bank, are able to assist. In this respect, we must extend and develop co-financing that associates private funds and funds from international organizations. In this way, the international structure can act as a catalyst to mobilize capital brought together by the banking circuit. Private and public funds are closely associated.
180.	Let it be quite clear that these arguments are presented—and I say this unashamedly—in the interest of all. Some time ago I spoke of a planetary "New Deal." What was President Roosevelt's gamble when he came to power? He put his money on a recovery stimulated by the weakest elements of society, through the resulting expansion of the market. Time proved him right. Of course, it is always hard, not to say deceptive, to make a transposition when two situations are so different. However: the problem facing us today is similar to the one that faced him. We must inject new hope, or discipline will be painful; we must find means of stimulating recovery that will not condemn the weakest but that will, rather, make use of their capacities for progress. Is a worldwide "New Deal" possible? I want to believe it is.
181.	I owed it to representatives here present to provide this very broad overview, for I am standing at the rostrum of an assembly whose responsibility is global, covering the whole world, from north to south and from east to west, dealing with all aspects of human activity—political, economic and social. I have thus outlined some of the principles that guide my country's policy. We have reaffirmed them on many occasions; we will continue to do so with the calm and the confidence that arise from our convictions.
182.	France's foreign policy is guided by a few simple underlying principles. It serves essential values, values that since the appearance of the first individual have put mankind at the centre of the efforts of every civilized society and every society aspiring to be civilized, values that consequently acknowledge the rights of peoples and thus the rights of nations, values, lastly, that cry out that peace is possible through the balance of forces in a climate of free expression and through a search for progress for all.
183.	France intends to uphold these principles in close cooperation—indeed, in conjunction—with its partners in the European Community, for we believe that the consolidation of that Community is an important element for our part of the world, a factor in the prosperity and peace of the world as a whole.
184.	This hope will have a genuine chance only if, all over the earth, individuals respect each other's diversity, if they examine their difficulties together, if they try to build international order together and, to that end, together adopt appropriate rules of law. Thus, I close as I began, by reaffirming our commitment to the United Nations, our Organization, and by thanking you, Mr. President, and you, Mr. Secretary General, for the orientations you have given us from the very beginning.
﻿First, may I add my voice to the voices of those who have already congratulated you, Sir, on your election to the presidency of the thirty-ninth session of the General Assembly.  I wish you every success in conducting its affairs in the months ahead. To the outgoing President, Mr. Illueca, I extend my thanks for the conscientious way in which he discharged his duties. And it is with great pleasure, and some pride, that I congratulate Brunei Darussalam on becoming, on 21 September, the 159th Member of the United Nations.
38.	Let me also, at the outset, pay a warm tribute to the Secretary General. His unceasing efforts to bring about the solution of the world's problems continue to win our highest esteem and support.
39.	Two years ago, the Secretary General, in his first report on the work of the Organization,' pointed to a crisis of multilateralism. He suggested that the world was "perilously near to a new international anarchy". His report this year shows, with customary perceptiveness and honesty, how little progress we have made towards the objectives he set two years ago. The Secretary General has told us frankly what we, the Member States, can do—indeed, have to do—to overcome the obstacles that have so far prevented our achieving the vision of a better world which inspired those who drew up the Charter of the United Nations now almost 40 years ago.
40.	At Fulton, Missouri, only a year after the birth of the United Nations, Winston Churchill spoke of the political will needed to tum the fledgling Organization into a practical force for peace. He said:
"We must make sure that its work is fruitful, that it is a reality and not a sham, that it is a force for action, and not merely a frothing of words, that it is a true temple of peace . . . and not merely a cockpit in a tower of Babel."
41.	Winston Churchill would certainly have endorsed the profoundly practical instinct that is so evident in the Secretary General’s reports. And 1, too, strongly support the Secretary General’s latest call for us to "ask ourselves what useful steps can be taken in a given situation rather than starting by thinking of all the extraneous reasons why they cannot be taken".
42.	For Churchill's insight is as relevant as ever. Effective international cooperation to tackle the world's problems needs more than polished speeches and well drafted resolutions. It needs courage and imagination; above all, it needs a steadfast commitment on the basis of universality to take practical action in pursuit of realistic objectives.
43.	Nowhere is that more necessary than in our approach to the problems of the world economy. The annual economic summit of the seven major industrialized countries is a good example of the kind of pragmatic approach to problem-solving I have in mind. Last June the United Kingdom hosted in London the tenth such meeting. We were able to reach a large measure of agreement on the essentials for world recovery. At the same time, we took real account of the difficulties which many countries still face. Despite those difficulties, the past 12 months have brought substantial improvements. Two years ago, world trade actually fell. Last year, it grew only 2 per cent. This year, the IMF has forecast growth in world trade of 8.5 per cent.
44.	This recovery has not been confined to the industrialized world. For many developing countries, too, the outlook has improved and is improving further. The current account deficit of the nonoil developing countries is this year expected to be less than half its level in 1981. And this year the growth rate for developing countries should reach 3.7 per cent. This significant improvement has not been achieved without hardship.
45.	I pay a tribute to the success adjustment policies pursued by many developing countries, often in the face of real social and political difficulties. These policies need to be sustained and more widely adopted if we are to manage and diminish the problem of international indebtedness, and they need the full support of the industrialized countries. This point has been rightly stressed by the Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund, Mr. de Larosiere. In his words:
"The efforts of developing countries need to be supported by the industrial countries, who have it in their power to create a more robust and dynamic world economy, as well as by concerted action to ensure adequate international financing flows and open trading conditions."
46.	A major cause of the problems of developing countries is the high level of international interest rates. The United States economy has shown how real new employment can be created in a society that is open and willing to face the need for change. But the current size of the United States budget deficit and the high interest rates that go with it still pose a threat to world recovery. We welcome the United States Administration's recognition of the need to tackle the problem. We hope that it will be sustained and carried into action. Lower world interest rates would benefit us all. They would ease the burden of debt repayment. That in turn would allow many countries to increase their imports, and a general increase in trade is in everybody's interest.
47.	The world's economic problems can only be solved through cooperation in this spirit of interdependence. Certainly my country is determined to work in close cooperation with debtor nations, case by case, to achieve mutually acceptable solutions to their difficulties. The challenge is to implement practical measures which stand a real chance of success.
48.	The British Government has put forward a number of proposals. We discussed them at the London Economic Summit in June. My colleague, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr. Lawson, described them at the IMF meeting in Washington yesterday. He made proposals for the use of multiyear rescheduling, for an enhanced role for the World Bank and its associates, for more private investment in debtor countries and for more stable long-term finance. If carried into practice, these proposals would do much to help the debtor countries. But, without doubt, the greatest contribution would come from sustained and widening recovery
49.	The industrialized countries have a special responsibility for helping to spread this recovery beyond their own frontiers. We must be in earnest in our fight to resist and to reduce protectionism. World trade must be revived through open markets. Here too, given the crucial importance of the dollar exchange rate and so of interest rates, the United States has a unique part to play.
50.	We have been disappointed that the resources available to the IDA have not been increased as we hoped. This makes it all the more important to undertake a special effort to help the poorest countries, above all in Africa. We cannot ignore the special conditions that have afflicted much of Africa or the Secretary-general’s plea for support. Special measures are needed for special conditions.
51.	The truth is that there are no instant solutions. The need is for common determination to work for solid, often unspectacular, progress on all fronts. Solutions to the economic problems I have described need to be rooted firmly in political reality if they are to endure. I am encouraged by the fact that Governments have been willing to identify practical steps that they can and will take together. That is the main reason why prospects for the world economy are better now than they were a year or two ago.
52.	The approach that is working in the economic field applies equally to political relations between States. Here too, there is a need for practical measures to solve real problems. Nowhere is that need more urgent than in East West relations—not because of what is happening but because of what is not happening, because in this area there has not been anything like the same meeting of minds over the way forward as there has been on economic questions. In his report the Secretary General speaks of "great Power tension accentuated by a lack of progress in disarmament and arms limitation". I share his analysis. That is why we need to make a fresh start. President Reagan this week put forward a series of proposals that could lead us in that direction. We must all reject the temptation to identify difficulties with that approach and instead identify the ideas with which we can agree.
53.	In the past year, Mr. Gromyko and I have met on no less than four occasions. On each of those occasions, I have been struck not so much by the differences between us—although these are real and substantial—as by the similarity of what we say are the basic aims of our peoples. This similarity of underlying approach is reflected in the desire of both sides to break the spiral of the arms race, in our shared aim of better relations between East and West, and often in apparently similar words and phrases. I found myself in complete agreement with the statement of the high level Economic Conference of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance, held in Moscow in June,that "no world problems—and that includes the historic dispute between socialism and capitalism—can be solved by force of arms". So what separates us is not so much the words we use as the meaning we attach to them. Our task must be to bridge that gap, to reconcile, in a spirit of mutual understanding, our differing purposes with our underlying interest in our common safety and security.
54.	Each side has proclaimed its desire for a more comprehensive dialogue. I refuse to believe that that cannot be achieved. I believe we can find a common way of resolving such issues of supreme importance to us all. In that same speech in Missouri, Churchill called for greater mutual confidence. He said:
"There is deep sympathy and goodwill in Britain—and I doubt not here also—towards the peoples of all the Russias and a resolve to persevere through many differences and rebuffs in establishing lasting friendships ..."
Forty years later that remains our hope.
55.	During 1984 the West has made far-reaching but practical proposals in every arms control negotiation. At Stockholm we have submitted specific measures which would enhance confidence and security throughout Europe. At Vienna we have made I major new proposal to resolve the long-standing disagreement over the level of Eastern forces. At Geneva, Britain has taken two initiatives on verification of a chemical weapons ban, while the United States has submitted a new draft treaty.
56.	Against that background I deeply regret the Soviet suspension of the nuclear arms talks. Of all subjects on the East West agenda, the control and reduction of nuclear weapons is by common consent the most important. And yet it is the one aspect of arms control which is not at present the subject of negotiation. The United States has offered to resume these talks, anywhere, at any time, without preconditions. The whole world would applaud a positive Soviet response.
57.	So, too, on the question of arms control in outer space. On 29 June, the Soviet Government proposed that talks should begin in Vienna in September. It asked for a prompt response. The Americans gave it, constructively and seriously. But so far the Russians seem to have been unable to take "yes" for an answer. Dialogue cannot be a one-way process—still less, negotiations. No one can converse with an empty chair. I hope the Soviet Union will find the political will to take its place at the table. When it does, it will find the West ready and willing to talk.
58.	The negotiations on the future of Hong Kong which the British and Chinese Governments have been conducting since 1982 are an excellent illustration of the way in which difficult issues may be resolved. Earlier today, in Beijing, the two Governments initialled a draft; agreement on the future of Hong Kong. It is a triumph of good sense. It shows how, in the search for solutions to international problems, agreement is only possible with courage, imagination and political will on all sides. Chairman Deng Xiaoping's idea of "one country, two systems" is an example of such a positive approach. The people of Hong Kong will wish to judge for themselves the outcome of these negotiations. But already I am confident that we have achieved a historic agreement.
59.	Britain also has a special relationship with, and a close interest in, the island of Cyprus. I hope that there, too, we may see early progress in the continuing search for a solution. The Secretary General’s current efforts to bring about a resumption of the intercommunal talks must not be allowed to fail. Only thus will a settlement of the wider problem be possible. That is why the British Government supports the Secretary General in his task. We stand ready to do all we can to assist him.
60.	I turn now to three troubled regions of the world where failure to resolve the disputes which divide the parties could have grave consequences.
61.	In the Middle East, it is deeply disappointing that once again this year we are no nearer a solution of the Arab Israel dispute, but with the arrival of a new Israeli Government there is now an opportunity to turn a new page. The outlines of a just settlement have been clear for many years. It must reconcile Israel's right to exist within secure and recognized borders and the Palestinians' right to self-determination. But plans or statements of principle from the international community are in themselves of limited value unless the parties to the dispute have the political courage to take the bold steps necessary for peace.
62.	Such steps are possible now without anyone's security being endangered. The new Israeli Government could halt the policy of installing illegal settlements in occupied territory. The Arab countries and the Palestinians could formulate a realistic and a common negotiating stand before it is too late. The United States has a unique position of influence with parties on both sides of the dispute. Its role is indispensable. President Reagan reaffirmed on Monday his commitment to his country's search for a just and lasting peace. I very much welcome that. As the President of the Council of Ministers of the European Community made clear yesterday fusing], we and our European partners stand ready to help and to use our influence to work for the peace which has eluded us all so long.
63.	In Lebanon, the efforts of the Lebanese Government to bring peace to that country which has suffered so long deserve the support of all of us. The 10 member countries of the European Community have called consistently for the early withdrawal, in agreement with the Lebanese Government, of all foreign forces. The presidency statement yesterday reiterated that plea. In our view, national reconciliation and withdrawal of those forces should go ahead together. UNIFIL has continued to perform a useful role in southern Lebanon, a role which—as the Secretary General said in April—could with advantage be enlarged.
64.	In the Gulf, we shall continue to support any initiatives which offer hope of an end to the long and tragic conflict between Iran and Iraq. We welcomed the decision to send a United Nations team to investigate allegations that chemical weapons had been used. The British Government condemns unequivocally the use of chemical weapons by anyone. We are encouraged that both sides continue to support the Secretary General’s appeal to avoid attacks on civilian centres of population. We hope that they will take further steps to limit the scope of the conflict and that this will prepare the way for an honourable settlement of the dispute.
65.	Southern Africa is another area where failure to make progress towards solving disputes could have consequences far beyond the region itself. The events of the past few weeks have amply demonstrated the wider dangers of the present policies of the South African Government. They underline the urgent need for real progress towards a system of government supported by all South Africans. This can be achieved only by dialogue within South Africa and between South Africa and the world at large.
66.	Even so, there has been some progress towards reducing tension in the region. In particular, I welcome the wide-ranging contacts between Mozambique and South Africa following the Agreement on Nonaggression and Good Neighbourliness, signed at Nkomati on 16 March 1984. We have also welcomed the agreement between Angola and South Africa, reached at Lusaka on 16 February 1984, on the withdrawal of South African forces from southern Angola. We shall continue to work for further steps towards an early settlement of the Namibian question.
67.	In Central America, too, there is a need for concerted action if we are to check the trend towards instability and foster social and political development. The roots of the conflict and political turmoil racking the region are indigenous, but the problems have been exploited and exacerbated by those who care little for regional stability and democratic evolution, preferring to pursue their own political objectives.
68.	That is why we were encouraged by the democratic elections in El Salvador this year and why we like our partners in the European Community strongly support the Contadora initiative. I much look forward to the meeting at San Jose next weekend between the Foreign Ministers of the 10 member countries of the Community and Spain and Portugal, and of the Central American and Contadora countries. This will be an important opportunity for us to underline our active interest in promoting and encouraging peace. Our purpose is to make a practical contribution to democracy and development in the region.
69.	I must now turn to the relationship between my country and Argentina, whose newly elected President addressed the Assembly on Monday [5th meeting]. Let me stress again that we welcome wholeheartedly Argentina's return to democratic government. We are ready, from that new basis, to try to work towards more normal relations between us after the tragic events of two years ago. We firmly believe that this would be in the interests of Britain, of Argentina, of all our friends in Latin America and of the Falkland Islanders themselves.
70.	Of course Britain and Argentina have different—and deeply held—positions on the question of sovereignty over the Falkland Islands. No one should forget that we were negotiating on that very subject in 1982 when Argentina launched its brutal invasion of the islands. The present Argentine Government was not responsible for that disastrous action, but its consequences cannot just be brushed aside.
71.	As I have said, we attach great importance to improving our relations with Argentina, and we have made a genuine and sustained effort to reach agreement with the Argentine Government on a basis for direct talks. It was clear that, if those talks were not to founder at the outset on the very issue that divides us, the question of sovereignty could not be addressed. We therefore needed to find a way of meeting the legitimate requirements of both sides. With the help of the Swiss and Brazilian Governments as protecting Powers and after a great deal of detailed work, a clear and satisfactory basis for talks was achieved and agreed by all.
72.	When the talks began at Berne in July, Argentina took a position at variance with this agreed basis. Their representatives insisted that no progress could be made towards normalization without the certainty that a mechanism would be established to permit negotiations over sovereignty. This overturned the very basis on which talks between us had been agreed. The talks therefore came to an end. This was an important opportunity missed. I think that many people will have been disappointed, as I was, that President Alfonsin, in his speech to the Assembly two days ago, presented the same position once again explicitly as a precondition of any talks between us.
73.	Let me also underline that there is a further fundamental principle involved in this dispute which cannot be overlooked—the principle of self-determination. It is a principle which is jealously guarded by the people of Great Britain and, indeed, by every Member of the United Nations. The Falkland Islanders, like any other people, have the right to self-determination. We had hoped that the new Argentine Government, with its attachment to democracy and human rights, would be ready to recognize this fundamental human right of the Falkland Islanders.
74.	Those who call on us to negotiate on the sovereignty of the islands should think what exactly it is that they are asking us to do. For Argentina, such negotiations could only have one outcome: the transfer of sovereignty over the islands irrespective of the wishes of the Falkland Islanders. To ask us to do that is to ask us to overturn the principle of self-determination enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
75.	We shall continue with the economic and constitutional development of the Falkland Islands. We shall maintain the minimum level of forces required to defend the islands. Let me emphasize those words, "defend the islands". Our military dispositions are designed solely for that purpose.
76.	We have sought ways of improving relations with Argentina by tackling practical issues where real progress is possible to the benefit of both sides. It is still my profound belief that, in the difficult circumstances I have described, the only way forward is to find a way of taking such practical steps as will enable confidence to be re-established between our two peoples.
77.	The right of peoples to choose their own Government is also at issue in Afghanistan and Cambodia. The outside world has little idea of the suffering which the Afghan people endure. We cannot ignore the harsh realities of the problem, which my Irish colleague, Mr. Barry, has already described [6th meeting]. We give our full support to the efforts of the Secretary General, which are seeking to ensure that the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and successive United Nations resolutions shall be applied to restore an independent and nonaligned Afghanistan. This cannot happen until Soviet forces are withdrawn.
78.	In Cambodia, the Vietnamese occupying force remains, despite the resolutions passed by an overwhelming majority in recent years calling for a complete withdrawal. The British Government continues to support the Cambodian people's right to determine their own destiny, free from outside interference.
79.	The continued division of the Korean peninsula has been a matter of concern much longer than the occupation of Afghanistan and of Cambodia. My visit to Panmunjom earlier this year reminded me of this sad fact. The British Government remains convinced that the suggestions put forward by the Republic of Korea for direct talks between the two sides represent the best prospect for a peaceful solution.
80.	There is one final region of the world I should mention, although it is not one much visited by Foreign Ministers. This year is the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Antarctic Treaty/ The Treaty is a remarkable example of political foresight. It provides an excellent model of practical cooperation achieved through international agreement. The fact that a further four States have acceded to the Treaty in this anniversary year shows its continuing value. The British Government would not wish to see any development that would undermine this important Treaty.
81.	We discuss many global and regional political issues in this Hall. But when we do so it is easy to forget the fundamental reality of the freedom and wellbeing of the individual. The architects of the Charter of the United Nations were quite clear about this. They set down, as a major purpose of the Organization, to achieve cooperation "in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language, or religion". The gulf between this intention and the gross abuses of human rights which still occur in so many parts of the world appals me. These abuses are sometimes carried out in the name of political, social or religious ideologies, and indeed by some of the leading signatories of the Helsinki Final Act/ Sometimes such abuses result from conditions of anarchy and chaos. My Government deplores them all, wherever they occur and whatever the reason with which their perpetrators may attempt to justify them.
82.	A particularly gross form of abuse of the most fundamental human rights of all—the rights to life and liberty—is terrorism. The horrifying events in Beirut last week served as a grim reminder of this growing evil. Terrorist acts may often be the work of small groups of crazed fanatics. But more and more they have had the material backing of a few misguided Governments. As the Secretary General’s report [A139/1] makes clear, there has been a steady increase in politically motivated violence in all its baleful forms. Few areas of the world have been spared. As so often, it is innocent men and women who pay the price for this assault on the basic values of civilized society. Indiscriminate murder for the furtherance of political ends is wholly unacceptable. We must resist it with every legitimate means available to the international community.
83.	The growing involvement in terrorism by Governments and their representatives abroad has brought to light another urgent problem: the abuse of diplomatic immunity. This is something which must deeply concern us all. Many representatives know that my Government is reviewing the working of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations. We are seeking ways to tighten control of unacceptable activities by members of diplomatic missions. The Convention has, generally speaking, performed useful service for over 20 years. Its underlying principles have for centuries stood the test of application between sovereign States of widely differing character. What is lacking is determination on the part of signatory States to apply rigorously enough the safeguards and sanctions it contains. The Declaration on International Terrorism, issued at the London Economic Summit, held from 7 to 9 June 1984 and the measures agreed by the European Community a6 Dublin earlier this month are evidence of how, given the political will, States can swiftly take practical action to deal with international problems.
84.	Let me in conclusion return to the theme with which I began. In speaking today of all the global and regional problems which confront us, I have many times referred to the need for realistic solutions and for a practical approach. I do so out of profound personal conviction, a conviction that is continually reinforced by my experience in political life in my own country and in international affairs. Put simply, it is this. None of the disputes and disagreements before us is of its essence insoluble. In many cases, we can already envisage the outline of a solution. In almost every case, what is needed, and what is missing, is political will—above all, the political will to work for practical agreement, to have the courage, imagination and dogged determination to negotiate in a rational and realistic fashion. Often, perhaps in most cases, that will mean the pursuit of limited, but attainable, objectives. Such an approach is a gradual one, demanding the steady creation of confidence between the parties. It will imply the breaking down of issues into manageable proportions, and it will require a spirit of understanding which takes account of the political and economic realities on both sides of the argument.
85.	Such an approach puts a discount on ringing declarations of intent and on uncompromising statements of minimum objectives. But it places a premium on steady, perhaps unspectacular, negotiation, often in private, and when it pays dividends, it pays handsomely. I said earlier that the British and Chinese Governments had initialled a historic agreement on the future of Hong Kong. But it is more than that. The agreement itself and, perhaps even more, the process by which it was achieved are powerful symbols of the way in which seemingly intractable problems can indeed be susceptible to treatment. And that, Mr. President, is the prescription which I end by offering you this afternoon.
﻿Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your unanimous election to the presidency of the thirty-ninth session of the General Assembly. We are particularly gratified to see you, a distinguished son of Africa and an eminent representative of a country with which India has traditionally close and cordial relations, preside over the proceedings of this Assembly. We are confident that under your able stewardship we shall be able to deal effectively with the many important questions on our agenda.
186.	I should like to take this opportunity also to place on record our appreciation of the effective and statesmanlike leadership provided to the Assembly's thirty-eighth session by your distinguished predecessor, Mr. Illueca, of Panama.
187.	I wish to pay a tribute to the Secretary-General for the indefatigable energy and quiet competence he has displayed in his stewardship of the United Nations during the past year. His patience and perseverance are characteristic of a style of functioning that has added much prestige and honour to the office of the Secretary-General. He has won our admiration for his skilful handling of several crisis situations. We wish him every success in the future.
188.	We welcome to the United Nations family its newest member, Brunei Darussalam. Its admission as the 159th Member is a reaffirmation of the principle of universality of membership of the Organization. We look forward to working in close co-operation with that country's delegation in the United Nations.
189.	We are at the threshold of the fifth decade of the United Nations. As the United Nations approaches its fortieth anniversary it is but appropriate that we pause to review the historic role the Organization has been playing. This is also a time for introspection and reflection so that we can improve our own performance and make the Organization more effective.
190.	In November 1948, the first Prime Minister of India, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, addressing the General Assembly'" on behalf of newly independent India, stated that the Charter of the United Nations, in noble language, had laid down the principles and purposes of that great Organization, and he thought it would not be possible to improve upon that language. The objectives were clear, he said, and yet it had often happened that the main objectives had been lost sight of amid matters of secondary importance. He further stated that he was convinced that the best of objectives could not be reached if men's eyes were bloodshot and men's minds clouded with passion. The lesson of history, he noted, and more especially the lesson of the last two great wars, which had devastated humanity, was that out of hatred and violence could come only hatred and violence. The Assembly was in the midst of a cycle of hatred and violence, he said, and it was obvious that if that cycle persisted and war, which the Assembly was specially intended to prevent, broke out, not only would there be tremendous devastation all over the world, but no individual Power or group of Powers would achieve its objective.
191.	The words of Jawaharlal Nehru are valid even today. The optimism that was generated in the early years of the United Nations has in recent years been sadly dissipated. We are facing not only an acute and troubled international situation but, more important, a period when faith in the world Organization appears to be weakening. There is today in some quarters a cynical disregard of the role and contribution of the United Nations, as, indeed, a profound suspicion of all multilateral approaches where these do not coincide with or directly promote the interests of these countries. We are facing the danger of a retreat from multilateralism which can only adversely affect the prospects of international peace and security and undermine the very foundations of this unique Organization. India and other non-aligned countries are determined to reverse this trend. As India did at the outset of the establishment of the United Nations, I would like now once again to reaffirm, on behalf of the Government and people of India, our undiminished faith in the United Nations and our continued commitment to the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter.
192.	In his thought-provoking report on the work of the Organization [A/39/1], the Secretary-General has reiterated the need to preserve and strengthen the Organization for harmonizing the actions of nations and to enhance the concept of multilateralism, which is a basic premise of our activity in the United Nations. He has rightly asserted that the realization of the full potential of the United Nations depends upon a willingness to take active steps to experiment with new approaches on the assumption that our common and agreed objective is human survival in reasonably decent conditions. We need to ponder over this issue. The fortieth anniversary of the United Nations should provide us with a unique opportunity for rededication, but also for a reassessment, some soul-searching and, above all, concrete remedial action. Our commitment to the multilateral approach is important and must be strengthened if we want the vision of the founding fathers to be realized.
193.	Throughout the years of our freedom struggle, India's leaders viewed independence not merely in national terms but as a part of the struggle of oppressed peoples everywhere for justice—political, economic and social. In the course of its transformation, India has built up a vast industrial infrastructure which has enabled it to keep pace with the scientific and technological advancements taking place in the world. Our democratic institutions, evolved over the years, have given the people of India a deep sense of participation and commitment in determining the nation's economic, social and political priorities. India's economy envisages a predominant role for the public sector in areas of basic industry as well as a flourishing private sector consistent with our socio-economic philosophy, which aims at prosperity and growth with social justice. The planning process adopted by India as an indispensable instrument for the development of all sectors of our economy involves the full participation of our people.
194.	In our international relationships, adherence to the policy of non-alignment has been both instinctive and inevitable. Even before the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries held its first summit in 1961, the essential principles of non-alignment had become the basis for the conduct of our foreign policy.
195.	Today the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, with its membership of 101 countries, constitutes the vast majority of the membership of the United Nations. It is an indication of the intrinsic appeal and relevance of this Movement, as well as its significance and its achievements to date, that almost every newly independent nation seeks membership.
196.	As Prime Minister Indira Gandhi said in her address to the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi from 7 to 12 March 1983:
"Its significance is not to be measured by the number of divisions or the megatons of destructive power we command, but by the intensity with which we desire peace and freedom, development and international justice.
"Other Governments may have conflicting opinions on right and wrong. We the non-aligned have chosen peace, which surely is the right and inevitable choice. We have sought and continue to seek friendship with all, except Governments which are racist or threaten the hard-earned freedom of others. Non-alignment is not vague, not negative, not neutral.
"Non-alignment is national independence and freedom. It stands for peace and the avoidance of confrontation. It aims at keeping away from military alliances. It means equality among nations and the democratization of international relations, economic and political. It wants global co-operation for development on the basis of mutual benefit. It is a strategy for the recognition and preservation of the world's diversity."
197.	The question of disarmament has always remained a basic concern of India and other countries of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. Governments and peoples all over the world are becoming increasingly aware of the grave threat posed to the very survival of mankind by the development, accumulation and deployment of nuclear weapons and their delivery systems. Two special sessions of the General Assembly have been devoted exclusively to this question. Yet new weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems are continuously being researched, tested, produced and deployed. A new arms race has begun in the chemical weapons field. New technologies are being developed which would make space, which has hitherto remained largely peaceful, a dangerous arena of military confrontation. Striking advances are also being made in conventional weaponry, giving it a versatility and lethal quality unknown in previous years.
198.	The escalating arms race, the rise in international tensions and the absence of willingness for constructive dialogue among the major nuclear- weapon Powers have increased the risks of the outbreak of a nuclear war. Clearly, the dangers of the total annihilation of mankind, indeed, of any life on this planet, are so great and increasing with such inexorable rapidity that we cannot permit ourselves the luxury of either indifference or despair. Dangerous doctrines, such as those of nuclear deterrence and of limited nuclear warfare, are being propounded. No country will remain unaffected by the horror of nuclear conflict once it is unleashed. By the same token, none of us can remain indifferent to the need to speed up disarmament negotiations. It is ironical that the principal justification for adding new and costly weapon systems to the arsenals of the great Powers has been that it provides better negotiating positions for those countries in any arms limitation talks. The logic of this position is that disarmament can commence only after countries have armed themselves fully. Such bizarre logic cannot be expected to serve as a basis for any serious arms limitation exercise.
199.	A fresh and concerted world-wide effort must therefore be made to halt the arms race. Nuclear- weapon States bear the greatest responsibility and must adopt urgent, practical measures to prevent a nuclear war. Specific proposals have been made by India and other non-aligned countries for a convention under United Nations aegis prohibiting the use of nuclear weapons under any circumstances. The idea of a freeze on the production and deployment of nuclear weapons is gaining popular support and needs to be given a practical shape in order to break the present impasse in arms negotiations. Efforts for a comprehensive nuclear-weapons-test-ban treaty must be expedited. Existing arms limitation agreements must be observed and new ones negotiated. At the same time, a concerted effort ought to be made to prevent a new and potentially more dangerous and destabilizing round of the arms race in the area of space-based systems. Diplomats and experts engaged in arms limitation and disarmament negotiations must now take due note of the mass popular upsurge in the world against nuclear weapons.
200.	A major peace initiative in this regard was taken recently by the Prime Minister of India, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, together with the Heads of State or Government of Argentina, Greece, Mexico, Sweden and the United Republic of Tanzania. This five- continent initiative, launched on 22 May 1984, states, inter alia, in the Joint Declaration [A/39/277]:
"As leaders of nations, States Members of the United Nations, we have a commitment to take constructive action towards halting and reversing the nuclear-arms race. The people we represent are no less threatened by nuclear war than the citizens of the nuclear-weapons States. It is primarily the responsibility of the nuclear-weapons States to prevent a nuclear catastrophe, but this problem is too important to be left to those States alone." 
201.	The Joint Declaration urges, as a necessary first step, the five nuclear-weapon States to halt all testing, production and deployment of nuclear weapons and their delivery systems, to be immediately followed by a substantial reduction in nuclear forces. This first step must be followed by a continuing programme of arms reduction leading to general and complete disarmament, accompanied by measures to strengthen the United Nations system and to ensure an urgently needed transfer of substantial resources from the arms race into social and economic development. The essential goal must be to reduce and then eliminate the risk of war between nations. The six- Power peace appeal has received the overwhelming support of the international community. People all over the world have an overriding interest in collective security and the avoidance of nuclear war. The appeal represents a significant step in mobilizing wider world support for the objectives of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries on disarmament, as set out by the New Delhi Conference.
202.	Non-aligned and like-minded nations must now think of other forms of action. The bulk of the global military expenditure of $1 trillion a year is accounted for by a handful of industrialized countries. A significant reduction in this enormously wasteful expenditure would not only help ease tensions the world over but also contribute to recovery and growth in the world economy and could be used to augment the currently decreasing levels of assistance to developing nations. The proposal for a world conference on disarmament and development de-serves to be taken up seriously by Member States.
203.	India attaches great importance to general and complete disarmament, particularly nuclear disarmament, and the prevention of nuclear war. A number of proposals submitted by my delegation to begin a serious nuclear disarmament programme are already before the General Assembly. It is our earnest hope that during this session our proposals, as well as others in this field, will be considered in all seriousness and that meaningful decisions will be taken.
204.	In our own neighbourhood, the Indian Ocean continues to be an area of competitive attention and mounting great-Power military presence, posing a direct threat to the security and integrity of the littoral and hinterland States. The increasing militarization of the Indian Ocean and its use as an arena for strategic power-play is a matter of immense concern to us. The establishment of new command structures has been accompanied by the introduction of sophisticated weaponry into the area. The 1971 Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace remains unimplemented.
205.	Ever since the expansion of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Indian Ocean in 1979, it has been the earnest hope of the littoral and hinterland States that the permanent members of the Security Council and the major maritime users of the Indian Ocean would contribute towards the early convening of the Conference on the Indian Ocean and to the early realization of the objectives of the 1971 Declaration. The evidence of the last few years has belied this expectation. On the contrary, efforts are afoot to distort the fundamental structure and elements of the 1971 Declaration. We believe that the Conference, to be held at Colombo, should be convened urgently to begin the process of elimination of great-Power military presence from the Indian Ocean in realization of the objectives of the Declaration. During the current year, the non-aligned countries have made serious efforts to complete necessary preparatory work for the Conference and have submitted a framework for its agenda. We hope all members of the	Ad hoc Committee will display the necessary political will and address themselves to this question in a constructive manner.
206.	The countries of South Asia are currently engaged in an active search for regional co-operation on the basis of mutual benefit. This is in consonance with our own policies over the years of reinforcing the fabric of understanding and co-operation among the countries of the region. At the South Asian Regional Co-operation Meeting of Foreign Ministers, held at Male on 10 and 11 July of this year, a detailed review of the implementation of programmes was undertaken. We recognize that this will be a long process and will call for much patience and perseverance. Even now the induction of sophisticated arms in our neighbourhood serves external strategic interests and is complicating the task of peaceful co-operation in our region. Notwithstanding that, we have no doubt that the process of regional co-operation will continue to gain strength in the months and years ahead and will not only assist the economic and social development of the countries of South Asia but also ultimately promote good-neighbourliness and harmony in the whole area.
207.	While on the subject of South Asia, it is with considerable regret that I find it necessary to refer to recent developments in Sri Lanka which have taken a turn for the worse, have caused us deep anguish and have aroused global concern. There has been a recrudescence of indiscriminate violence and killing by the armed forces on a scale which recalls the tragedy of July 1983. Reports indicate that the armed forces in that country have conducted large-scale operations in areas where the Tamils constitute the overwhelming majority of the population, resulting in heavy loss of life and property of the innocent Tamil population. If the spate of violence in the northern province continues, it is bound to have serious repercussions in other parts of Sri Lanka and precipitate an influx of refugees into our country. We already have 40,000 Sri Lankan refugees in Tamil Nadu.
208.	The ethnic problem in Sri Lanka cannot be solved by military action. It is a political problem involving the just rights of the Tamil minority, md only the determined pursuit of the political process of consultation and mutual accommodation can lead to a constructive way out.
209.	After the communal violence of 1983, the Prime Minister of India offered her good offices to help find a political solution to the problem. President Jayawardene of Sri Lanka accepted that offer, and the efforts of our special envoy to promote the process of dialogue have been undertaken with the full concurrence of the Government of Sri Lanka. While talks within the framework of the All Party Conference are continuing, innuendos and insinuations are repeatedly being made against India.
210.	We have reaffirmed our stand in favour of Sri Lanka's integrity and unity and have expressed opposition to all forms of violence and separatism. Because of the large number of Tamil refugees from Sri Lanka in the Indian state of Tamil Nadu and because of the many age-old links between the Tamil populations of the two countries, the repression and denial of human and political rights of the Tamils in Sri Lanka give rise to repercussions in our country with which we are trying to deal as best we can. But it is a travesty of facts to suggest that we are in any way responsible for Sri Lanka's problems. The problem exists right there in Sri Lanka and it has to be resolved there. For our part, we do not and will not permit any activities directed against Sri Lanka from our soil. It is therefore regrettable that leaders of Sri Lanka continue to make baseless allegations against India that it is providing sanctuary and support to Tamil militants. India is doing no such thing. I should like to reiterate that such false and unfounded allegations can only create unnecessary and avoidable difficulties and misunderstanding in the relations between the two countries.
211.	The Prime Minister of India has categorically stated that India does not intervene in the internal affairs of Sri Lanka or, indeed, of any other country. India does not support any separatist movement; it does not support or condone resort to violence of any kind. It is our sincere hope that, through consultations, a viable political solution will soon be found assuring the safety and legitimate rights of the Tamils as full and equal citizens, so that the people of Sri Lanka can live together in peace and harmony.
212.	I cannot over-emphasize the necessity for the utmost restraint on the part of all concerned and a determined pursuit of the political process to find a viable and acceptable solution in which the fundamental human and civic rights of the Tamil population of Sri Lanka will be safeguarded.
213.	The efforts for a political settlement in Afghanistan are continuing, though progress has been slow. While there is universal reaffirmation of the inadmissibility of interference in the internal affairs of States, as also of the induction of foreign troops in any country, there is no doubt that the situation in South-West Asia can be resolved only through an overall political settlement based on principles set out in the Political Declaration adopted at the New Delhi Conference.' The efforts of the Personal Representative of the Secretary-General in past months have sought to impart momentum to this process and deserve our support.
214.	Of equal concern to us are the continuing difficulties that have come in the way of peace in South-East Asia. The events of the past year have made us only more conscious of the opportunities, as well as the pitfalls, that lie in the search for a solution of the problems afflicting that region. India is convinced that there can be no military solution to this question. What is needed is a balanced approach that takes into account the security and other considerations of all the countries in the region and eliminates outside interference. We are hopeful that the new processes of dialogue opening up between the countries of Indo-China and ASEAN will yield positive results in coming months and make for a much-needed sense of trust and reconciliation among the countries of the region.
215.	The futility of war as a means of settling disputes has been highlighted in the tragic fratricidal conflict between Iran and Iraq. The continuing war has involved great sacrifices by both sides, resulting in enormous losses not only of material wealth but also of precious and irreplaceable human lives. The critical situation in the region threatens not only the security of the Gulf but also the safety and economic well-being of much of the world. As Chairman of the Movement of the Non-Aligned Countries, India has remained in touch with both sides to bring an end to this conflict which weakens the Movement's unity and solidarity. We are heartened that the Secretary- General's call for a halt to bombings in the civilian areas has met with a positive response from both sides. We hope that the two sides will continue to show restraint and see the inevitability of getting down to negotiations for the settlement of their differences. We are convinced that there can be no victor or vanquished in a conflict of this nature. Its continuation will only weaken the ability of the two countries to meet the challenges that face them as developing countries.
216.	The events in West Asia continue to arouse our anguish and indignation. The continued denial to the Palestinian people of their basic and inherent right to self-determination and nationhood, Israel's arrogant defiance of the will of the international community, the critical situation in Lebanon, the consolidation by Israel of its stranglehold over the occupied territories, including its settlements policy—all constitute sordid chapters in a seemingly endless tragedy.
217.	The turmoil in West Asia remains a most serious threat to world peace today. Recent months have witnessed deterioration in the situation, resulting in further acts of aggression and intimidation by Israel against the Palestinian and Lebanese peoples. We remain firm in our support for the brave homeless and harassed Palestinian people, led by the Palestinian Liberation Organization, their sole authentic representative. Occupation of the territory of neighbouring States will not guarantee Israel security; it can if anything, only have the opposite effect. A comprehensive solution comprising the total and unconditional withdrawal of Israel from all Arab territories occupied since 1967, the exercise by the Palestinian people of their inalienable national and human rights, including the right to establish an independent State in their homeland, and mutual guarantees of security among States of the region must be achieved.
218.	We support the convening of an international peace conference on the Middle East under United Nations auspices for finding a comprehensive, just and lasting solution in accordance with well-established principles laid down in United Nations resolutions. The situation in the region does not brook any delay, and urgent preparatory measures should be undertaken so that the conference can be convened at the earliest possible time. In this context, India is appreciative of the efforts being made by the Secretary-General towards the convening of the conference and the process of consultations initiated by him with the parties concerned to find a comprehensive solution. We stand ready to extend our full support and co-operation in this connection.
219.	It is now a century since Namibia fell prey to colonialism at the Berlin Conference of 1884-1885. For the larger part of the period and up to the present day, this Territory and this valiant people have suffered a particularly brutal and repressive colonial presence, an extension of the abhorrent system of eighteen years of direct United Nations jurisdiction over Namibia have brought the Territory closer to independence only in theory, as the United Nations plan for Namibian independence remains unimplemented in spite of its universal acceptance as the basis for a peaceful settlement. Sadly, the question of Namibia has become embroiled in the web of East-West tensions, with entirely irrelevant and extraneous considerations being introduced into what is, and must essentially remain, a question of decolonization. The South West Africa People's Organization	the sole and authentic representative of the Namibian people, has shown admirable restraint, flexibility and statesmanship. South Africa's answer has always been characterized by arrogance, defiance of world opinion, and prevarication. The non-aligned believe that only sanctions can force Pretoria to pay heed.
220.	We believe that Security Council resolution 435 (1978) remains the only basis for a peaceful settlement of the Namibian question. India, along with other non-aligned countries, rejects any kind of linkage or parallelism in regard to the implementation of this resolution. The Security Council must consider more resolute action in the exercise of United Nations responsibility over Namibia to ensure the implementation of its own resolutions. Meanwhile, we remain steadfast in our support for the Namibian people under the leadership of SWAPO, their sole and authentic representative, and in our resolve to assist them in all possible ways in their valiant struggle for liberation.
221.	We are being increasingly confronted with the proposition that racist South Africa is moving towards reform of its policy of apartheid. Mr. Botha found platforms to proclaim this to the world during his visits to several Western European countries, visits that should never have been permitted to take place and have had the effect of undermining the international campaign to isolate Pretoria. The charade of elections on the basis of a "new dispensation" was organized in an attempt to confirm this impression. A country known for its indiscriminate and repeated acts of aggression against neighbouring independent States is projecting itself as a votary of peaceful coexistence. This propaganda, which emanates from Pretoria and finds an echo in capitals of some of South Africa's powerful friends and allies, will deceive no one. South Africa's attempts to hoodwink the world will not succeed.
222.	The root cause of all the problems in southern Africa is the policy and practice of apartheid. The international community must not let flag its vigilance against apartheid or its efforts to counter it by every possible means. In this context, we are happy to note the clear-sightedness shown by the Coloured and Asian communities in rejecting, despite pressures of all kinds, the so-called constitutional reforms mooted by the racist regime. As the Prime Minister of India, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, stated in a recent message: cannot be reformed; it must be ended."
223.	The front-line States of southern Africa have long been a bastion of resistance against racist South Africa, though it has meant great suffering and sacrifice on the part of the peoples of those countries. The world must take urgent and resolute action to fortify the front-line States and strengthen the Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference so that those States could better withstand Pretoria's repeated acts of aggression and destabilization and its threats and blandishments.
224.	The adoption of a resolution on Central America by consensus in the Assembly last year [resolution 38/10] augured well for peace and reconciliation in that troubled region. So also have the untiring endeavours of the Contadora Group of nations. The non-aligned countries have pledged full support to the Contadora exercise. We commend the Contadora countries for their perseverance and dedication and for the progress so far achieved.
225.	Nevertheless, the situation in Central America remains tense and delicate, capable of explosion at the next spark. Again this year, Nicaragua felt compelled to take recourse to the Security Council following continuing hostile acts directed against it, in particular the mining of its ports and harbours. We would like to see the endemic problem of the region resolved by its own peoples without meddling from outside quarters. We hope that accord will be achieved before long on a comprehensive agreement along the lines contained in the draft Contadora Act on Peace and Co-operation in Central America.
226.	Efforts to resolve the vexed question of Cyprus have received a serious set-back in the last year following the proclamation of a so-called Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus and subsequent steps taken with a view to consolidating that unilateral declaration of independence. The Government and people of India have deplored the unilateral declaration of independence and firmly support the unity, territorial integrity, sovereignty, independence and non-alignment of Cyprus, a country with which we have traditionally had friendly and co-operative relations. We believe that the unilateral declaration of independence must be rescinded and intercommunal talks resumed under the auspices of the Secretary- General with a view to arriving at a lasting settlement, taking due account of the rights and aspirations of both the Greek and the Turkish Cypriot communities. In this context, we welcome the steps recently taken by the Secretary-General aimed at a resumption of the intercommunal dialogue as well as the positive response of both sides to the call of the Secretary-General.
227.	The international economic situation continues to cause great concern. When we met here in 1983 there were claims that respite from the severest recession in post-war history was in sight. The industrialized countries may be experiencing some recovery, but it remains uneven in its spread and there are doubts about its durability. The vast majority of the developing countries have not experienced any improvement. As a group, their gross national product has remained stagnant and many of them have experienced declining growth rates. Falling commodity prices, adverse terms of trade, rising debt burdens, barriers to trade and declining financial flows continue to affect them adversely.
228.	These conditions have resulted in sharp reductions in imports and postponement of investment in projects and human resources development programmes which may have set back their growth prospects for years to come. Austerity measures compelled by circumstances over which they have had little control have precipitated social disruption and political instability in a number of countries. The net effect of these measures has been to attract a transfer of resources from these countries to the financial institutions of the developed countries. The appalling costs in terms of human misery and destitution that these measures have implied are not brought out in the adjustment figures put out by international agencies. These adjustments, as the Committee for Development Planning has put it, have taken place "at the margin of life and death".
229.	The gravity of the economic situation in Africa is a cause of particular concern to the international community. The critical conditions there have been further aggravated by adverse climatic factors leading to widespread hunger and malnutrition. In the clearest sense, this represents a test of the will and ability of the international community to meet this challenge through international co-operative endeavour and to make it a part of the overall struggle of developing countries against hunger and poverty.
230.	It is common wisdom to say today that, in an interdependent world, the progress of the rich cannot be achieved at the cost of the poor. This interdependence was again acknowledged and emphasized at the London Economic Summit of the industrialized countries in June this year.
231.	The test of the faith in interdependence lies in the willingness to take co-operative action. As a group, developing countries are larger markets of the European Economic Community, the United States and Japan than each of these three is for the other two. When import volumes have had to be reduced by as much as 50 per cent in many developing countries, its dampening effect on recovery in some industrialized countries should be evident. Sustained economic recovery of the developed countries is dependent on the reactivation of the economic development of the developing countries. But the actual policies pursued by many developed countries seem frequently to reflect a rejection of the concept of interdependence and the policy measures that this would entail.
232.	At a time when financial resources for development are needed by developing countries, net private flows of resources to them have in several cases become negative. Official development assistance has declined in real terms, as is evident from the fact that, in the case of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries, aid as a share of their gross national product has fallen from an average of 0.38 per cent to 0.36 per cent in 1983. Multilateral financial institutions are facing the worst crisis of resources since they were created. A case in point is the IDA, which is of paramount importance to the poorest countries. The level at which it has been possible to agree on its seventh replenishment is 20 per cent less m nominal terms and 40 per cent lower in real terms over that of its sixth replenishment.
233.	Protectionism is steadily on the increase. The United Nations World Economic Survey 1984 estimates that over half of world trade is now subject to some form of non-tariff barrier. The practical effect of protectionist measures is particularly intense in sectors like textiles, in which developing countries are the most efficient producers. We are thus blamed for our alleged inefficiency and penalized when we are efficient.
234.	We cannot but express our disappointment at the attitude demonstrated by some developed countries during meetings of the Economic and Social Council and at the Fourth General Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, held at Vienna from 2 to 19 August 1984, in their approach both to substantive issues and to the conduct of negotiations. It is difficult to avoid the impression that this was part of the systematic and persistent efforts by certain countries to make the United Nations system the scapegoat for their lack of political will. We strongly urge the developed countries to reconsider their positions and to work to restore the norms and consensus on the basis of which the United Nations system can continue to play its rightful role as a central forum for joint action for mutual benefit.
235.	It is legitimate to expect that now that recovery in developed countries has started, even though in an uneven and limited way, Governments in developed countries will deal in a more comprehensive and co-operative manner with the deeper structural problems of the world economy. It is necessary to adopt and implement a comprehensive set of measures for reactivating growth in developing countries. We must recognize the realities of the situation and work towards the establishment of a real dialogue between the North and the South. Policies which are recognized to stand in the way of the resumption of the development momentum in the developing countries need to be rectified. The ultimate objective of any good policy must be the contribution it can make towards the removal of existing inequalities and in achieving better growth rates for all.
236.	Deliberate measures have to be taken now to attain more normal levels of growth. This cannot be achieved merely by the trickle-down effect. The agenda for global economic recovery and development suggested in the Economic Declaration of the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries" provides a balanced set of actions. Intensive consultations have taken place on the two-phase approach towards global negotiations put forward by the non-aligned and developing countries, but agreement on its launching has been impossible to obtain. While this matter is being pursued, we propose in the meantime that at this session of the General Assembly serious negotiations take place to provide action-oriented content to the Programme of Immediate Measures contained in the Declaration. Particular attention would have to be given to an improvement in the terms of trade of the developing countries and to a roll-back of protectionism. We have to tackle the crushing debt burden of developing countries in its global context and in a comprehensive manner, dealing with both the financial and the developmental aspects. Agreement needs to be reached for a substantial increase in the net flow of financial resources, particularly official development assistance, to developing countries. The resource position of multilateral development institutions would need to be considerably strengthened to meet the growing needs of developing countries.
237.	This session of the General Assembly has several other important tasks ahead of it. In its most fundamental sense, development has to be achieved in human terms. The prevailing imbalance in which 47 per cent of the world's population has only 5 per cent of the world's share of resources has grave implications for the future of humanity. The close link between population policies and economic and social development has been long recognized. The International Conference on Population, held at Mexico City from 6 to 14 August 1984, adopted useful recommendations for the further implementation of the World Population Plan of Action. My delegation attaches great importance to its quick and effective implementation, and we urge the international community to give full support to the national efforts of the countries in attaining its objectives. Similarly, in a related field, we welcome the support extended by the child survival and development strategy of UNICEF to national efforts, including those of my own country.
238.	Access and acquisition of modern scientific and technological knowledge is essential to carry out the economic and social transformation of developing countries. Because of our colonial past, many of our countries missed out on the industrial revolution. We have no intention of being left out of the technological revolution. We think that the area of science and technology is particularly suitable to devise new and imaginative mechanisms of international co-operation for mutual benefit. In this respect, we attach great importance to the establishment of the long-term financing system for science and technology for development. My own country is fully prepared to meet its responsibilities in this regard, and we urge all other countries, particularly the developed countries, urgently to finalize the financial arrangements which would enable the launching of the United Nations Financing System for Science and Technology for Development.
239.	It is more than a year and a half since the Heads of State or Government of the non-aligned countries, at their New Delhi Conference, called for the convening of an international conference on money and finance for development. Since then, the idea has gathered further momentum and gained w\der support. It has been pursued in a number of forums both within and outside the United Nations system, such as the Economic and Social Council; the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its sixth session, held at Belgrade from 6 June to 2 July 1983; the General Assembly; the Conference of the Heads of Government of Commonwealth Countries, held at New Delhi in November 1983; and the Williamsburg and London Economic Summit Conferences of the major industrial countries, held in May 1983 and June 1984. Recently, a group of five eminent experts appointed by the Chairman of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, the Prime Minister of India, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, completed a detailed study of the substantive and procedural issues that would arise in the context of convening such a conference. This report has been made available to the member Governments of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, as well as those of other countries. The need for improvement in the system, whether it be described as evolution or adaptation, reform or restructuring, is now widely recognized. It is now time to set in motion the preparatory process, with the participation of all interested parties, for moving towards serious negotiations on the subject. We sincerely hope that a consensus in this direction will soon evolve. It would be in keeping with the urgency of the situation and the international community's commitment to the multilateral process for these consultations to conclude in a preparatory process to coincide with the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations.
240.	India's commitment to the purposes and principles of the United Nations is firmly grounded in the traditions of our foreign policy. As the Prime Minister of India said at the thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly on behalf of the non-aligned countries: "Firm faith in the United Nations is central to the non-aligned". The observance of the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations next year should provide us all with an opportunity for rededication to the ideals that have animated the founders of this Organization.
241.	The non-aligned countries will be in the fore-front of preparations for the commemoration of that anniversary. It would be fitting if participation in the commemorative session by Member States was at the highest level, in order to enhance the significance of the occasion.
242.	The non-aligned countries also suggested at the New Delhi Conference that 1985 should be observed as the Year of the United Nations. Such an anniversary should not become an occasion for mere celebration. Member countries and their peoples need to consider carefully the contribution of the United Nations system over the past four decades, its continuing relevance in the current international situation, and the ways and means by which the Organization can be strengthened in order to meet more effectively the challenges facing contemporary society. Its procedures and methods of work should be improved in order to enhance its overall performance.
243.	Human institutions may and do face temporary set-backs. Rather than give way to despair and allow things to drift, we should make relentless efforts to reinvigorate the United Nations. In this endeavour, the abiding faith in it of the peoples of the world remains its strongest support, and we should do all we can to mobilize it.
244.	The year 1985 will also mark the silver .jubilee of the historic Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, enshrined in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV). That the membership of the United Nations has grown so impressively in recent decades is due in no small measure to the endeavours of the Organization in the field of decolonization. We hope that the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration will be appropriately observed. As a country with a deep and abiding commitment to decolonization, India looks forward to participating in that exercise.
245.	The year 1985 will also be observed as International Youth Year. Youth, which constitutes a crucial segment of the population, can make a valuable contribution to the development process and to the promotion of international understanding, co-operation and peace. It is therefore imperative that the younger generation be provided with all the necessary conditions for participating in national development activities and in the study and resolution of major national, regional and international problems. The observance in 1985 of International Youth Year is indeed timely, as it will serve to draw attention to the specific needs and aspirations of the future generation.
246.	In her address to the General Assembly last year, at its thirty-eighth session, Prime Minister Indira Gandhi referred to a new order struggling to be born amidst the upheavals of the present-day world:
"For us, the non-aligned, and for all who are deeply concerned with the future of humanity, the question is whether we help the birth of this new creation or throttle it before it can draw breath. The matter is not simple, because history has proved time and again that ideas and movements can be obstructed, but not stopped. How long can a few pockets of affluence continue to exert influence on the large populations, the natural resources, the cultural strength of the others? How long can allies and supporters, who may not have a base in their own countries and who are not in tune with the changing times, be perpetuated? You cannot kill an idea by killing its adherents. The new-born will not die; the birth can be delayed but the cost will be much higher and the affluent will have to pay. When peaceful change is thwarted, violent upheaval occurs. Previously, the end of a civilization brought destruction and trauma in its trail. If we keep to past trends, we too will be engulfed by circumstances. But today we have the opportunity, which may well be the first in human history, for humankind to bridge the transition from the old to the new in a conscious way, to build a new era, to move together to a new future."
﻿It gives me pleasure, Mr. President, to associate myself with the warm congratulations offered to you from this rostrum. They are a tribute to your country and to yourself, as well as to a continent which is playing such a prominent role in the United Nations. I hope and trust that, under your leadership and guidance, the deliberations of this session of the General Assembly will be constructive, positive and responsive to the grave problems that face us.
101.	It is gratifying to observe the family of nations grow from year to year, reinforced with new partners in our common endeavours. The United Nations will either stand or fall on the principle of universality. The only attitude we should disavow is the promotion of narrow, selfish interests which run counter to our common international efforts.
102.	Every session of the General Assembly must set out in a spirit of hope that, despite the disappointments of the past, we can and should renew our efforts and work for a better world. Forty years ago, the founders of the United Nations looked back on a tragic past and undertook to forge instruments that would ensure a better future for humanity. So do we, in accordance with ancient Jewish tradition, look back year after year upon the disappointments of the past with firm belief in a better future, buoyed by an unflagging hope in the triumph of that human spirit which never deserts us.
103.	The fortieth anniversary of the end of the Second World War will occur in 1985, as has already been noted from this rostrum. This was a landmark in history and even more so in the annals of my people. Israel and the Jewish people, who still carry so many scars of that terrible war, will commemorate the occasion appropriately. The event will undoubtedly be marked by all nations, as was indeed recommended by the thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly, which invited States Members "to adopt . . . measures declaring punishable by law any dissemination of ideas based on racial superiority or hatred . . . including Nazi, Fascist and neo- Fascist ideologies". The Assembly also appealed to all States to accede to the Convention on the Non-Applicability of Statutory Limitations to War Crimes and Crimes against Humanity. There are still a few pockets of neo-Nazism that continue to linger, and they should be dealt with firmly, but the true heirs to this inhuman creed are those organizations and Governments that continue to this day to deny the right of existence of another State and strive for its outright destruction. There should be no room in civilized society for such doctrines or for those who promote them.
104.	The United Nations concept embraces the whole of mankind. Its raison d'etre is the welfare, present and future, of humanity, with special attention accorded to the underprivileged, the disabled and the oppressed. Our special attention should be focused on the problems of children and of youth and on their appropriate education and training. This should be our central task in building up our nations and societies.
105.	The coming year will be marked by the conclusion of the United Nations Decade for Women, with the World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the Decade to be held at Nairobi. Our hope is that that Conference will become a high point in women's struggle for equality and will not be exploited for narrow and barren political interests.
106.	Technological progress holds the promise of providing solutions to some of the most pressing problems of developing nations, but nowhere is it more sorely needed than in the field of agriculture and food production. It is now widely recognized that the international development effort has failed to meet its most important challenge, the production of food for the fast-growing population of our world. Agriculture is the key to the present challenge, but its development and that of the rural society that sustains it have been sadly neglected.
107.	Great strides have been made world-wide in industry, in the development of infrastructure, transportation, education and health, but food production has remained deficient. It is a terribly sad comment on our society that in this modern age millions go hungry and die of famine; hundreds of millions, mainly children, suffer malnutrition, their future as productive members of their society endangered. Per capita food production in Africa, for instance, has in fact dropped 15 per cent in the last decade. Countries in other continents have required emergency food supplies. Nations that were once self-sufficient have become importers of food and, as a result of their economic difficulties stemming from the increase in the cost of energy, their true independence has become endangered.
108.	Catastrophe awaits many nations if we do not find the way to assure adequate food for our world's growing population. World security and stability begin with the assurance of basic human needs. A change of direction is thus urgently needed in the goals of international development. That is the challenge of this decade. This goal can be reached despite the scarcity of arable land and water and despite the meagre resources that are available in various countries. In fact, Israel has emerged in only one generation from severe austerity and food rationing to self-reliance; we have increased our food production twelvefold and have become a net exporter of food.
109.	Israel recently marked the twenty-fifth anniversary of its programme for international development co-operation. This programme had its beginning in the late 1950s and early 1960s with the emergence of newly independent nations that sought rapid development. Imbued with a pioneering spirit that thrived on successful adaptation and innovation in the development of their own country, the people of Israel considered it a duty to share the knowledge acquired through their own rapid development experience with the peoples of other emerging nations.
110.	Israel calls upon all Governments to set aside political differences and narrow economic interests to join forces in the campaign against hunger. Israel will continue to co-operate with other nations in technology and development and stands ready to join other Governments, international agencies and non-governmental organizations in working to meet this great challenge to humanity.
111.	Israel is the fulfilment of an age-old dream and prayer for the re-establishment of the Jewish State in the Land of Israel. It is the home of all Jews who wish to make it their home, and it is the defender and protector of all Jews who are oppressed or persecuted because they belong to the Jewish people. These principles are enshrined in Israel's Declaration of Independence, in its laws and in the conscience of its people.
112.	We are aghast at the fact that, 40 years after the eradication of Nazism, rampant anti-Semitism and racial discrimination still exist in a number of countries. The situation of Soviet Jewry has recently taken a definite turn for the worse. From this rostrum I call upon the Government of the Soviet Union to remove the harsh limitations and restrictions imposed upon Jews who seek repatriation and reunion with their brethren in Israel. The continued harassment of Soviet Jews has become one of the most pressing humanitarian problems of the day, a violation of the most basic human rights as expressed in the Helsinki accords. Hundreds of thousands of Jews are being systematically denied their rights and many are forced to live as outcasts, deprived of their livelihood, harassed or imprisoned in gaols and labour camps under inhuman conditions.
113.	Soviet Jews are deprived of access to Jewish culture. A systematic campaign is waged against those Soviet Jews teaching and studying the Hebrew language. Ill-concealed under the cloak of anti-zionism, officially inspired anti-Semitism is being increasingly manifested in the Soviet media.
114.	We call upon the Soviet Government to change its policy, which is unjustifiable. The Soviet Jews are not involved in any anti-Soviet activity, nor are they violating Soviet laws or working against Soviet interests. Their only wish is to study their ancient culture and their national language and to live as Jews in their historic homeland. It should be recalled that in front of this very Assembly official representatives of the Soviet Union have declared that the Jewish people have a right to a State of their own. Soviet Jewry demands nothing more than to exercise this right.
115.	In our own part of the world, the Middle East, the Jews of Syria continue to suffer under a harsh regime that holds them hostage and refuses to grant them basic human rights, the most important of which is the right to emigrate and join their brethren. Periodic killings of Jews, either sanctioned or tolerated by the authorities, maintain a climate of terror among the Jews of Syria.
116.	In Ethiopia, an ancient Jewish community struggles to maintain its heritage, culture and integrity under dire hardship. We acknowledge the gesture of the Ethiopian Government, which has recently enabled Jews and non-Jews from all over the world to visit that community, and we express our sincere hope that it will take all necessary steps to protect and respect their religious and cultural rights and enable those who so desire to be reunited with their families in their ancient homeland.
117.	On 13 September 1984, a Government of national unity, encompassing the overwhelming majority of political parties in Israel, was established. Its creation is a reflection of the wide consensus that unites the people of Israel on the main issues on the Government's agenda in the economic, defence and political domains.
118.	In its foreign relations, Israel is dedicated, as always, to the goal of peace and accommodation with all its neighbours. In the north, we stand ready to reach an understanding with Lebanon which will guarantee the security of our common border and thus make possible the withdrawal of all forces from southern Lebanon. Syria remains dogmatically opposed to the idea of peace with Israel. Nevertheless, we are adamant in our conviction that there can be no solution other than peace. In the east, we have repeatedly called on the Government of Jordan to join us in negotiations for peace. In the south, of course, we have peace with Egypt, but we are convinced that peaceful relations should be deepened and strengthened in the face of so much rejectionist pressure against peace.
119.	The chances of progress towards further peace and stability between Israel and its neighbours must be appraised, however, in the context of the realities of the region.
120.	The Middle East continues to be beset by violence, bitter conflicts and wars. In a few weeks of bloodshed along the Iran-Iraq border, more men and children die than in all the Arab-Israel wars. Thousands die every year in domestic strife and hostilities entirely unconnected with the Arab-Israel conflict. Yet, as everyone in this Hall knows full well, a disproportionate amount of the time of the General Assembly is devoted year after year to a contrived and counter-productive review of the Arab-Israel conflict, the main purpose of which seems to be only to slander Israel.
121.	In the last two decades, the violence and oppression that characterize so many regimes in the Middle East have erupted on the international scene in waves of terrorism, hijacking and assassination. When in 1972 the Secretary-General proposed that the United Nations promote measures to counter international terrorism, we were among the first to welcome that initiative. Regrettably, it has been thwarted by States that sponsor and support terrorism. Middle Eastern terrorism, sanctioned by these Governments, has been thus allowed, through neglect and indifference, to expand to more and more countries. Today the cancer of terrorism has spread to all continents. The latest form of terrorism and international piracy is the mines that threaten shipping and the freedom of navigation in the Red Sea. Recently, we were again horrified by the murderous bombing of the United States Embassy at Beirut, a calculated and deliberate act of terrorism.
122.	Terror is a malignant disease that will spread everywhere if not contained. But at least in one instance concerted international effort has produced results. When terrorism first raised its ugly head in the mid-1960s, its prime target was international civil aviation. Planes were hijacked almost daily, aircraft bombed, passengers terrorized and murdered. The proper functioning of civil aviation today is a result of powerful measures taken jointly by many nations to ensure the safety of passengers and aircraft and to combat the threat of hijackings. But such successful international co-operation remains an exception. Terrorism is still an item on the Assembly's agenda, but it is debated ineffectively, shunted aside by vested interests which offer its representatives support, sustenance and even quasi- recognition. As long as the family of nations continues to evade its responsibilities, to appease rather than punish, to pardon terrorists rather than prosecute or extradite them, to afford terrorists diplomatic immunity, the disease will spread and claim yet more victims in our homes and communities.
123.	Whenever a particularly outrageous terrorist attack takes place, as for example the recent bombing of the United States Embassy at Beirut, a wave of outrage sweeps public opinion in all parts of the civilized world. People naturally demand instant retaliation against such despicable acts and a fitting punishment for the criminal perpetrators.
124.	While punishment has its necessary place in any system of justice, the overriding problem here is not whom to punish and how punishment should be delivered. Rather, it is how to prevent terrorism and root it out from the international arena. There is only one way to deal with this problem. Those countries which agree that terrorism must be eradicated should join forces and wage a permanent war on the terrorist organizations. This is the only way to expose, pre-empt, weaken and finally destroy them. This is a war of self-defence in its true sense, a campaign that the free world should undertake on behalf of its peoples and of the entire human race.
125.	For its part, Israel has been waging an unrelenting war on Arab terrorism and has dealt it a number of crippling blows. The so-called PLO, which had established its own mini-terrorist State in Lebanon, from which it carried out and assisted terrorist acts in five continents, was expelled from that country. But Israel cannot be expected to shoulder alone the burden of fighting international terrorism. Since we are all potential victims of terror, we must fight it together. If we do not, terrorism will endanger our basic freedoms and all the standards of civilized behaviour for which the United Nations stands.
126.	The attitude underpinning Arab terrorist attacks against Israel is the continued denial by Arab States of Israel's right to exist. Translated into wanton attacks on civilians, the ideology is cruel and inhuman. But it has produced the very opposite result to that intended. Israel has taken the necessary measures to protect its people and enable them to live and prosper alongside their Arab neighbours throughout the Land of Israel. We have to state with regret that any sign of ostensible moderation in the attitude of Arab Governments towards Israel is negated by their sustenance and support of terrorist organizations committed to Israel's destruction and by their continued attempts to expel Israel from United Nations bodies and other international organizations. We will welcome a change in the Arab stance if it is given concrete expression, such as a clear-cut disengagement from the so-called PLO and other terrorist organizations and a straightforward statement of readiness to make peace with Israel.
127.	Sadly, such a breakthrough for peace was set back by the General Assembly's rejection of the Camp David accords and the Israel-Egypt peace treaty, for no other reason than that certain Arab States reject the idea of peace with Israel. Camp David has been the only ray of light in an otherwise dismal and dark picture of hostility. It will continue to serve as a beacon of hope until its message is finally accepted by the peoples and Governments of our region.
128.	The United Nations can contribute to peace in the Middle East by a change of direction. It should embrace the idea of peace between Israel and its neighbours condemn the blatant attacks on Israel and reject outright the attempts to expel it from international forums. Recently, an attempt to expel Israel from the UPU was properly rejected by an overwhelming majority. It is now time for the United Nations as a whole to muster the courage to condemn such behaviour. It will mark an important milestone in rehabilitating the image of the United Nations and its standing in the world community.
129.	Recently, the idea of convening an international conference on the Middle East was resurrected. It was advanced by a State that has no diplomatic relations with Israel and that recommends the participation of representatives of terrorist groups. The Arab-Israel dispute is not in need of another international forum. There have been more than enough such gatherings and proposals, and they have all proved futile. They served as a stage for propaganda and for competition between Arab States in the politics of public confrontation with Israel. A conference such as the one being proposed would strike a blow at the principle of direct negotiations, which has proved to be the only means of producing agreements between Israel and its neighbours, from the time of the General Armistice Agreements in 1949 through the Camp David accords in 1978.
130.	We therefore call on Member States that have the interest of peace at heart to bring their influence to bear on our Arab neighbours to the east and north to adopt the only successful and tested path to peace—direct negotiations with Israel.
131.	Such negotiations produced the agreement with Lebanon which was signed on 17 May 1983. That agreement provided for security arrangements against terrorism and an agreed basis for normal relations between our two countries across the recognized international boundaries. It was approved by the legislatures of Israel and Lebanon, but Syria and those that cannot tolerate the idea of peace with Israel destroyed it by the application of sheer, brutal force. The agreement was designed to lead to the withdrawal of all foreign forces from Lebanon, the restoration of Lebanese independence and the establishment of security measures along the Lebanon- Israel border.
132.	Today, some 40,000 Syrian troops occupy 65 per cent of Lebanon and show no sign of any intention to leave. The Lebanese Government is dominated by Syria and is not capable of conducting free negotiations that would resolve its problems with Israel. Obviously, Israel will ensure its legitimate security needs and make the necessary arrangements in southern Lebanon to protect the people of northern Israel against any repetition of the terrorist attacks of recent years. I reiterate our readiness to withdraw all our forces from Lebanon, subject to the above-mentioned arrangements.
133.	By now it should be clear to everyone, including the Arab States in our area, that Israel has no interest in maintaining any military presence in Lebanon. But we have to make certain that after the last Israeli soldier leaves Lebanon, the terrorists will not return to attack us.
134.	Let me repeat: anyone, any people or State that is interested in the evacuation of the Israel army from Lebanon must see to it that the terrorist organizations expelled from Lebanon by Israel do not return to our borders to renew their attacks. This is an essential condition for peace. Israel is ready to cooperate in any serious effort towards a fair solution to this problem.
135.	Since the conclusion of the Camp David accords, Israel has repeatedly called on Jordan, Egypt and the Palestinian Arabs to join in negotiations for an agreement on autonomy. Unfortunately, Egypt has discontinued its participation in the talks, while Jordan and the Palestinian Arabs have refused to join them. Arab rejectionism and extremism continue to have a stranglehold on those who may have been willing to embark on the path of moderation and peace.
136.	From this rostrum, I turn yet again to our neighbours with the same call. Let us move forward together on a new path. Let us talk to one another. Let us engage in a common effort to resolve our conflicts, rather than perpetuate the negative attitudes which find frequent expression in this building.
137.	Until this call is heeded, Israel will continue to strive for an end to Arab rejectionist attitudes and aspire to mutual acceptance, tolerance, understanding and dialogue, which are consonant with the most basic goals of the United Nations.
138.	Israel is aware of the substantial contribution which the peaceful uses of nuclear energy can make to the well-being of the world and of the right of all countries to benefit from such uses. We support those international arrangements that would ensure the status and inviolability of nuclear facilities dedicated to peaceful purposes.
139.	Israel has long been concerned by the dangers posed by nuclear armaments and has therefore consistently supported the objective of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons.
140.	We believe that the most credible barrier to proliferation in such a sensitive area as the Middle East is a freely negotiated nuclear-weapon-free zone. In this belief, we are encouraged by the Latin American experience and the recent progress towards establishing the South Pacific as a nuclear-weapon- free zone.
141.	In the vital field of disarmament, we are impelled by a permanent moral imperative. Progress in this field is indispensable if we are to remove the nuclear threat. It may be a commonplace to say that time is running out, but it is nevertheless true. A very recent experience demonstrates that weapons, once they exist, are used. During the current terrible Iran- Iraq war, new non-conventional weapons, such as gas, have been used. This latest addition to the arsenal of fighting armies, against established international conventions and basic decency, cannot but arouse the deepest anxiety. It should be opposed vigorously by anyone concerned for the future of our civilization. All of us are aware that a moderation of the armament spiral, both conventional and non- conventional, will free huge resources needed for the welfare of mankind, in particular that of the developing countries.
142.	In conclusion, our mission is twofold. Our first task is the improvement of the quality of life in this world, especially for those who are suffering or who lack the means of sustenance; the hungry millions are waiting for us to do our duty. Our second task is to concert our efforts to eradicate from our midst terrorism and all other violations of civilized norms. We must dedicate equal effort to achieving both goals. We cannot accomplish our humanitarian task unless we overcome the dangers that threaten our society. Both objectives can be achieved provided we muster the courage and the will to do so. Our reward will be true peace. There can be no greater goal for the United Nations.
143.	The vision of our ancient prophets of universal peace was intended for a distant, Utopian future. But, if we succeed in removing these two formidable obstacles—hunger and terrorism—from our path, the march of humanity towards the fulfilment of that vision will be immeasurably advanced, our stride quickened and our hearts uplifted with the promise of better days.
﻿Mr. President, I congratulate you on your election. When Africa's problems are looming so large, it is appropriate that an African should once again preside over the General Assembly. We are confident that your presidency will help make this session a fruitful one. New Zealand will do all it can to assist you.
3.	We welcome the newest Member of the United Nations, Brunei Darussalam, a country of our own part of the world, with which we have long-standing ties. New Zealand has long believed that the membership of the Organization should be universal. We welcome every step in that direction. We would not want to see the principle of universality compromised in any way.
4.	I would not adequately reflect the views of most New Zealanders if I did not, right at the beginning of my first address to the General Assembly, talk about an issue that has become very prominent in public debate in our country. New Zealanders—not just a few of them, but people from all sectors of the community—have become gravely concerned about nuclear weapons and the continuing and deadly competition in their production, their refinement and their deployment.
5.	New Zealand is a small and remote country, perhaps a little distant from the mainstream of world affairs. We are fortunate enough to live in a region that constitutes a pocket of tranquillity in a deeply divided and troubled world. Like many members of the international community, New Zealand faces serious economic problems and some social ones as well; but we are at least able to come to grips with these problems without having our attention diverted by those immediate worries out security that are all too familiar for many Members of the United Nations. We are not occupied; we are nobody's client; we have excellent relations with all our neighbours; in 1984 no other country has New Zealand in its sights. For our longer-term protection we rely on our membership of the Western Alliance. That membership is formally expressed in a security treaty with the United States and Australia which for 33 years has been a central feature of the foreign and defence policies of successive New Zealand Governments, including my own.
6.	Against this background, why is it that New Zealanders are becoming increasingly worried about a contest that is centred in two capitals half a world away? With no more immodesty than many others, New Zealanders like to think of themselves as practical and sensible people. They are simply alarmed at the continuing build-up of nuclear arsenals, because they can see no sense in it. How does it make sense continually to augment and refine an existing capacity to make the rubble bounce and bounce and bounce again? New Zealanders have felt deepening frustration at the inability of the States that hold nuclear weapons, in particular the two super-Powers, to agree on practical measures to halt and reverse the process of building more and "better" nuclear weapons. If ordinary people everywhere can see the irrationality of that race, they ask, why cannot the super-Powers see it also? And, if they can see it, why do they not do something about it?
7.	Quite recently, another dimension has been added to these concerns. Our people, like others round the world, have known for a long time that the possibility of nuclear war is a terrible and frightening one. They have known for very many years that if the countries that have these weapons eventually descend to hurling them at each other, then those countries and their peoples will be destroyed. They have also recognized that other countries, including New Zealand, would suffer very severely indeed. But New Zealanders had not previously supposed that the direct physical consequences for them could be overwhelming. If common humanity and concern for others dictated anxiety about nuclear war, it was thought, perhaps we could afford to be slightly less anxious than others.
8.	Within the last year or so, New Zealanders have been told that even that last tattered shred of reassurance is probably no longer available. Reputable scientists from east and west have told us that the global, climatic and long-term biological consequences of a nuclear war would be much more severe than had been previously thought. What is more, that would be the case if even a relatively small part of existing nuclear arsenals was used or if the weapons were used only against so-called counter-force or military targets. The scientists have also told us that nuclear war in the north may generate a nuclear winter in the south as well. They have gone further and advised us that there is a possibility of the self- inflicted extinction of the human species. That, we are told, is what could flow from the deliberate, if irrational, act, the mistake, the miscalculation or the accident.
9.	To New Zealanders this is a truly appalling state of affairs. Refinements or modifications of the predictions which the scientists have made about the consequences of nuclear war may be made as a result of further work, but they will concern only the exact range of utter disaster.
10.	What the scientists have already made entirely plain to all of us—plainer than ever before—is that the nuclear weapons that may have helped to maintain an uneasy peace between two great countries for more than three decades have become a threat to the security and survival of countries and peoples everywhere. The situation we are facing is quite unlike any other with which the international community has had to grapple before. It is one from which, unpalatable though it may be to think about, no country— and, for that matter, no individual—can back away. We shall not escape from it if the traditional prescriptions of great-Power politics are applied.
11.	What the scientists have not demonstrated, of course, is that nuclear war will occur or that it is more likely now than it was in the past. But the question how close we may be to falling into the abyss does not take account of the essential point. The fact is that a nuclear war is possible, whether it is half a year or 100 years away or whether, as we all hope, it never occurs.
12.	None of the nuclear-weapon States can tell us that it will not occur, that they will never do what they have in their power to do. The results of the use of nuclear weapons would be so grave that it is absolutely incumbent upon the nuclear-weapon States to do everything possible to avoid their use. And that would remain the case even if the consequences of nuclear war should be shown later to be only half or a quarter as bad as the scientists have predicted.
13.	My Government can find no encouragement in the recent response of the nuclear-weapon States to this situation. The refinement and deployment of nuclear weapons continues apace. There are disquieting indications that the military competition between the super-Powers may, in the coming years, move to the new environment of outer space. Multilateral arms control negotiations are stalled and, in some cases, in danger of being discredited. I would ask the Soviet Union to respond positively to the United States invitation to resume key bilateral arms control talks in order to get a dialogue under way again.
14.	My Government hopes that the two super-Powers will take a long hard look at the course of developments in the nuclear arms race. It is clearly in their own interests and in the interests of all of us to make a new and very much more determined attempt to reach agreements that will enable them to change direction. None of us underestimates the complexities involved in reaching agreements that will permit a mutual, balanced, verifiable—and very large—reduction in existing levels of nuclear weapons. We are aware that it will not be easy to manage safely the transition to a more secure world where, as a stage in the road to their elimination, the number of nuclear weapons is drastically reduced and where innovations in weaponry, if they are to occur at all, are not of a kind that cause instability. That process will require trust and good will. It is also likely to require the taking of risks. But the most dangerous risk of all is to do nothing: to allow compulsive competitiveness to continue indefinitely.
15.	We ask, in addition, of the Soviet Union that it reflect on the fact that many countries, of which New Zealand is one, have the greatest difficulty in under-standing its current reluctance to take part in bilateral arms control negotiations with the United States. The events that occurred between 1939 and 1945 gave the Soviet Union every reason to be concerned about preserving the peace. It will advance that cause by returning to the bargaining table and looking at ways and means of beginning the process of de-escalation.
16.	Countries such as my own have to recognize that the contribution we can make to assist this process is limited; but we are bound to continue to try. There are several things we want to emphasize. The most urgent of these is the need for massive reductions in strategic nuclear arms. There are other things as well. New Zealand has, for many years, argued the case for the conclusion of a comprehensive test-ban treaty.
17.	It needs to be understood that our advocacy of that measure is not prompted solely by the fact that one of the nuclear-weapon States continues, despite repeated pleas from all the countries in the region, to test its weapons in the South Pacific. We see a prohibition of the testing of nuclear weapons by any country in any environment as a critical first step in halting and then turning back the arms race. We have been disappointed at the lack of progress made in securing such a prohibition. My delegation will again at this session of the General Assembly sponsor a draft resolution which seeks to encourage and speed up that work.
18.	A comprehensive test ban will also be of the greatest importance in preventing the further spread of nuclear weapons. Everything possible must be done to stop that from happening. My Government will want to take an active part in the Third Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons next year. We see that Treaty as fundamental to world security.
19.	There are, of course, other techniques of modern warfare which are not much less unpleasant than nuclear weapons. Biological weapons have already been outlawed. The need for a comprehensive agreement to outlaw the manufacture and use of all chemical weapons is another matter of concern to New Zealand. During the past year there appears to have been some prospect of progress in that direction. We urge the Conference on Disarmament to get on with the task.
20.	If the international community is to chart a way out of the current impasse on nuclear weapons, this will be done through global measures in which the nuclear-weapon States will play the major role. But regional initiatives can also make a contribution. My Government regards the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco) as a significant regional advance. We are also fully committed to, and will vigorously defend, the Antarctic Treaty, which demilitarized a whole continent to the south of New Zealand and prohibited the basing or testing of nuclear weapons and which, for more than 20 years, has effectively guaranteed the stability of that region.
21.	Very recently, a new initiative has been taken in our part of the world. On the proposal of Australia and with the full support of my Government, the heads of Government of the 11 countries that make up the South Pacific Forum agreed on 28 August of this year, at a meeting in Tuvalu, on the desirability of establishing a South Pacific nuclear-free zone at the earliest opportunity. The heads of Government spelt out the principles that will be applied in the construction of such a zone. It was agreed that there should be no use, testing or stationing of nuclear devices in the South Pacific; that no South Pacific country would develop or manufacture or receive from others or acquire or test any nuclear explosive device; and that nuclear activities in the South Pacific would be conducted in accordance with applicable international principles and treaties, notably the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. The meeting acknowledged the need for a South Pacific nuclear-free zone to respect the principles of freedom of navigation and overflight. It was accepted that South Pacific countries would retain their unqualified sovereign right to decide for themselves, consistent with the objectives of the zone, on their security arrangements and on such questions as the access to their ports and airfields by vessels and aircraft of other countries. It was agreed that in the course of the next year a draft of a treaty to establish the zone should be prepared.
22.	This initiative represents, I believe, a major advance for the region. It would net, we know, spare us from the consequences of nuclear war but, when in place, it would significantly strengthen the existing measures, both global and regional, to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons. It would also, I believe, convey a clear signal that the South Pacific countries do not want their region to become an arena for rivalry involving nuclear weapons.
23.	New Zealand would hope to be in a position to report to the General Assembly next year and, before that, to the Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons that good progress has been made in creating a South Pacific nuclear-free zone. New Zealand and the other countries of our region naturally expect that, when the necessary work has been done within the region, all the nuclear-weapon States will co-operate with us to ensure that the zone becomes a reality.
24.	The recent meeting of the South Pacific Forum turned its attention also to the evolving situation in New Caledonia.
25.	The question is not really where that Territory is going. Rather, it is how it gets there, and at what pace. The French Government has, I believe, made a clear and irreversible commitment to self-determination for the peoples of New Caledonia. There is a particular mix of interests and problems that must be resolved carefully and by the people most directly concerned, that is to say, by all the ethnic groups that have a legitimate stake in the future of New Caledonia.
26.	All members of the Forum agreed that the changes that are to come in New Caledonia—and they must and will come—should be made speedily and peacefully, that is to say, without violence and without external interference. It is up to all parties concerned to exercise moderation. They must work together to achieve the kind of political future that satisfies the demands of a truly democratic and harmonious multi-ethnic society in New Caledonia.
27.	A significant amount of progress has been made. A lot remains to be done. That was recognized at the Forum. There we were agreed that the process of decolonization would be advanced by a public statement from France about its commitment to independence for New Caledonia. We gave it as our view that the referendum planned for 1989 should be brought forward; 1989 was, we felt, too distant a date. And we suggested some intensification of preparation for the country's eventual independence to ensure the full and active participation of the Kanak people in the country's educational, vocational and administrative life.
28.	We called too, at that Forum, on the Independence Front to play its part in the early and peaceful evolution of New Caledonia to independence by recognizing the need for independence to reflect fully the multiracial nature of New Caledonia.
29.	What we stressed above all was the crucial role of dialogue—that those involved should keep talking to each other. That was the message which the Tuvalu Forum sought to convey to France and to the Independence Front. I am hopeful that an initiative taken by the Forum to foster the process of dialogue will soon get under way and that a group of Ministers from Forum countries—including New Zealand— will be able to talk to the leaders of the Independence Front and to the French Government to tell each of them about the concern of the countries in our part of the world that New Caledonia should move through conference and dialogue, not through confrontation and dispute, to independence. We in the South Pacific have always found solutions to problems through dialogue, discussion, consensus; and it is through dialogue and consensus that we wish to see New Caledonia take its rightful place soon in the community of the nations of the South Pacific.
30.	Neither we nor our South Pacific partners want to see unwelcome external influences intrude upon events of New Caledonia, nor to see the transition to independence marred by an outcome that is not in accordance with the wishes of all those in New Caledonia who have made that country their permanent home. Our part of the world has been fortunate in that it has been free from the conflict and violence that have so often accompanied decolonization elsewhere. We do not want that record to be blemished. I am confident that it will not be.
31.	If it is important to all of us living in the South Pacific that our region remain free from conflict, we are equally concerned to ensure that our backyard, the Antarctic, does not become an area of international rivalry and discord. I have already noted that the Antarctic Treaty demilitarized Antarctica. What is even more important, the Treaty provides the only possible guarantee that the region will continue to be free from international rivalry and conflict. The study on the question of Antarctica, submitted by the Secretary-General should help countries more remote from the region to understand the contribution the Treaty has made and continues to make to the achievement of the purposes of the United Nations. I hope it will convince them that the Treaty system, which is open to all Members of the United Nations, must be preserved and strengthened.
32.	I referred a moment ago to a conviction that there has been an irrevocable commitment to self- determination for the people of New Caledonia. I wish I could say the same about the situation in southern Africa. Namibia continues to be unlawfully occupied by South Africa. The United Nations has had no choice but itself to accept a special responsibility for the Territory. It has guaranteed to its people that they will be able to exercise their right of self- determination. But that promise has been subverted by South Africa's determination to accept no settlement except on its own terms, and by the military power which reinforces the obstinacy and aggression that South Africa has also shown towards its other neighbours.
33.	I wish, too, that it could be said that the agreements South Africa has recently concluded with neighbouring States signified a new era in the region. Regrettably, they do not appear to be agreements made willingly in order to resolve difficulties and develop closer working partnerships, or agreements in which peace and justice were equally sought by both sides.
34.	Nor can it be said that the South African Government has offered justice to the people of South Africa in its new constitutional arrangements. There is not the slightest indication that it is ready to share political power with the black majority. Nor is there any sign that it is willing to dismantle the system. The essence of that system is unchanged. In recent and separate elections the Coloured and Indian communities have spurned the South African Government's attempt to draw them into an alliance and, by so doing, have confirmed their rejection of the apartheid system.
35.	New Zealand likewise rejects apartheid and all it stands for. We are committed in our country to building a multiracial society based on freedom, justice and consent. The South Africans have already learned that my Government will not compromise with a system that rejects those values.
36.	If my Government believes that there is today more reason than ever before to keep the basic issue of war and peace right at the top of the agenda of the United Nations, we also see an urgent need to move quickly and firmly to tackle the economic problems facing the world.
37.	The world economy is just beginning to emerge from the worst trial it has known for over 30 years. Investment and production have increased, inflation is down and world trade is increasing. But doubts persist. Unhappily, even now many countries have yet to benefit significantly from the recovery in some of the leading industrial economies. The international financial system has shown enough flexibility to survive the recent crisis. That is a relief. But it is hard to feel very optimistic about the future when many countries are still struggling to meet their financial obligations and in many others large numbers of people are actually facing starvation.
38.	The protracted debates in international forums during the past few years have not done much to alleviate the real problems confronting us. New Zealand would like to encourage the development of a gradual movement towards pragmatism and compromise. New Zealanders have never seen much prospect of resolving the world's economic problems through confrontation. Dialogue and consensus are the techniques that we are trying to use in our own country, and they seem to us to hold out the best chance of success on the international scene.
39.	The recent economic crisis has had at least one good result. During the past year or so, it has become widely recognized among industrialized as well as developing countries that, despite the role that international financial institutions have played in supporting the adjustment and development efforts of individual countries, the present international system is not working well. If proof is still required it can easily be found in the debt problem, on the one hand, and the problem of protectionism, on the other. More and more, international trade is escaping the multilateral rules that should safeguard the interests of all countries, including the smaller among them. The need for an overhaul is pressing. The task now is to find the right technique for the job—that is, a technique that will work. New Zealand has been active in the search for an acceptable and effective procedure for dealing with the problem. New Zealand supports a comprehensive review of the trade and payments system.
40.	Before I finish I want to reaffirm my faith and my country's in the United Nations. Nowadays there are many people who question the usefulness of the Organization for their own countries if not for the world at large. I am not one of them. I believe that the Charter of the United Nations is the foundation of the system of international relations under which we have all lived for nearly 40 years. I believe that the essential function of the United Nations under the Charter is to discourage the use of force by one State against another. I believe that the Organization has played a part in saving us all so far from the catastrophe of a third world war. I belong to a generation in my country which has never experienced at first hand the ravages of war in the sense of the amount of fear that war brings, and throughout my lifetime the United Nations has symbolized, as it has coexisted with a level of peace for which we yearn, the fact that multilateral arrangements can be of benefit to the human race. I believe that the United Nations has an important contribution to make towards bringing the nuclear arms race under control and freeing us from the fear of nuclear war. I believe that I and all New Zealanders and our children can rest more peacefully because of the work that is done within the United Nations, and I believe that that is true for all peoples on our Earth.
﻿Mr. Lusaka, I congratulate you on your election to the office of President of the thirty-ninth session of the General Assembly. Our congratulations also go to the representatives of Brunei Darussalam, a State which has become the 159th Member of the United Nations.
58.	For almost 40 years now, the words "the United Nations" have been firmly established in the world's political vocabulary. There is virtually no major international problem in connection with which those words would not be spoken in different languages, both in this Hall and outside it.
59.	The extensive involvement of the United Nations in world affairs and developments is determined by the very mission of this forum, which was brought into being in order to unite the political will and potential of States for the purpose of maintaining international peace and security.
60.	The conclusion reached by the founding Members of the United Nations was very simple indeed. It was born of the experience of the most bloody and destructive war that has ever befallen mankind. Indeed, it was precisely through united efforts that the aggressor was crushed. High was the cost of the great victory whose fortieth anniversary will be observed next year. All the peoples who fought against fascism contributed to that victory, but the Soviet Union's decisive role in it is indisputable.
61.	United efforts were and are still needed today in order to build the post-war world. For it is the main lesson of the Second World War that States must stand together in the fight against war.
62.	It is common knowledge, however, that as the war-ravaged earth was still smouldering and thousands of towns and villages were in ruins, the international atmosphere once again began to deteriorate and ultimately to become critical. This happened through the fault of those who, in their quest for world hegemony, began to behave contrary to their obligations as allies in the anti-Hitlerite coalition, oblivious to the lessons of the past.
63.	In disregard of the lofty purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, which they too had just signed, a group of States set out to escalate their military preparations by putting together a system of aggressive military blocs with the North Atlantic Alliance as its pivot. Those States pledged themselves to a policy based on a position of strength, a policy of brinkmanship. They are responsible for the advent of the cold war, which for a long time froze the normal flow of international life for which the peoples of the world yearned.
64.	As a result, in the post-war years the world has been in a state of fever. And whenever international relations were marked—as was the case during the period of detente—by budding cooperation between States with different social systems, no effort was spared to undermine those positive processes, which is exactly what happened at the whim of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization [NATO] military bloc. It is precisely this trend in world politics that is the source of the situation that characterizes the international climate today. The threat of war has grown and the foundations of world peace have become more shaky.
65.	This course, which is manifest as never before in the current policies of the United States and of those who choose to be its accomplices, is opposed by a broad front of peace-loving States and forces.
66.	The Soviet Union is in the vanguard of active champions of peace. It has been and remains faithful to its solemn pledge taken right after the criminal Fascist swastika was crushed and the Hitlerite war machine smashed. The essence of that pledge has not faded with the years; it is to fight resolutely to ensure that the flames of world war never flare up again. The fact that it has been possible for almost 40 years to ward it off is largely to the credit of the countries which pursue a policy of peace among nations and frustrate—by their international prestige and influence—aggressive and adventuristic designs wherever they originate. The Soviet Union is one of them.
67.	Together with other socialist countries, we shall continue to work in the interest of improving international relations. This is precisely the thrust of the documents of the meeting of the Political Consultative Committee of the States Parties to the Warsaw Treaty, held at Prague on 4 and 5 January 1983, and of the high-level Economic Conference of the member countries of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance, held in Moscow from 12 to 14 June 1984.
68.	The Soviet Union and the States of the socialist community are concentrating their efforts on attaining the key objective of preventing a nuclear disaster. For if the destructive potential currently amassed in the world were unleashed the human race would probably cease to exist. To prevent that from happening is a goal of overriding importance. AH States represented in the United Nations should contribute to its achievement. No one and nothing can relieve them of the responsibility they have assumed under the Charter of the United Nations for the destiny of present and succeeding generations.
69.	As was stressed recently by Mr. Chernenko, General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics: "The world has radically changed. Its problems cannot be solved by force ... it is imperative to adopt a policy of realism, reason and business-like cooperation in solving the problems that face mankind."
70.	Those who truly hold dear the interests of peace cannot confine themselves merely to stating that there exists a threat of nuclear war. It is necessary to pinpoint the source of that threat. Clarity in this regard is not merely a matter of historical fairness. An understanding of the factors that are pushing mankind towards a nuclear abyss also determines the answer to the question whether or not this calamitous process can be stopped, and how.
71.	It is of fundamental importance to compare the two political trends and the two approaches to the problem of nuclear weapons.
72.	Right after Hiroshima and Nagasaki the world witnessed the inception of a policy of ever greater stockpiles of nuclear weapons and nuclear blackmail. The Soviet Union forcefully called for the outlawing of these most deadly and destructive weapons. Indeed, as early as 1946 the Soviet Union submitted at the United Nations a draft international convention on the prohibition for all time of the production and use of nuclear weapons and on the destruction of their stockpiles. I am sure there are some present here in this Hall who witnessed the discussion of this item at that time.
73.	Yet our former allies in the struggle against fascism did not have the heart to vote for that proposal. Their reaction then was bound to make the peoples apprehensive and it did cause serious apprehension.
74.	And what is the situation today? Statements are being openly made at the highest official levels that the United States has the right to deliver a first nuclear strike, that is to say, to unleash a nuclear war.
75.	Our country sought a ban on nuclear weapons both when it did not possess them and after it developed them. Today, as before, the Soviet Union favours prompt measures to reduce and eventually eliminate nuclear weapons altogether. This is the aim of a comprehensive set of initiatives advanced by the Soviet Union.
76.	Whenever the United States side showed realism and the will to come to agreement on the basis of the principle of equality and equal security—something that did happen before—it proved possible to reach important accords. Thus, a major step forward was taken with the conclusion in 1972 by the Soviet Union and the United States of the Interim Agreement on Certain Measures with respect to the Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms and the Treaty on the Limitation of Antiballistic Missile Systems.
77.	However, in the years that followed, our attempts to reduce or at least to limit nuclear arms failed to produce concrete results. The tug of war between the groups that determine United States foreign policy has been won by the militaristically minded. They attempt to devalue the existing Soviet American accords by wrecking what was achieved earlier through long and painstaking work on both sides, as was done with the SALT II Treaty.
78.	They broke off and refuse to resume the trilateral talks between the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the United States on the complete and general prohibition of nuclear weapons tests. They stalled the ratification of the Soviet United States treaties on the limitation of underground nuclear weapons tests and on peaceful nuclear explosions that had been signed a long time ago. And what tremendous efforts were required to arrive at those treaties and agreements.
79.	Those and other similar actions are but a few examples of the policy of the United States, whose central objective is to try to secure military superiority for itself.
80.	Stories intended to mislead people are being churned out in profusion. Not that they are particularly reticent about saying that, should they eventually feel like negotiating, they would do so only from strength. To that end—they claim—the United States must first build up its military muscle.
81.	It took Washington a long time to send its team to the negotiating table at Geneva. However, at the talks the United States side followed a scenario that was not designed to lead to agreement. How else can one describe the fact that while negotiating the limitation of nuclear arms in Europe our partners did exactly the opposite? Beforehand—I repeat, beforehand—they set the date for deploying new United States medium range missiles on the territories of several Western European States. We were told to accept the United States position or else there would be no agreement. So there is no agreement.
82.	As to the Soviet proposals paving the way to agreements, they were rejected out of hand. Anything aimed at reaching agreement on the basis of equality was opposed with hostility.
83.	It was Washington's deliberate intention to wreck the negotiations on nuclear arms—both medium range and strategic. And it succeeded in this. Juggling with words ostensibly in favour of negotiations is a false propaganda ploy. Its purpose is obvious.
84.	Now they rejoice that they were able to keep the timetable and begin the deployment of their missiles in Europe, as planned. Even here in the course of the General Assembly one can meet representatives of Western European States who are rubbing their hands with pleasure over the fact that the plan for deployment is being implemented.
85.	It makes no difference whether deception is crude or cleverly packaged. A good idea is being exploited for unsavoury purposes.
86.	We have noticed that there are realistically minded politicians and statesmen in the West, including the United States, who realize that it is precisely in this way that the issue of negotiations is being used.
87.	No, the path of stockpiling of nuclear weapons is not the right path to follow. The movement must be in the opposite direction, leading to the removal of these weapons and to their subsequent elimination both in Europe and throughout the world. This is the course of our policy.
88.	The Soviet Union is in favour of serious talks. Not only are we prepared for such talks, but we are insisting on them. Our proposals on the limitation and reduction of strategic arms and on the limitation of nuclear arms in Europe remain valid. They neither offer advantages nor do any harm to either side. The United States must remove the obstacles it has put in the way of the talks. Unless these obstacles are removed, of course, these talks will not take place, and this is what the United States has in mind.
89.	It is often asked: since it is difficult for the time being to arrive at a radical solution to the problem of nuclear arms, would it not be possible to take steps that would create a favourable atmosphere for that, raise the level of trust among States and ease international tension?
90.	We are convinced that such steps are both possible and necessary. An effective measure of this kind would be the implementation of our proposal, endorsed by the United Nations, for a quantitative and qualitative freeze of nuclear weapon arsenals by all States which possess them. Thin could be done in the first place by the Soviet Union and the United States on a bilateral basis to set an example for other nuclear Powers to follow. Could we not do this? We propose to Washington: let us set such an example.
91.	For the time being it is necessary at least to suspend the nuclear arms race. The world has crossed the line beyond which any further build-up and improvement of these arms is not only dangerous but senseless.
92.	In the present circumstances it is futile and hopeless for anyone to expect to get ahead and gain military superiority. It is absolutely illusory to hope to win a nuclear war: whether global or limited, blitzkrieg or protracted—whatever the nuclear war doctrines.
93.	Such is the authoritative and unanimous conclusion of scientists and competent military and civilian experts of world renown, with the exception of those, of course, who have lost their honour and conscience or those who were not at all endowed by nature with either.
94.	What kind of people can fail to see that peace today is fragile? In spite of the obvious, they once again proclaim a policy of "peace through strength". Moreover, they are trying to elevate this policy to the level of statesmanship. All we hear is that strength, strength and, above all, strength is the guarantee of international peace. In other words—weapons, weapons and still more weapons. But does not the experience of the past—both recent and remote— show otherwise?
95.	In the face of the currently aggravated dangerous military and political confrontation it is extremely important not to miss the chance. Agreement should be reached on freezing nuclear weapons and prospects opened up for a subsequent reduction of arsenals of these weapons. 
96.	Sentiments in favour of such a solution have become widespread in the world. As is well known, the broadest sections of the population in the United States and other Western countries spontaneously come out in favour of this solution, and we fully understand their aspirations.
97.	Only ill will can guide those who spawn all kinds of insinuations that the Soviet Union all but manipulates or is behind this movement. Let them ask what it is that the people who take to the streets in mass marches of protest are fighting for. Let them ask those people themselves. Let them ask those people, not us. They will give only one answer: they are fighting for life. What kind of people can assume that the Americans or the British, the French or the Italians, the Germans or the Dutch wish to perish in the flames of nuclear war? We think that those who hope to crush the antinuclear movement by punitive measures realize it full well.
98.	In this light, what is the value of the human rights rhetoric in which they just love to indulge in their speeches, statements before various commissions and committees, in articles and voluminous reports to parliaments. In fact, the proponents of the arms race do not care a bit about these rights, including the paramount human right—the right to life.
99.	There can be no justification for any action that pushes the world to nuclear war. It is only natural that last year the General Assembly adopted—at the Soviet initiative—by an overwhelming majority of its Members resolution 38/75 condemning nuclear war as the most hideous crime that could be committed against peoples.
100.	A nuclear age requires that political thinking be consonant with its realities. Where categories such as "strength", "deterrence" and "superiority" still prevail in this thinking, they must be replaced by concepts of the non-use of force and of trust, equality and mutual regard for security interests.
101.	It would be of fundamental importance if nuclear Powers observed, in relations between themselves, certain norms that were formulated by Mr. Chernenko in his statement last March. It is proposed that these Powers: regard the prevention of nuclear war as the primary objective of their foreign policy, preclude situations fraught with the risk of nuclear conflict and, should such a risk arise, hold urgent consultations in order to prevent a nuclear conflagration; renounce the propaganda of any nuclear war scenario, whether global or limited; assume an obligation to forgo the first use of nuclear weapons; under no circumstances use nuclear weapons against nonnuclear countries which have no such weapons on their territory, respect the status of the existing nuclear free zone and encourage the establishment of new such zones in various parts of the world; prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons in any form; not transfer to any recipient whatsoever such weapons or control over them, not deploy them on the territory of countries where there are no such weapons and not extend the nuclear arms race to new environments, including outer space; seek, step by step, on the basis of the principle of equal security, the reduction of nuclear armaments up to and including the complete elimination of all types of such weapons.
102.	The Soviet Union is in favour of reaching agreement at any time with other nuclear Powers on the mutual recognition of such norms and making them binding. This would serve to reduce the risk of the outbreak of a nuclear conflict.
103.	In view of its special urgency, it is necessary to single out the question of preventing the race in nuclear and other weapons in outer space, which some want to turn into a staging area for war. We all know who is seeking this.
104.	The extension of the arms race to outer space, unless checked in time, could become an irreversible process. Effective measures are needed to keep outer space peaceful.
105.	No one country should believe that this is for others, not for it, to decide. Such an attitude would be a big mistake.
106.	A major step has been our initiative in calling for Soviet United States talks on preventing the militarization of outer space. We believe that the Soviet Union and the United States, as the leading Powers in the field of outer space exploration, should do all they can to keep outer space peaceful and in particular, with a view to accomplishing this task, to lay the foundations for multilateral agreement. This idea seems to be alive among many States. Full responsibility for the failure to hold the talks rests with the United States side. Washington is unwilling to engage in the talks.
107.	Ask any man in the street in any town in the United States, in the Soviet Union or in any other country whether he believes that nuclear weapons should be stationed in space, beyond the Earth's atmosphere, at an altitude of hundreds of kilometres, and that outer space should become a springboard for war preparations, or whether he feels that this should not be allowed to happen. There is no doubt that the answer will be unequivocal: this cannot be allowed.
108.	We urge the United States Government to recognize that the militarization of outer space threatens the whole of mankind, including the American people themselves. We express the hope that the United States will refrain from actions which would make irreversible the process of turn outer space into an arena of military rivalry and it will be willing to engage in talks with a view reaching an agreement. For its part, the Soviet Union continues to be in favour of starting such talks as soon as possible.
109.	The General Assembly would be doing a good thing if it forcefully voiced its concerted opinion that the militarization of outer space should not be allowed to take place and that outer space must be used solely for the good of peoples and not for sowing death and destruction on Earth. We hope that every member of every delegation in this Hall will give serious thought to this.
110.	In seeking to promote this goal in every possible way, the Soviet Union proposes the inclusion in the agenda of the current session of the Assembly of an important and urgent item entitled "Use of outer space exclusively for peaceful purposes for the benefit of mankind". What we are talking about is, in the first place, the banning, without delay and for all time, of the use of force in and from outer space against the Earth, as well as from the Earth against objects in outer space. In other words, agreement must be reached on the prohibition and elimination of space attack weapons of all systems, whatever their mode of basing, designed to destroy objects in space. This applies above all to States with major space capabilities. 
111. The United Nations should speak out emphatically and with all its authority in favour of achieving reliably verifiable agreements on a bilateral and a multilateral basis. The way must be opened for concerted and constructive efforts by States which could eventually lead to the creation of a world organization for the use of outer space exclusively for peaceful purposes.
112.	Among those present here there are bound to be people who in 1982 witnessed the Soviet Union solemnly assume in this Hall a unilateral obligation not to be the first to use nuclear weapons. That decision—which was not an easy one to take—is of exceptional importance.
113.	Our country continues to urge the other nuclear Powers, which have not yet done so, to assume a similar obligation. This would also be a tangible historic contribution to international confidence building. Much is said about trust and confidence, but by no means is everything done to bring it about.
114.	Surely the implementation of the proposal of the socialist countries to conclude a treaty on the mutual non-use of military force in relations between the States of the Warsaw Treaty and the North Atlantic Alliance would help to dissipate mutual apprehensions. It would be a welcome decision if an obligation not to be the first to use either nuclear or conventional weapons against one another—in other words, not to use force—were undertaken by States whether or not they belong to military alliances or have a neutral or nonaligned status.
115.	We have also submitted these and some other major proposals at the Conference on Confidence and Security building Measures and Disarmament in Europe, meeting at Stockholm. They have been submitted in combination with certain confidence building measures in the military field.
116.	Representatives of NATO countries, on the other hand, take what is actually an obstructionist position with regard to these proposals. What is proposed under the guise of military and technical measures is a programme, which they have drawn up, of poorly disguised espionage. The measures they are trying to sell do not, of course, affect a single inch of the territory of the United States—that is, the country in which the foundations of the military machine of the NATO bloc are to be found. It is on Soviet territory that they are proposing to carry out these measures.
117.	The same can be said about the prospects of the Vienna Talks on Mutual Reduction of Forces and Armaments and Associated Measures in Central Europe. The fruitless "data" discussion started by the Western participants has long been stalling those talks.
118.	The NATO countries are evading the business-like discussion of cardinal questions, above all those dealing with arms reduction, although without such discussions there can be no real strengthening of security and stability on the European continent. At the Vienna talks too, there should be no place for any of the kind of political manoeuvring in which our negotiating partners like so much to indulge.
119.	Some two years ago at Geneva the Soviet Union introduced at the Conference on Disarmament draft basic provisions for a convention on the prohibition of chemical weapons. That draft constitutes a well-balanced basis for agreement. Some of its provisions were subsequently revised and amended to accommodate the positions of the other participants in the talks.
120.	Not everyone wants to see a successful completion of those talks. Some would rather see them fail. It would seem that the ostensible interest of certain States serves to conceal their plans for a build-up of chemical weapons. Such tactics should be strongly condemned. We may presume that certain War Departments are doing this. But where are the statesmen? Where are true sobriety and farsightedness, a wide-angle look at peace and the fate of the world?
121.	The drafting of an international convention on the prohibition and elimination of chemical weapons should be speeded up, and the United Nations could contribute to this in no small measure. With time this problem will become eve:, more intractable.
122.	Our country expresses its readiness to take part in multilateral negotiations on the limitation of naval activities and naval armaments and on the extension of confidence-building measures to seas and oceans, especially to regions with the busiest sea lanes or with the highest likelihood of conflict situations. We have already put forward a proposal— and this is worth recalling—for an agreement on appropriate measures, including those applicable to particular regions, such as the Indian, Atlantic or Pacific Oceans, the Mediterranean Sea or the Persian Gulf.
123.	The convening of an international conference on the Indian Ocean is being inadmissibly delayed. The United States and some of its allies disregard the will of the littoral States that wish to see a peaceful Indian Ocean and clear skies above it. As before, the Soviet Union continues actively to advocate the turning of this ocean into a zone of peace, something that would be a major step towards preventing the militarization of the world's oceans.
124.	The arms race is seriously damaging to people even when the guns are silent, for it is increasingly consuming intellectual and material wealth and impedes the solution of global problems such as the elimination of hunger and disease, the search for new sources of energy, and the preservation of the environment.
125.	These tasks will not be accomplished either by declaratory statements or by attempts to make assistance to other countries contingent on their acceptance of a particular model of socioeconomic development. Something else is required, namely, the renunciation of all forms of exploitation and of the use of trade and economic ties as tools of political pressure, and a restructuring of international economic relations on a just and democratic basis.
126.	By pressing for the implementation of tangible measures for curbing the arms race and achieving disarmament in close connection with the solution of world economic and social development problems, we consider that reduction of military budgets in either percentage or absolute terms is a promising way to achieve such a goal. And yes, I am talking about military budgets.
127.	Together with the other States signatories of the Warsaw Treaty, the Soviet Union has submitted a proposal to the countries of the North Atlantic bloc to begin talks on the question of the mutual non increase of military expenditures and their subsequent reduction. In our view, there should be no obstacles to the participation of States that do not belong to these military and political groupings in implementing the proposed measures.
128.	However, so far there has been no response from the NATO countries, and that is no accident. If a picture were taken today using the most sophisticated modem technology to show on a planetary scale the magnitude of the worldwide military preparations by the United States and its allies, it would reveal a view that would stun any thinking person: a palisade of missiles; strategic bombers; naval armadas plying the waters of the seas and oceans; hundreds of military bases scattered all over the globe; and colossal stockpiles of weapons of every type.
129.	Some may say that the Soviet Union too has weapons on land, in the air and on and under water. Our answer is: Yes, we do have them, but not by our choice. The objective facts of post-war history irrefutably show that it was not the Soviet Union, not socialism, but rather the other side that initiated the arms race and each of its new spirals. That is where the truth lies.
130.	Forced to take countermeasures, our country did so only in response to, and to the extent commensurate with, the protection of its own security and that of its friends and allies. We have never sought, nor are we seeking, superiority. We stand for maintaining military equilibrium, and at the lowest possible level at that.
131.	We have put forward no less than 100 constructive initiatives from the rostrum of the United Nations alone. The whole world knows that it was the Soviet Union that came forward with the most radical proposal—general and complete disarmament combined with general and complete control. No one else has proposed this.
132.	Numerous proposals have been made by the Soviet Union to curb the arms race in some of its areas. We have proposed—and our proposal still stands—that agreement be reached on the complete prohibition of nuclear weapon tests and on the prohibition of the development and manufacture of new types of weapons of mass destruction and of new systems of such weapons.
133.	The Soviet Union has also been making sustained efforts to reduce conventional armaments and armed forces by proposing that this problem be solved on both a global and a regional basis.
134.	The world community welcomed the Soviet initiatives that brought forth major international treaties and agreements—the Treaty on the Non Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under Water, the Treaty on the Prohibition of the Emplacement of Nuclear Weapons and Other Weapons of Mass Destruction on the Seabed and the Ocean Floor and in the Subsoil Thereof, the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction, and so on. They continue to serve their purpose to this day and serve it well.
135.	We have voluntarily and unilaterally assumed a number of obligations ranging from no-first-use of nuclear weapons to practical steps limiting our armed forces and armaments in Central Europe.
136.	While making its own constructive contributions, the Soviet Union reacts favourably to proposals made by other countries. We support the idea of establishing nuclear free zones and zones of peace in various parts of the globe. We have responded positively to the recent initiative by Argentina, Greece, India, Mexico, Sweden and the United Republic of Tanzania, contained in their Joint Declaration, which urged all nuclear Powers to stop the build-up of nuclear weapons and begin to reduce their stockpiles.
137.	The proposals that we have made constitute an impressive list of initiatives aimed at easing international tensions and developing peaceful cooperation among States.
138.	Yet no matter what proposals or arguments we advance, our counterparts say "no"—they are not acceptable.
139.	They swear that they favour a halt in the arms race, but only through modernization of arms and through improvement and stockpiling of weapons. Is it not absurd? It is absurd, indeed, and it underlies the entire policy. They would have people believe that they favour a reduction in world tensions, but only by establishing more and more military bases, by intensifying military preparations, by militarizing outer space and by deploying new kinds of United States nuclear weapons in Europe.
140.	What is needed to prevent hunger and disease from claiming the lives of countless millions of people? According to the logic of NATO countries, this can be achieved by throwing as much money and resources as possible down the insatiable maw of the war industry.
141.	It would appear that there is no other path towards ensuring peace than war preparations. This is twisted logic, a logic of frenzied militarism.
142.	All States must have a clear understanding of why none of the important and acute international problems is being solved at present. This applies first and foremost to nuclear weapons and the arms race.
143.	They are not being solved because the NATO States do not want it. The instigator of this policy is, of course, Washington. It has firmly linked its foreign policy plans with the further stockpiling of nuclear weapons as well as other types of weapons of mass destruction. It has put up an insurmountable wall on the path to agreement.
144.	Even elementary decency is lacking in cases where representatives of the two Powers—the Soviet Union and the United States—meet to discuss one thing or another. Everything the United States side says is intended to secure unilateral advantages for the United States. Therefore, from the very outset things are doomed to failure. If there are political genes, then failure is genetically inevitable.
145.	If you read closely the documents setting out the policy of the United States Administration for the future—and there are quite a lot of them—you will see that these documents, which are imbued with the spirit of imperial ambitions and enmity towards the Soviet Union and other peace-loving States, glorify the course aimed at United States domination m the world and extol arms and strength. Thus, they set the stage for deadlocks i.e. solution of all the acute problems of today.
146.	We are convinced that each State, irrespective of its social system, whether big or small, will realize that this is a course that leads to a further aggravation of tensions in the world, to an increased risk of a nuclear catastrophe. 
147.	The Soviet delegation is authorized to state before this high forum that the Soviet Union will follow the same policy course it has pursued up to now, namely, the course aimed at peace, disarmament, limitation and subsequent elimination of nuclear armaments, and the solution of other acute problems of today.
148.	One should face the truth squarely. It is precisely the current United States policy that has made the gap between these two courses in world politics wider and deeper than ever before and has virtually blocked the paths leading to agreement.
149.	Today, many people are wondering anxiously if everything has been lost and the only thing left is to acknowledge that international relations have plunged into total darkness.
150.	We do not accept such a view of the situation in the world. A feeling of doom is alien to our world outlook. An insurmountable barrier must be erected against war. An end must be put to the stockpiling of weapons in the world.
151.	It is understandable that prevention of war is a difficult task. The flywheel of military production is revolving continuously, and influential forces— which place the interests of dominating the world above everything else—will not stop it.
152.	Examples are readily available; they are at hand—all you have to do is reach for them. In defiance of the elementary norms of international law and morality, an act of banditry was committed against tiny Grenada, which dared to assert its sovereignty. It was occupied and robbed of its independence.
153.	We are witnessing gross interference in the internal affairs of El Salvador. No effort is being spared to prop up the regime of the stooges who are committing brutal crimes against the Salvadorian people.
154.	A real siege—military, political and economic—has been mounted against Nicaragua, whose people, defending their national freedom, independence and democratic achievements, are heroically resisting in the (ace of the undeclared war organized against it by Washington. But the Nicaraguan people want just one thing: they want their independence and they want to resolve their internal affairs as they themselves see fit.
155.	The United States still cannot reconcile itself to the existence of socialist Cuba. Threats are being made against Cuba to force that country off the course to which it has been committed in both words and deeds.
156.	The situation in Central America—where a dangerous pocket of tension has been created— should be settled by peaceful means on the basis of an unconditional cessation of United States interference in the internal affairs of the countries of the region. Possibilities for such a settlement have been opened up thanks to the constructive approach of Nicaragua and Cuba and to the initiative of the States of the Contadora Group. The Soviet Union supports the efforts to reach a political settlement of the problem.
157.	Turning now to the Middle East, here again we can see what the imperialist policies mean for peoples and countries. Still fresh in our memories are the barbaric acts in Lebanon undertaken in an attempt to force upon it a capitulation agreement with Israel, and these acts are still going on today.
158.	Yet the facts show that the United States, which relies upon "strategic cooperation" with Israel, has no intention of establishing lasting peace in that region.
159.	The Soviet Union has recently put forward a proposal on the principles of a Middle East settlement. That proposal is well known and has evoked a broad response. We call upon all parties to the conflict to act with sober minded regard for each other's legitimate rights and interests, and upon all other States to facilitate the search for a just settlement in the Middle East.
160.	Provocative intrigues continue against sovereign and nonaligned Afghanistan. The foes of the Afghan people will stop at nothing and will not abandon their hope of plunging it back into medieval darkness. To this end, military incursions from outside are being organized. Is it possible to solve the foreign policy aspect of this problem? Yes, it is. The way to do that is to stop forming, arming and infiltrating into the country from outside gangs of anti-government bandits and saboteurs and not to interfere in the internal affairs of Afghanistan. There can be no doubt that Afghanistan has followed, and will continue to follow, the path it has chosen—the path of independence, freedom, social progress, peace and nonalignment.
161.	In Southeast Asia the situation is being exacerbated by the policy pursued by outside forces. Acts of provocation against Viet Nam, Laos and Kampuchea are going on unabated. Attempts are being made to pit their neighbours, the members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations against those countries. We regard the initiative of the three countries of IndoChina on turning Southeast Asia into a zone of peace, good neighbourliness and cooperation, as also their efforts to start a political dialogue among the States of the region, as constructive.
162.	The Soviet leadership has repeatedly stated its positions on the question of its relations with the People's Republic of China. Those positions are well known. The Soviet Union favours normal, good neighbourly relations between these two great States.
163.	Obstacles are being put in the way of the normalization of the situation in the Korean peninsula, thus increasing tension in the Far East. The Soviet Union has consistently affirmed its solidarity with the Korean people in their struggle for the withdrawal of foreign troops from South Korea and for the peaceful reunification of their homeland, without any outside interference. The proposals of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea provide a positive basis for a settlement of the Korean question
164.	The racist regime of Pretoria has all but been formally named a "historical ally" of the United States. In defiance of the decisions of the United Nations, that regime is trying to keep Namibia under the colonial yoke for as long as possible and is threatening—m particular by overt interventionist actions—the independence of Angola and other neighbouring African States That regime could not engage in such lawlessness were it not for the complicity of some major Powers.
165.	There can be no doubt, however, that the Namibian people will win their freedom and independence. In the present day world, the colonial policy of South Africa and its patrons is a historically doomed anomaly.
166.	The economically weak countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America are being virtually plundered by industrialized capitalist States. The Soviet Union, like other socialist countries, will continue to render assistance, to the extent of its capabilities, to the newly independent States in their efforts to develop their national economies. International economic relations should be restructured in such a way that all countries of the world can make economic and social progress.
167.	Of late, the world has been increasingly confronted with dangerous symptoms in the policy of the United States, such as claims to impunity and licence to do anything it wishes. It does not scruple to declare any criminal ways and means legitimate if these can serve the desired ends. In world affairs, it intends to follow the logic of the idea that one does whatever one's left foot desires. And so it tramples on other peoples' lands with soldiers' iron heeled boots—left, right, left, right.
168.	We are convinced that the time is ripe to take the most serious notice of the fact that certain States, living set out to achieve military superiority and to pursue the policy of terrorism in international affairs, have resorted to actions designed to undermine the socio-political systems of other States.
169.	There is a very long list of documents, decisions, resolutions and various provisions to which States have affixed their seals and which specifically provide that it is inadmissible for countries to interfere in the internal affairs of others. Even the United Nations as a whole has no right to intervene in such matters. It is only necessary to look at Article 2 of the Charter of the United Nations, which states precisely that. When that Article was discussed and adopted in the course of the discussion and adoption of the Charter, everyone solemnly and unanimously supported the idea that not even the United Nations should have the right to intervene in the internal affairs of States.
170.	Yet, flagrant violations of this international law are being committed today before the eyes of the world, while those responsible say that they are acting in such a way simply because they do not HI the social system of some State or other. This destroys the very possibility of ensuring peaceful relations and mutual trust among States and increases the threat of war. Such policies and actions flout the international rules of conduct. They cannot be tolerated and must be terminated. The United Nations, in our view, should speak out emphatically in support of the rule of law in international relations.
171.	In the light of what I have said, the Soviet Union is submitting to the General Assembly for its consideration an important and urgent item entitled "Inadmissibility of the policy of State terrorism and any actions by States aimed at undermining the socio-political system of other sovereign States".
172.	We propose that the United Nations resolutely condemn the policy and practice of State terrorism as a method of dealing with other countries and peoples. It is necessary to renounce any action aimed at changing or undermining by force the social systems of sovereign States, destabilizing and overthrowing their legitimate Governments, or initiating military action to that end on any pretext whatsoever, und to halt any such action already in progress.
173.	All States are duty bound to respect the inalienable right of the peoples of the world to decide for themselves their own destinies and to pursue independently their own political or any other kind of development.
174.	Our proposal stems from the Soviet Union's approach of principle. The adoption of this proposal would contribute greatly to preventing and eliminating international conflicts and to consolidating moral and political barriers against aggression and war.
175.	There is much truth in the statement that the international situation is directly dependent on the state of Soviet United States relations. Today, as always, our country believes in the maintenance of normal relations with the United States—and there has been much talk about this. Until the recent past, that is precisely how these relations were developing, although not without certain vicissitudes, whereas in the years of the Second World War they were relations of allies.
176.	In recent years these relations have been disrupted through the efforts of Washington. They have spared no effort to destroy all the gains accomplished together and to undermine the trust that had been built up earlier. What is more, they all but flaunt their indifference to the reputation of the United States side as a partner in international affairs. Yet, that is not something to flaunt.
177.	History does not begin on the day when a particular United States Administration comes into office. The periods when the two Powers combined their efforts to defeat fascism will stand out as the best pages in the history of Soviet United States relations; and those who determine United States policy today have a great deal to do if they wish their words and the obligations they assume to be trusted. No attempts to substitute modifications in form for the substance of a policy and for the need to move away from militarism towards a policy of peace can be meaningful. That is nothing but an empty vessel. What is required is the determination to make such a move if one is truly guided by good intentions in United States Soviet relations and is really working towards peace. That alone can carry some weight on the political scales.
178.	The Soviet Union believes that it is precisely concrete deeds, not verbal assurances that can lead to normalizing the situation in our relations with the United States. The Soviet Union will not be found wanting. Every American, every American family, should know that the Soviet Union wants peace— and only peace—with the United States.
179.	We have developed normal and, in a number of cases, good and fruitful relations with the countries of Western Europe, but we cannot disregard the fact that some of them have permitted the deployment on their territories of new United States nuclear missiles intended for use as first strike weapons.
180.	Nor can one overlook the fact that in some quarters hopes have not yet been abandoned of revising the post-war realities in Europe. Recently such revanchist sentiments have been fuelled by statements which seek to question the commitments assumed by the members of the anti-Hitler coalition. We would caution against yielding to that dangerous frenzy and we appeal for sober mindedness. No one has the right to disrupt what has not merely become a pillar of international law but was born of the innumerable sacrifices of the last world war.
181.	We regard the countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America, which make up the majority of the Movement of Nonaligned Countries—an influential force in the world today—as our fellow fighters in the struggle between those who work for peace and those who work against it. It is the intention of the Soviet Union to continue to do everything in its power to deepen and develop friendly ties with those countries.
182.	It is our firm conviction that it is possible to correct the current alarming tilt in international developments, to halt the arms race and to set it on a downward spiral, to reduce and then totally eliminate the threat of war. This requires the combined efforts of States, nuclear and nonnuclear, big and small, regardless of their social systems.
183.	As Mr. Chernenko has stressed, "the Soviet Union will cooperate fully with all States which are prewired, by practical deeds, to help to ease international tensions and to create an atmosphere of trust in the world—in other words, with all those who genuinely seek to consolidate the foundations of peace and not to prepare for war."
184.	The future of mankind is the common responsibility of all countries and all peoples, and the peoples of the world are entitled to expect that the United Nations and all its activities will be imbued with a sense of that responsibility.
﻿First of all, I wish to congratulate you, Mr. Lusaka, on your election as President of the General Assembly. I wish you every success in carrying out the responsibilities of that high international office.
3.	It is an honour to be here, and I thank you all for your gracious invitation. I would speak in support of the two great goals that led to the formation of the United Nations—the cause of peace and the cause of human dignity.
4.	The responsibility of the General Assembly—the peaceful resolution of disputes between peoples and nations—can be discharged successfully only if we recognize the great common ground upon which we all stand: our fellowship as members of the human race, our oneness as inhabitants of this planet, our place as representatives of billions of our countrymen whose fondest hope remains the end to war and to the repression of the human spirit. These are the important, central realities that bind us, that per-
us to dream of a future without the antagonisms of the past. And, just as shadows can be seen only where there is light, so, too, can we overcome what is wrong only if we remember how much is right; and we will resolve what divides us only if we remember how much more unites us. This chamber has heard enough about the problems and dangers ahead; today let us dare to speak of a future that is bright and hopeful and can be ours only if we seek it. I believe that future is far nearer than most of us would dare to hope.
5.	At the start of this decade one scholar at the Hudson Institute noted that mankind also had undergone enormous changes for the better in the past two centuries, changes which are not always readily noticed or written about.
6.	"Up until 200 years ago, there were relatively few people in the world," he wrote. "All human societies were poor. Disease and early death dominated most people's lives. People were ignorant, and largely at the mercy of forces of nature."
7.	"Now," he said, "we are somewhere near the middle of a process of economic development ... At the end of that process, almost no one will live in a country as poor as the richest country of the past. There will be many more people .. . living long, healthy lives, with immense knowledge and more to learn than anybody has time for." They will be "able to cope with the forces of nature, and almost indifferent to distance."
8.	We do live today, as that scholar suggested, in the middle of one of the most important and dramatic periods in human history—one in which all of us can serve as catalysts for an era of world peace and unimagined human freedom and dignity.
9.	Today I would like to report to you, as distinguished and influential members of the world community, on what the United States has been attempting to do to help move the world closer to this new era. On many fronts enormous progress has been made, and I think our efforts are complemented by the trend of history.
10.	If we look closely enough, I believe we can see all the world moving towards a deeper appreciation of the value of human freedom in both its political and its economic manifestations. This is partially motivated by a world-wide desire for economic growth and higher standards of living. And there is an increasing realization that economic freedom is a prelude to economic progress and growth and is intricately and inseparably linked to political freedom.
11.	Everywhere, people and Governments are beginning to recognize that the secret of a progressive new world is to take advantage of the creativity of the human spirit; to encourage innovation and individual enterprise; to reward hard work; and to reduce barriers to the free flow of trade and information.
12.	Our opposition to economic restrictions and trade barriers is consistent with our view of economic freedom and human progress. We believe such barriers pose a particularly dangerous threat to the developing nations and their chance to share in world prosperity through expanded export markets. Tomorrow, at the International Monetary Fund, I will address this question more fully, including America's desire for more open trading markets throughout the world.
13.	This desire to cut down trade barriers and our open advocacy of freedom as the engine of human progress are two of the important ways the United States and the American people hope to assist in bringing about a world where prosperity is commonplace, conflict an aberration, and human dignity and freedom a way of life.
14.	Let me place these steps more in context by briefly outlining the major goals of American foreign
A/39/PV.4 

policy and then exploring with you the practical ways we are attempting to further freedom and prevent war. By that I mean, first, how we have moved to strengthen ties with old allies and new friends; secondly, what we are doing to help avoid the regional conflicts that could contain the seeds of world conflagration; and thirdly, the status of our efforts with the Soviet Union to reduce the levels of arms.
15.	Let me begin with a word about the objectives of American foreign policy, which have been consistent since the post-war era and which fuelled the formation of the United Nations and were incorporated into the Charter of the United Nations itself.
16.	The Charter states two overriding goals: "to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime has brought untold sorrow to mankind" and "to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men and women and of nations large and small".
17.	The founders of the United Nations understood full well the relationship between these two goals. And I want you to know that the Government of the United States will continue to view this concern for human rights as the moral centre of our foreign policy. We can never look at anyone's freedom as a bargaining chip in world politics. Our hope is for a time when all the people of the world can enjoy the blessings of personal liberty.
18.	But I would like also to emphasize that our concern for protecting human rights is part of our concern for protecting the peace.
19.	The answer is for all nations to fulfil the obligations they freely assumed under the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The Declaration states that: "The will of the people shall be the basis of the authority of government; this will shall be expressed in periodic and genuine elections". The Declaration also includes the right of everyone: "to form and to join trade unions," "to own property alone as well as in association with others," "to leave any country, including his own, and to return to his country," and to enjoy "freedom of opinion and expression". Perhaps the most graphic example of the relationship between human rights and peace is the right of peace groups to exist and to promote their views. In fact, the treatment of peace groups may be a litmus test of a Government's true desire for peace.
20.	In addition to emphasizing this tie between the advocacy of human rights and the prevention of war, the United States has taken important steps, as I mentioned earlier, to prevent world conflict. The starting-point and comer-stone of our foreign policy is our alliance and partnership with our fellow democracies. For 35 years, the North Atlantic alliance has guaranteed the peace in Europe. In both Europe and Asia, our alliances have been the vehicle for a great reconciliation among nations that had fought bitter wars in decades and centuries past. And here in the western hemisphere, North and South are being lifted on the tide of freedom and are joined in a common effort to foster peaceful economic development.
21.	We are proud of our association with all those countries that share our commitment to freedom, human rights, the rule of law—and international peace. Indeed, the bulwark of security that the democratic alliance provides is essential, and remains essential, to the maintenance of world peace. Every alliance involves burdens and obligations, but these are far less than the risks and sacrifices that would result if the peace-loving nations were divided and neglectful of their common security. The people of the United States will remain faithful to their commitments.
22.	But the United States is also faithful to its alliances and friendships with scores of nations in the developed and developing worlds with differing political systems, cultures and traditions. The development of ties between the United States and China—a significant global event of the last dozen years—shows our willingness to improve relations with countries ideologically very different from ours.
23.	We are ready to be the friend of any country that is a friend to us and a friend of peace. And we respect genuine non-alignment. Our own nation was born in revolution; we helped promote the process of decolonization that brought about the independence of so many members of this body, and we are proud of that history.
24.	We are proud, too, of our role in the formation of the United Nations and our support of the Organization over the years. And let me again emphasize our unwavering commitment to a central principle of the United Nations system, the principle of universality, both here and in the United Nations technical agencies around the world. If universality is ignored, if nations are expelled illegally, then the United Nations itself cannot be expected to succeed.
25.	The United States welcomes diversity and peaceful competition; we do not fear the trends of history. We are not ideologically rigid; we do have principles and we will stand by them, but we will also seek the friendship and goodwill of all, both old friends and new.
26.	We have always sought to lend a hand to help others—from our relief efforts in Europe after the First World War to the Marshall Plan and massive foreign assistance programmes after the Second World War. Since 1946, the United States has provided over $115 billion in economic aid to developing countries, and today it provides about one third of the nearly $90 billion in financial resources, public and private, that flows to the developing world. And the United States imports about one third of the manufactured exports of the developing world.
27.	But any economic progress, as well as any movement in the direction of greater understanding between the nations of the world, is, of course, endangered by the prospect of conflict at both the global and the regional levels. In a few minutes I will turn to the menace of conflict on a world-wide scale and discuss the status of negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union. But permit me first to address the critical problem of regional conflicts, for history displays tragic evidence that it is these conflicts which can set off the sparks leading to world-wide conflagration.
28.	In a glass display case across the hall from the Oval Office at the White House there is a gold medal—the Nobel Peace Prize won by Theodore Roosevelt for his contribution in mediating the Russo-Japanese War in 1905. It was the first such prize won by an American, and it is part of a tradition of which the American people are very 
proud, a tradition that is being continued today in many regions of the globe.
29.	We are engaged, for example, in diplomacy to resolve conflicts in southern Africa, working with the front-line States and our partners in the Contact Group. Mozambique and South Africa have reached a historic accord on non-aggression and co-operation; South Africa and Angola have agreed on a disengagement of forces from Angola, and the groundwork has been laid for the independence of Namibia, with virtually all aspects of Security Council resolution 435 (1978) agreed upon. Let me add that the United States considers it a moral imperative that South Africa's racial policies evolve peacefully but decisively towards a system compatible with basic norms of justice, liberty and human dignity. I am pleased that American companies in South Africa, by providing equal employment opportunities, are contributing to the economic advancement of the black population. But clearly, much more must be done.
30.	In Central America, the United States has lent support to a diplomatic process to restore regional peace and security. We have committed substantial resources to promote economic development and social progress.
31.	The growing success of democracy in El Salvador is the best proof that the key to peace lies in a political solution. Free elections brought into office a government dedicated to democracy, reform, economic progress and regional peace. Regrettably, there are forces in the region eager to thwart democratic change, but these forces are now on the defensive. The tide is turning in the direction of freedom. We call upon Nicaragua, in particular, to abandon its policies of subversion and militarism, and to carry out the promises it made to the Organization of American States to establish democracy at home.
32.	The Middle East has known more than its share of tragedy and conflict for decades, and the United States has been actively involved in peace diplomacy for just as long. We consider ourselves a full partner in the quest for peace. The record of the 11 years since the October war shows that much can be achieved through negotiations; it also shows that the road is long and hard.
33.	Two years ago, I proposed a fresh start toward a negotiated solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict. My initiative of 1 September 1982 contains a set of positions that can serve as a basis for a just and lasting peace.' That initiative remains a realistic and workable approach, and I am committed to it as firmly as on the day I announced it. And the foundation-stone of this effort remains Security Council resolution 242 (1967), which, in turn, was incorporated in all its parts in the Camp David accords.
34.	The tragedy of Lebanon has not ended. Only last week, a despicable act of barbarism by some who are unfit to associate with humankind reminded us once again that Lebanon continues to suffer. In 1983 we helped Israel and Lebanon reach an agreement that, if implemented, could have led to the full withdrawal of Israeli forces in the context of the withdrawal of all foreign forces. This agreement was blocked, and the long agony of the Lebanese continues. Thousands of people are still kept from their homes by continued violence and are refugees in their own country. The once-flourishing economy of
Lebanon is near collapse. All of Lebanon's friends should work together to help end this nightmare.
35.	In the Gulf, the United States has supported a series of Security Council resolutions that call for an end to the war between Iran and Iraq that has meant so much death and destruction and has put the world's economic well-being at risk. Our hope is that hostilities will soon end, leaving each side with its political and territorial integrity intact, so that both may devote their energies to addressing the needs of their people and a return to relationships with other States.
36.	The lesson of experience is that negotiations work. The peace treaty between Israel and Egypt brought about the peaceful return of the Sinai, clearly showing that the negotiating process brings results when the parties commit themselves to it. The time is bound to come when the same wisdom and courage will be applied, with success, to reach peace between Israel and all of its Arab neighbours in a manner that assures security for all in the region, the recognition of Israel, and a solution to the Palestinian problem.
37.	In every part of the world, the United States is similarly engaged in peace diplomacy as an active player or a strong supporter.
38.	In South-East Asia, we have backed the efforts of the Association of South-East Asian Nations
to mobilize international support for a peaceful resolution of the Cambodian problem, which must include the withdrawal of Vietnamese forces and the election of a representative government. ASEAN's success in promoting economic and political development has made a major contribution to the peace and stability of the region.
39.	In Afghanistan, the dedicated efforts of the Secretary-General and his representatives to find a diplomatic settlement have our strong support. I assure the General Assembly that the United States will continue to do everything possible to find a negotiated outcome which provides the Afghan people with the right to determine their own destiny, allows the Afghan refugees to return to *heir own country in dignity, and protects the legitimate security interests of all neighbouring countries.
40.	On the divided and tense Korean peninsula, we have strongly backed the confidence-building measures proposed by the Republic of Korea and by the United Nations Command at Panmunjom. These are an important first step towards peaceful reunification in the long term.
41.	We take heart from progress by others in lessening tensions, notably the efforts by the Federal Republic of Germany to reduce barriers between the two German States.
42.	And the United States strongly supports the Secretary-General's efforts to assist the Cypriot parties in achieving a peaceful and reunited Cyprus.
43.	The United States has been and will always be a friend of peaceful solutions.
44.	This is no less true with respect to my country's relations with the Soviet Union.
45.	When I appeared before the General Assembly, at its thirty-eighth session. I noted that we cannot count on the instinct for survival alone to protect us against war. Deterrence is necessary but not sufficient. America has repaired its strength. We have invigorated our alliances and friendships. We are ready for constructive negotiations with the Soviet Union.
46.	We recognize that there is no sane alternative to negotiations on arms control and other issues between our two nations, which have the capacity to destroy civilization as we know it. I believe this is a view shared by virtually every country in the world and by the Soviet Union itself.
47.	I want to speak to the General Assembly today on what the United States and the Soviet Union can accomplish together in the coming years, and the concrete steps that we need to take.
48.	As I stand here and look out from this podium, there in front of me I can see the seat of the representative of the Soviet Union, and not far from that seat, just over to the side, is the seat of the representative of the United States. In this historic assembly hall it is clear there is not a great distance between us. Outside this room, while there will still be clear differences, there is every reason why we should do all that is possible to shorten that distance. That is why we are here. Is that not what the United Nations is all about?
49.	On 16 January last, I set out three objectives for United States-Soviet relations that can provide an agenda for our work over the months ahead.
50.	First, I said, we need to find ways to reduce, and eventually to eliminate, the threat and use of force in solving international disputes. Our concern over the potential for nuclear war cannot deflect us from the terrible human tragedies occurring every day in the regional conflicts I have just discussed. Together we have a particular responsibility to contribute to political solutions to these problems, rather than to exacerbate them through the provision of even more weapons.
51.	I propose that our two countries agree to embark on periodic consultations at policy level about regional problems. We will be prepared, if the Soviets agree, to make senior experts available at regular intervals for in-depth exchanges of views. I have asked Secretary of State Shultz to explore this with Foreign Minister Gromyko. Spheres of influence are a thing of the past. Differences between American and Soviet interests are not. The objectives of this political dialogue will be to help avoid miscalculation, reduce the potential risk of United States-Soviet confrontation and help the people in areas of conflict to find peaceful solutions.
52.	The United States and the Soviet Union have achieved agreements of historic importance on some regional issues. The Austrian State Treaty and the Berlin accords are notable and lasting examples. Let us resolve to achieve similar agreements in the future.
53.	Our second task must be to find ways to reduce the vast stockpiles of armaments in the world. I am committed to redoubling our negotiating efforts to achieve real results: in Geneva, a complete ban on chemical weapons; in Vienna, real reductions—to lower and equal levels—in Soviet and American, Warsaw Pact and North Atlantic Treaty Organization conventional forces; in Stockholm, concrete practical measures to enhance mutual confidence, to reduce the risk of war and to reaffirm commitments concerning non-use of force; in the field of nuclear testing, improvements in verification essential to ensure compliance with the threshold test-ban and peaceful nuclear explosions agreements; and in the field of non-proliferation, close co-operation to strengthen the international institutions and practices aimed at halting the Spread of nuclear weapons, together with redoubled efforts to meet the legitimate expectation of all nations that the Soviet Union and the United States will substantially reduce their own nuclear arsenals. We and the Soviets have agreed to upgrade our hotline communications facility, and our discussions of nuclear non-proliferation in recent years have been useful to both sides. We think there are other possibilities for improving communications in this area that deserve serious exploration.
54.	I believe the proposal of the Soviet Union for opening United States-Soviet talks at Vienna provides an important opportunity to advance these objectives. We have been prepared to discuss a wide range of issues of concern to both sides, such as the relationship between defensive and offensive forces and what has been called the militarization of space. During the talks we would consider what measures of restraint both sides might take while negotiations proceeded. However, any agreement must logically depend upon our ability to get the competition in offensive arms under control and to achieve genuine stability at substantially lower levels of nuclear arms.
55.	Our approach in all these areas will be designed to take into account concerns the Soviet Union has voiced. It will attempt to provide a basis for a historic breakthrough in arms control. I am disappointed that we were not able to open our meeting at Vienna earlier this month on the date originally proposed by the Soviet Union. I hope we can begin these talks by the end of the year or shortly thereafter.
56.	The third task I set in January was to establish a better working relationship between the Soviet Union and the United States, one marked by greater co-operation and understanding.
57.	We have made some modest progress. We have reached agreements to improve our hotline, extend our 10-year economic agreement, enhance consular co-operation and explore co-ordination of search and rescue efforts at sea.
58.	We have also offered to increase significantly the amount of United States grain for purchase by the Soviets and to provide the Soviets with a direct fishing allocation off United States coasts. But there is much more we could do together. I feel particularly strongly about breaking down the barriers between the peoples of the United States and the Soviet Union and between our political, military and other leaders.
59.	AH of these steps that I have mentioned, and especially the arms control negotiations, are extremely important to a step-by-step process towards peace. But let me also say that we need to extend the arms control process, to build a bigger umbrella under which it can operate—a road-map, as it were, showing where during the next 20 years or so these individual efforts can lead. This can greatly assist step-by-step negotiations and enable us to avoid having all our hopes or expectations ride on any single set or series of negotiations. If progress is temporarily halted at one set of talks, this newly established framework for arms control could help us take up the slack at other negotiations.
60.	Today, to the great end of lifting the dread of nuclear war from the peoples of the Earth, I invite the leaders of the world to join in a new beginning. We 
need a fresh approach to reducing international tensions. History demonstrates beyond controversy that, just as the arms competition has its roots in political suspicions and anxieties, so it can be channelled in more stabilizing directions and eventually be eliminated, if those political suspicions and anxieties are addressed as well.
61.	Towards this end I will suggest to the Soviet Union that we institutionalize regular ministerial or cabinet-level meetings between our two countries on the whole agenda of issues before us, including the problem of needless obstacles to understanding. To take but one idea for discussion, in such talks we could consider the exchange of outlines of five-year military plans for weapons development and our schedules of intended procurement. We would also welcome the exchange of observers at military exercises and locations. And I propose that we find a way for Soviet experts to come to the United States nuclear-test site, and for ours to go to theirs, to measure directly the yields of tests of nuclear weapons. We should work towards having such arrangements in place by next spring. I hope that the Soviet Union will co-operate in this undertaking and reciprocate in a manner that will enable the two countries to establish the basis for verification for effective limits on underground nuclear testing.
62.	I believe such talks could work rapidly towards developing a new climate of policy understanding, one that is essential if crises are to be avoided and real arms control is to be negotiated. Of course, summit meetings have a useful role to play. But they need to be carefully prepared, and the benefit here is that meetings at the ministerial level would provide the kind of progress that is the best preparation for higher-level talks between ourselves and the Soviet leaders.
63.	How much progress we will make, and at what pace, I cannot say, but we have a moral obligation to try and try again.
64.	Some may dismiss such proposals and my own optimism as simplistic American idealism. And they will point to the burdens of the modem world and to history. Well, yes, if we sit down and catalogue year by year, generation by generation, the famines, the plagues, the wars, the invasions mankind has endured, the list will grow so long and the assault on humanity so terrifying that it seems too much for the human spirit ^o bear.
65.	But is that not narrow and short-sighted and not at all how we think of history? Yes, the deeds of infamy or injustice are all recorded, but what shines out from the pages of history is the daring of the dreamers and the deeds of the builders and the doers. These things make up the stories we tell and pass on to our children. They comprise the most enduring and striking fact about human history: that through the heart-break and tragedy man has always dared to perceive the outline of human progress, the steady growth in not just the material well-being but the spiritual insight of mankind.
"There have been tyrants and murderers, and for a time they can seem invincible. But in the end, they always fall. Think on it—always. All through history the way of truth and love has always won."
That "as the belief and the vision of Mahatma Gandhi, and it remains today a vision that is good and true.
66.	"All is gift" is said to have been the favourite expression of another great spiritualist, a Spanish soldier who gave up the ways of war for that of love and peace. And if we are to make realities of the two great goals of the Charter of the United Nations—the dreams of peace and human dignity—we must take to heart these words of Ignatius Loyola: "We must pause long enough to contemplate the gifts received from Him who made us—the gift of life, the gift of this world, the gift of each other."
67.	And the gift of the present, for it is this present, this time, that now we must seize. I leave you with a reflection from Mahatma Gandhi spoken with those in mind who said that the disputes and conflicts of the modem world are too great to overcome. It was spoken shortly after Gandhi's quest for independence had taken him to Britain.
"I am not conscious of a single experience throughout my three months' stay in England and Europe that made me feel that after all East is East and West is West. On the contrary, I have been convinced more than ever that human nature is much the same no matter under what clime it flourishes and that, if you approach people with trust and affection, you would have tenfold trust and thousand-fold affection returned to you."
68.	For the sake of a peaceful world, a world where human dignity and freedom are respected and enshrined, let us approach each other with tenfold trust and thousand fold affection. A new future awaits us. The time is here, the moment is now.
69.	One of the founding fathers of our nation, Thomas Paine, spoke words that apply to all of us gathered here today. They apply directly to all sitting here in this Hall. He said: "We have it in our power to begin the world over again."

﻿Allow me first of all, on behalf of the delegation of the Central African Republic, to congratulate you, Sir, on your election to the presidency of the thirty-ninth session of the General Assembly. Your long experience acquired in the course of your diplomatic career and your superb knowledge of international issues bode well for the great success of the work of this session. My delegation would like to assure you at the outset of its readiness to assist you.
105.	I should also like to take this opportunity to reaffirm the support of the Central African Republic for the Secretary-General, whose work on behalf of the Organization is both dedicated and selfless.
106.	Lastly, our delegation wishes to extend a warm welcome to Brunei Darussalam whose admission is a further reflection of the universal role of the United Nations.
107.	Since the founding of the Organization, its usefulness and effectiveness have continually been called into question. The resolutions it has adopted, the solutions it has worked out, the recommendations it has made, have never really fulfilled the hopes cherished by peoples stricken by crises and conflicts; they have never completely allayed the tensions and upheavals in the world. Therefore, despite the heterogeneous nature of the Organization and its complexity, it should show a more definite spirit of consensus and return to its original objectives, namely, the noble ideals of peace and development laid down in the Charter of the United Nations.
108.	The sweeping currents of ideas, discoveries and technological innovations should lead to a change in the relations between nations; all such changes should lead to a true world balance. Unfortunately, reality is quite different. We are, in fact, witnessing a resurgence of intolerance, insecurity, selfishness and violence. Despite that gloomy picture, we shall not give in to either defeatism or scepticism. Despite numerous stumbling-blocks, the United Nations continues to be the forum in which discussions and negotiations on the fate of the world are held.
109.	In today's world, which is characterized by diversity, the right to be different should be recognized as a fundamental principle governing relations among States, a right to be different that the United Nations fosters and develops, the right of each people to flourish within the context of its own history, its own culture, its own beliefs and the political and economic system it has freely chosen. When denied to others—as is so often the case—this right to be different becomes a source of turbulence, hatred and confrontation.
110.	In Africa, in Asia, in Europe, as well as in America, evidence of such intolerance and selfishness is all too common. Often, peoples are stifled. Their legitimate struggles for their inevitable emancipation and their power to decide their lot in full exercise of their sovereignty are being thwarted by sordid personal interests.
111.	Are examples necessary? The situation prevailing in southern Africa is a very eloquent case in point. It is, of course, true that the agreements recently concluded between South Africa and some countries of the region are an encouraging step along the road towards peace. However, that remains problematical. So long as SWAPO, the sole representative of the Namibian people, is denied recognition of its national rights, peace cannot be lasting and total. It is more than ever important that Security Council resolution 435 (1978) be fully observed and implemented.
112.	The Central African Republic welcomes the recent agreements concluded between France and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to withdraw all foreign forces from Chad. It hopes, however, that the simultaneous withdrawals will be effective and complete, not just from the capital, N'djamena, and its immediate environs, but from all Chadian territory. Chad must regain possession of the whole of its original territory. That would enable the Government of that brotherly neighbouring country finally to dedicate itself fully to the task of reconciliation and national reconstruction begun by President Hissein Habre.
113.	With regard to the question of Western Sahara, our delegation believes that an excellent basis for seeking a solution can be found in the resolutions adopted at the eighteenth and nineteenth ordinary sessions of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity. In that connection, we cherish the firm hope that the next session of that Assembly will provide an opportunity to assess the efforts made by the countries involved.
114.	With regard to the question of the Middle East, everyone knows that the Palestinian problem lies at the heart of the conflict. No acceptable solution can therefore be arrived at which ignores the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination under the aegis of the Palestine Liberation Organization. In that connection, we shall continue to support any initiative in line with the spirit of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) aimed at bringing about a lasting and comprehensive settlement of the conflict.
115.	In the same context, the Central African Republic makes an urgent appeal to the international community to spare no effort to preserve and guarantee the national unity, territorial integrity, sovereignty and neutrality of Lebanon.
116.	In the name of the principle of recognizing the right to be different, Democratic Kampuchea should be enabled fully to exercise its sovereignty. To that end, we hope to see the full application of the principles laid down by the Organization.
117.	The Central African Republic also supports any initiative designed to enable Afghanistan to regain its national rights and its status as a neutral, non-aligned country.
118.	The problem of Korea remains a pressing one. The persistent tension in the Korean peninsula is of concern to the Central African Republic. Thus, as part of our contribution to the efforts being made by the international community to reduce such tension, we shall continue to urge both parties, which undeniably aspire to reunification, to pursue their dialogue on the basis of the South-North Joint Communique of 4 July 1972, which set forth the principles for such action. Free, direct dialogue, free of outside interference, would unquestionably enable the parties to establish the conditions for the restoration of the mutual confidence indispensable for the maintenance of peace in the region. Both parties could, in the meantime, plan for their simultaneous admission to membership in the United Nations.
119.	Given the situation prevailing in Central America, the Central African Republic believes that negotiation is the only appropriate means for achieving a peaceful solution and for promoting the harmonious coexistence of the States of the region,
120.	These several examples of the refusal of certain States to recognize and accept the right to differences are based on a two-pronged interest. First, there is an ideological interest, since those States which reject the right to differences are often members of an alliance bloc. A treacherous complicity does, indeed, exist on the part of part of the international community. That complicity impedes mutual understanding and confidence. And then there is strategic interest in the policies of certain States which have embarked on the arms race in order to maintain their military and economic domination.
121.	Thus, while the Central African Republic welcomes the negotiations under way on disarmament, it also deplores the fact that they are brought to stalemate at a time when the proliferation and development of arms are reaching alarming levels, thus perpetuating the vicious circle of destruction.
122.	The disarmament we so fervently wish for cannot be achieved solely through regional security and arms limitation agreements. All States must be aware of the pressing and collective task of championing international, peace and security.
123.	The Central African Republic is firmly convinced that the effective development of all the countries of our community is a condition for global balance and a guarantee of peace. Development also means the right to life and therefore it cannot be jeopardized. We call on the developed countries to contribute effectively, through bilateral or multilateral agreements, to the realistic development of the countries of the third world. For, one and indivisible, peace requires, if it is to be preserved, the universal development of all the members of the international community.
124.	The inadequacy of the present international economic system is resulting in enormous difficulties for the developing countries. Will the alarm so often sounded ever be heard?
125.	While concerned with providing a minimal decent standard of living for our peoples, our countries are rarely able to find the means to implement the economic plans and programmes which have been drawn up. Thus, we continue to suffer severely from the effects of the world economic crisis and from the shortcomings of the economic system. We deplore the attitude of certain industrialized countries which act as though the developing countries should come to terms with their poverty levels and even be content with them.
126.	The countries of the third world are struggling not only for the right to development but also Tor a more significant mobilization of the means for development. The unbreakable link between the right to development and the right to security requires, in turn, the developing countries to observe an indispensable and reasonable balance between the means allocated for security and those given over to development.
127.	Thus, it is regrettable that, after the adoption in 1974 of the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States, there is still a gap between the socio-economic development efforts of certain industrialized countries and others which are less industrialized.
128.	The international crisis seems to have disallowed any claim of the developing countries to such development, and therefore to life. The assistance which is accorded them, dwindling day by day, is clearly inadequate and the terms of trade are growing worse at a dizzying pace.
129.	Our countries are in debt and are bowed under the burden of the amounts due; these debts are worsened and inflated by the crisis of the international monetary system. At the same time, our balance of trade shows a deficit and access to development sources and new technology, which are so badly needed to maintain development projects, seems to be denied to us solely because we happen to be developing countries.
130.	We continue to be greatly disappointed, and we state this in this lofty gathering, all the more so because our hopes have faded since the work of the sixth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, held at Belgrade in 1983, and of the Fourth General Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, held at Vienna earlier this year.
131.	A joint definition of new international economic regulations by the industrialized countries and by the third world is needed today. The entire international community would benefit from the beginning of global negotiations designed to putting a halt to this crisis.
132.	The results achieved in three years by the Military Committee for National Recovery in working to restore and rebuild the Central African Republic are very encouraging and are a cause of satisfaction for us because the result first and foremost from our own efforts
133.	But such success is also due to the valuable assistance given by friendly countries and by international organizations, including the United Nations. I should like once again to pay a heartfelt tribute to the Secretary-General and his co-workers for the unceasing concern which they continue to show for the Central African Republic. The road is still long and the task an arduous one. That is why we should like to be assured of continuity and stepping up of international assistance.
134.	While observing the third anniversary of ac-cession to power of the Military Committee for National Recovery, the Head of State, General Andre Kolingba, began his speech as follows: "For three years now the Central African Republic has seen the Military Committee for National Recovery at work. These three years have been imbued, above all, with peace,"—I repeat, with peace—"a factor working for stability and a sine qua non condition for any kind of development."
135.	That equation of peace and development is the basis of the philosophy of action advocated by the Central African Republic, on both the domestic and the international level.
136.	For we have faith in the possibility of warding off those ills which loom as a serious threat over the future of the international community. The solution lies in respect by all States for the fundamental values of the right to differences and the right to development.
137.	That is the message which General Andre Kolingba, Chairman of the Military Committee for National Recovery and Head of State, deeply convinced of the ability of the Organization to resolve world problems and drawing inspiration from the well-springs of our philosophy, has entrusted us to present for the consideration of the Assembly.
138.	The entire Central African Republic joins us in wishing all possible success for the work of the Assembly.

﻿72. First of all, please allow me, Sir, on behalf of the Chinese delegation, warmly to congratulate you, the outstanding representative of Zambia, on your election to the presidency of the thirty-ninth session of the General Assembly. I believe that the current session will fulfil its mission successfully under your presidency. I also wish to thank your predecessor, Mr. Jorge Illueca, for his contribution to the thirty-eighth session. At the same time, I should like to take this opportunity to extend a warm welcome to China's close neighbour, Brunei Darussalam, on its admission to membership in the United Nations.
73.	As representatives of the Governments of various countries of the world, we meet here every year to hold extensive exchanges of views on the international situation and to explore ways to maintain world peace, ensure international security and promote human welfare. This fact itself testifies to the importance of the United Nations and its historic mission.
74.	Reviewing international developments over the past year, people cannot but feel worried. With the suspension of their disarmament negotiations, the two nuclear superpowers have stepped up their deployment of intermediate range missiles in Europe and adopted confrontation measures, thus further escalating their nuclear arms race. This poses a new threat to all European countries and deeply disturbs all countries in the world. Over the past year, while the two wars of aggression in Asia went on unchecked, a new armed invasion occurred in Central America. The Middle East is still fraught with crises, and the flames of war in the Gulf region are spreading, causing widespread concern. Basically, the tension and sharp contradiction in southern Africa are not yet relaxed.
75.	Meanwhile, the serious economic difficulties of many developing countries show clearly that the global North South contradiction is sharpening and the gap between the rich and the poor widening. Therefore, I think no one will deny that peace and development, generally speaking, remain the two fundamental questions bearing upon the interests of all the peoples in the world today. I should like to take this opportunity to offer some observations on the two questions on behalf of the Chinese Government.
76.	At present, what concerns and disturbs people most is the threat of a nuclear war. Despite innumerable rounds of talks on nuclear disarmament and a variety of proposals to this end, nuclear weapons have continued to increase and nuclear stockpiles have reached extremely dangerous proportions. As is universally recognized, the two superpowers ought to bear the main responsibility on this question. It is they that possess over 95 per cent of the world's total nuclear weaponry, and it is they alone that are in a position to fight a nuclear war. Should they choose to use only a small portion of their nuclear arsenals, not only would the people of these two nuclear Powers suffer, but the people of the whole world would be plunged into an unprecedented holocaust. For this reason, the numerous small and medium sized countries and people throughout the world are fully justified in demanding that they immediately halt their nuclear arms race and take the lead in drastically cutting back their nuclear weaponry.
77.	The arms race between the two nuclear Powers is extending to outer space. Both sides are stepping up the development of antiballistic missile weapon systems so as to reinforce their strategic offensive capabilities through improved strategic defensive means. Recently they have made some gestures on the question of outer space weapons, each mounting negotiation offensives against the other. However, as people can see, negotiations have not really started and yet each of the superpowers is busy shifting the responsibility for obstructing and sabotaging the talks on to the other. This cannot but arouse suspicion. Do they really intend to hold talks or just to use them to cover up their arms race in outer space?
78.	As the arms race between the two nuclear Powers escalates, the danger of a nuclear war will increase with each passing day. Though already possessing an oversaturation and overkill nuclear capacity, each of the superpowers is doing its utmost to gain supremacy over the other on the pretext of maintaining parity and equal security, lest the other side should surpass it in terms of quantity and quality of nuclear weapons. This practice of progressive escalation of nuclear armaments cannot but arouse doubts as to whether or not they truly have a sincere desire for disarmament. What the people of the world want is genuine and effective disarmament to ensure that people can live in peace and security.
79.	The Chinese Government and people always stand for nuclear disarmament. We hold that efforts should be made to promote progress in conventional as well as nuclear disarmament. The small quantity of nuclear weapons China possesses is solely for the purpose of self-defence. We have solemnly declared time and again that at no time and in no circumstances will China be the first to use nuclear weapons and that it unconditionally undertakes not to use nuclear weapons against nonnuclear States and regions. China has never participated in the nuclear arms race, nor does it intend to participate in that race or to shirk its responsibility in regard to nuclear disarmament.
80.	China's position on nuclear disarmament can be summed up in the following three basic points. First, our fundamental position is the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of all nuclear weapons. Secondly, as a practical step towards nuclear disarmament, we propose that, after the Soviet Union and the United States have taken the lead in putting an end to testing, improving and manufacturing nuclear weapons and have agreed on substantially reducing their nuclear arsenals, a broadly representative international conference should be convened with the participation of all nuclear States to work out together concrete measures for further nuclear disarmament. Thirdly, before all this materializes, for the sake of reducing the threat of nuclear war and showing good faith in nuclear disarmament, all nuclear States should undertake not to be the first to use nuclear weapons and unconditionally pledge not to use, or threaten to use, nuclear weapons against nonnuclear States and nuclear free zones and should reach agreement on mutual non-use of nuclear weapons.
81.	We support the just demand of the people of the world for the prohibition of nuclear weapons and the prevention of a nuclear war, and we appreciate all reasonable proposals conducive to nuclear disarmament and the maintenance of world peace. To promote progress in nuclear disarmament, we are ready to exchange views, within the United Nations or in other forums, on such issues as the prevention of nuclear war, the cessation of the nuclear arms race, and nuclear disarmament, provided all the other nuclear States agree to do so.
82.	As things now stand, we cannot but emphasize that it is of great urgency to demand that the two nuclear Powers stop their nuclear arms race, halt the deployment of new intermediate range missiles, resume negotiations on nuclear disarmament and reduce and destroy those nuclear missiles already deployed in Europe, Asia and elsewhere, and immediately stop extending their arms race to outer space. We stand for the early conclusion of a treaty on the prohibition of the arms race in outer space and a ban on research, testing, development, manufacture, deployment and use of all weapons designed for outer space warfare, as well as destruction of all the existing outer space weapon systems. AH this is highly necessary for demilitarizing outer space and ensuring the peaceful use of outer space by mankind.
83.	China has always opposed the development, production and use of all biological weapons detrimental to mankind. The Standing Committee of the Chinese National People's Congress has already adopted, on 20 September 1984, the decision on China's accession to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction. From now on, China will join other countries to combat all acts that violate this Convention and to work hard for its further improvement so as to advance the whole process of disarmament.
84.	A major cause of the turbulence and tension in the world today is the commission in international relations of such acts as infringement of the sovereignty of other countries, invasion and occupation of their territories, interference in their internal affairs and the use of force against them in violation of the basic principle of the sovereign equality of all States as set forth in the Charter of the United Nations.
85.	We are of the view that all nations, big or small, strong or weak, rich or poor, should be treated as equals and that they should respect one another, live in harmony and engage in mutually beneficial cooperation. The affairs of a country should be determined by the people of that country themselves. External interference of all kinds is illegal and impermissible.
86.	In pursuing their foreign policies, all countries should observe the norms guiding international relations and abide by the Charter. However, the superpowers, on the strength of their size and power, often try to impose their own will on others, thinking they may do whatever they please. Instead of respecting the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of other countries, they have pursued hegemonism and power politics and even carried out armed aggression against weak and small countries. With their support, certain regional hegemonists do not scruple to play the tyrant and have tried to annex territories of their neighbours by force. At this important rostrum of the General Assembly we have condemned more than once the big and small hegemonist Powers for their acts of aggression in violation of the Charter and in breach of international security. Today we once again strongly condemn these acts. People throughout the world will go on denouncing the hegemonists, with full justice, so long as they persist in such acts of aggression.
87.	At present there exist many "hot spots" in the world. Some areas may become "hot spots" tomorrow. Kampuchea is still being trampled upon. The war of aggression against Afghanistan is being intensified and expanded. The situation in the Middle East and Central America remains complex, tense and volatile. In southern Africa, the racists and colonialists are obstructing national independence and threatening the security of neighbouring countries. Some of these "hot spots" have resulted from direct aggression by the superpowers; others have turned into international crises because of their meddling, intervention or behind the scenes support and manipulation. To cool down the "hot spots", relax tensions and resolve contradictions, the prerequisite is to stop interference, control and infiltration by the superpowers and their followers so that the parties concerned in each country or region may seek reasonable solutions to their respective internal problems through peaceful negotiations.
88.	As an old Chinese saying goes, "Common fear leads to unity; common greed leads to rivalry." This is how the world situation stands today. On the one hand, the two superpowers are in rivalry for world hegemony; and on the other, the large numbers of small and medium sized countries are steadily strengthening their unity and supporting one another in the struggle against hegemonism. It is our belief that, in the face of unjust action where the strong bullies the weak and the big oppresses the small, the international community has the responsibility and obligation to speak out for justice and struggle against such acts in order to uphold the norms governing international relations and the principles of the Charter. Far from helping world peace and stability, tolerance towards aggressors will only inflate their arrogance.
89.	The struggles of the world's people against hegemonism, imperialism, colonialism and racism are all just struggles, to which the Chinese Government and people will, as always, give firm support.
90.	We support the position of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea in favour of the holding of tripartite talks, the easing of tension in the Korean Peninsula and the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea, and calling for the withdrawal of United States troops from South Korea.
91.	We support the people of Afghanistan in their heroic struggle to safeguard national independence and resist foreign aggression. We oppose the efforts of the Soviet Union to intensify its aggression against and devastation of Afghanistan, and we demand the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan.
92.	We have always stood by the Arab people and supported their just struggle against Israeli aggression and expansion and the just struggle of the Palestinian people to regain their legitimate national rights; and we demand Israel's withdrawal from Lebanon and from all the other Arab territories it has occupied since 1967.
93.	We support the just struggle of the people of Namibia for national independence and that of the people of South Africa against apartheid and racial discrimination, and we demand the withdrawal of the troops of South Africa from Namibia and the cessation of military threats to the neighbouring countries.
94.	We support the Latin American people and the Contadora Group in their endeavour for peace and stability in Central America and demand that the outside forces stop their acts of military intervention and infiltration in this region.
95.	Here I would like, in particular, to say a few words about the question of Kampuchea. Almost six years have passed since Viet Nam invaded and occupied the independent and sovereign State of Democratic Kampuchea by armed force. Viet Nam refuses to give up its wild ambition of annexing Kampuchea despite repeated setbacks on the battlefield in its successive "dry season offensives". It has time and again played the trick of the so-called partial withdrawal in an attempt to cover up its refusal to withdraw its troops. Its demand to make its troop withdrawal conditional upon the exclusion of one of the patriotic resistance forces of Kampuchea has revealed all the more clearly that to this day it lacks the sincere desire to solve the Kampuchean question.
96.	We hope to see a fair and reasonable solution to the question of Kampuchea at an early date. But a political settlement of this question must be predicated on the withdrawal of all the Vietnamese aggressor troops from Kampuchea. In our view, whether one firmly opposes aggression by Viet Nam and demands the withdrawal of its troops is a fundamental test as to whether one gives resolute support to the just struggles of people subjected to aggression, safeguards the independence of sovereign States, works for the maintenance of world peace and security and upholds the basic norms of international relations. We support the legitimate status and authority of the tripartite Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea, headed by Prince Norodom Sihanouk. We believe that, after the withdrawal of Vietnamese troops, the various Kampuchean political forces will become united on a broad basis and that the Kampuchean people will be able to decide their own future through a United Nations supervised general election, free from outside aggression and interference. We hope to see Kampuchea become an independent, peaceful, neutral and nonaligned State.
97.	The Chinese Government pursues an independent foreign policy, firmly opposes hegemonism and resolutely stands by all peoples who are subjected to oppression and aggression. China will never attach itself to any big Power or group of Powers, nor yield to any outside pressure. We support the Movement of Non Aligned Countries and will not enter into alliance with any big Power. We do not practise the so-called equidistant diplomacy, or play cards or ally ourselves with one big Power against the other. In our external relations we have always followed the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence initiated jointly by China, India and Burma 30 years ago. They are: "mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual nonaggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence". In accordance with these principles, China has improved relations with neighbouring countries, concluded a number of boundary treaties and treaties of peace, friendship and cooperation, and developed friendly relations with many countries in Asia, Africa, Latin America, Europe, North America and Oceania. The Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence have long been written into China's Constitution and are the basic norms China follows in handling its relations with all countries.
98.	We want to live in peace and to develop normal relations with all countries. Even though some countries have differences of one kind or another with us for this or that reason, we are ready to seek a settlement of the differences in a spirit of mutual understanding and consultation so that our relations with them may gradually improve.
99.	Over the past three decades, the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence have stood the test of international vicissitudes and have shown great vitality. Experience shows that they are the basic norms governing relations between States and that they constitute an important weapon against hegemonist interference and aggression. In line with the trend of history and in response to the call of our time, they reflect the aspirations and interests of the people of all countries and have thus won their appreciation and support. Whether relations between countries are good or bad depends on whether or not those countries adhere to the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. If those Principles are adhered to, countries with different social systems can live in amity and engage in friendly cooperation. But if they are not adhered to, even countries with similar social systems may fall out and enter into confrontation or even conflict. We stress the importance of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence here because they are in accord with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations. So long as all countries strictly adhere to the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence in their mutual relations—whether between big Powers, or between big and small countries, or between small countries—it will not be difficult to have international tensions relaxed, and world peace will surely be preserved.
100.	The peace and stability of the world depend on the sustained growth of national and international economies. The development of the third world has become one of the biggest challenges mankind faces today.
101.	This year marks the tenth anniversary of the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, which were adopted by the General Assembly on 1 May 1974, at its sixth special session. At that session 10 years ago [2209th meeting], Deng Xiaoping, Chairman of the Chinese delegation, pledged China's support for the just position of the third world countries calling for the restructuring of the inequitable and irrational international economic order. Despite the persistent efforts made by the developing countries to remove external constraints imposed on their economic development and improve North South relations, the actual results are far from satisfactory. Up to now, global negotiations have not been launched, and the immediate measures for solving the current urgent problems affecting the developing countries have failed to materialize. That this is still a far cry from the objectives set forth in the Declaration and the Programme of Action adopted at the sixth special session of the General Assembly is the result of international obstacles from certain quarters.
102.	At present, economic recovery in the West is still very unsteady, and the economic prospects in developing countries remain grim. These countries are faced with such difficulties as economic stagnation, lack of funds, export restrictions and a heavy debt burden. Their development is being seriously hindered.
103.	The grave difficulties of the least developed countries, particularly the desperate plight of many such countries in Africa, ought to receive close attention and deep sympathy from the whole world. In the areas south of the Sahara, more than 100 million people are plagued by famine, with vast numbers of women and children on the verge of death, as a result of long years of economic stagnation and a drop in per capita income for years running, coupled with the threat of continued drought and reduction of grain output. It is urgent that the international community take concerted action in response to their appeal for help in coping with the difficulties. All developed countries have the obligation to give them adequate aid of all kinds and to help them to overcome their economic difficulties and alleviate the people's sufferings.
104.	The grave debt problem is an urgent issue facing developing countries, Latin American countries in particular. The total volume of external debt incurred by the third world as a whole has reached a staggering figure. Recently, the continued rise in the interest rates of United States banks has further increased the burden on debtor countries. In our view, settlement of the debt problem is a responsibility which the creditor countries, commercial banks and international financial agencies should shoulder together with the debtor countries. The principle for settling this problem should be the promotion of debt service through development. The debtor countries should be asked to adopt readjustment policies aimed at promoting their economic growth, and not to impose a recessionist policy. The creditor countries should take such measures as lowering high interest rates, improving terms of payment, reducing trade restrictions, increasing governmental development aid and providing adequate credits and loans so as to reduce the burden of the debtor countries. We appreciate and support the reasonable proposals put forward by debtor countries for settling the debt problem, and the responsible attitude they adopt. We hope that, through their own sustained efforts and with the attention and help of the international community, the debtor countries will be able gradually to extricate themselves from their difficult position so that the current debt crisis may be eased and overcome.
105.	Protectionism is another urgent problem that affects the economic growth of the developing countries. We have noted with concern that, with the gradual recovery of the economies of developed countries, protectionism is on the rise rather than on the decline. This has become a major obstacle to the economic recovery and development of the developing countries. We call on the major developed countries immediately to adopt effective measures to honour their promises made at various international forums and to halt and reverse the trend of increased protectionism against the developing countries so that the latter may increase their export earnings and create conditions for the expansion of their imports and the growth of their economies.
106.	The world economy is an integral whole. Its stability and growth cannot be based on the affluence of the few and the impoverishment of the many. Without the economic growth of the developing countries, it will be difficult for the developed countries to achieve sustained economic recovery and expansion. The truth is quite obvious and has come to be appreciated and supported by more and more persons with breadth of vision in the West. It is regrettable that some major developed countries have thus far failed to consider in earnest the practical difficulties and urgent demands of the numerous developing countries. These developed countries have remained indifferent to the North South dialogue and global negotiations and have opposed a restructuring of the old international economic order. Theirs is a short-sighted policy.
107.	The Group of 77 has already put forward a series of practical proposals that have taken into consideration the interests of all countries concerned. In order to remove the obstacles in the way of launching global negotiations, they have time and again made major efforts and proposed that the global negotiations be carried out in two phases. The International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade, adopted by the General Assembly in 1980 also gives expression to the common desire of the international community to establish the new international economic order and to revitalize the world economy.
108.	The midterm review and appraisal of the implementation of the Strategy should mainly be aimed at ensuring the full implementation of the series of policy measures set forth in the Strategy. The developing countries have proposed the convening of another international conference on money and finance with the object of promoting development. We hope that all countries concerned will strive to create conditions for the early convocation of that conference. It has been our consistent view that the solution of the immediate problems facing the developing countries should be closely linked with the effort to achieve the long-term objective of establishing the new international economic order. We support all proposals that proceed from the overall interests of the world economy and that help to improve North South relations and promote development in the third world. We are ready to join the other developing countries in making unremitting efforts to establish the new international economic order.
109.	There is great potential for increased cooperation among third world countries with their vast territories and rich resources. While North South negotiations are at a stalemate, South South cooperation among developing countries is making further progress. South South cooperation is not only an effective way for the developing countries to strengthen collective self-reliance in overcoming difficulties and developing their economies, but also an important impetus to the North South dialogue and a booster to their negotiating positions. The Chinese Government is ready to play its part in promoting South South cooperation in accordance with the principles of equality and mutual benefit, stress on practical results, diversity in form and common progress.
110.	Peace and development are two major issues in the world today. They also constitute the primary objectives of China's domestic and foreign policies. The Chinese people are now engaged in a large-scale socialist modernization drive. Their goal can be attained only through long years of efforts in a peaceful international environment.
111.	This year marks the thirty-fifth anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China. We have scored great achievements in these 35 years, particularly in the years since 1979, which have witnessed the sustained growth and coordinated development of China's economy. True, we made detours and paid our price, but we gained experience as well. It is our basic experience that economic development must be based on the actual conditions of one's own country: there is no readymade model to copy and one has to blaze one's own trail. A period of 35 years is far too short for us to turn China, with its large population and vast territory, into a modernized, prosperous and strong socialist country. Thirty five years are not enough, not even another 35 years. China will continue unswervingly to pursue its foreign policy of peace and will make every possible endeavour for the maintenance of world peace.
112.	Based on the idea of "one country, two systems", the Chinese Government has decided to resume the exercise of sovereignty over Hong Kong in 1997 and establish a Hong Kong Special Administrative Region. That is to say, in view of the history of Hong Kong and its realities, a special administrative region where the capitalist system will remain unchanged for 50 years is to be established in a socialist country. This idea, based as it is on China's actual conditions, conforms to a common aspiration and the interests of the 1 billion Chinese people, including our compatriots in Hong Kong. Thanks to their joint efforts, the Chinese and British Governments have reached and initialled an agreement on the question of Hong Kong. The settlement of this question will contribute significantly to the lofty cause of the reunification of our great motherland and to stability and peace in Asia.
113.	China's foreign policy remains firm and consistent, as it is based on the fundamental interests of the people of China and of the rest of the world. We support the people of all countries in their struggle to safeguard sovereignty and independence and develop their national economy and in their struggle against the arms race and the threat of war and hegemonism and in defence of world peace. China wishes to live in peace and develop normal relations with all other countries in the world, including the United States and the Soviet Union. China stands for the easing of world tensions and the settlement of all international disputes through peaceful consultations and earnest negotiations. China also hopes to see the two superpowers, the United States and the Soviet Union, end their nuclear arms race and global rivalry and improve their bilateral relations in the interest of world peace and international security.
114.	Only with peace can there be development. Without development, there can be no stability; and without stability, peace is out of the question. Peace and development are inseparable. They are the two major objectives which the world's people have most at heart and to which the United Nations is committed. We must march towards these two major objectives, however numerous the difficulties and obstacles may be. We are convinced that with the concerted efforts of the people all over the world these objectives can definitely be attained.
115.	It is nearly 40 years since the founding of the United Nations, which, having traversed a path by no means smooth and uneventful, today shoulders an even heavier responsibility for the maintenance of world peace and international security. We appreciate and support the Secretary General’s statement in his report on the work of the Organization expressing the desire and demand to make the United Nations work better. As one of the founders of the United Nations and one of the permanent members of the Security Council, China is determined to make the greatest endeavour possible, together with other countries, to uphold the Charter and strengthen the role of the United Nations.

﻿May I first extend to you, Mr. President, the congratulations of the Federal Republic of Germany on your election to your high office. We consider your personality, your extraordinary talents and your longstanding deep commitment to the cause of the United Nations to be a guarantee of success in accomplishing your difficult tasks. We see in you the representative of a continent and a country with which we are linked by traditionally good and friendly relations.
2.	I wish to express also the gratitude of my country to your predecessor, Mr. Jorge Illueca, for the competent way in which he guided the work of the thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly.
3.	At the same time, I wish to thank the Secretary General and his collaborators for their untiring efforts and for the excellent work done in the past year in the interest of strengthening the United Nations and of peace in the world.
4.	It gives me particular pleasure today to welcome Brunei Darussalam to this forum as a new Member State. We entertain good bilateral relations with Brunei Darussalam and feelings of friendship for it as a member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
5.	In his thought-provoking report on the work of the Organization, the Secretary General recalls the historical achievements of the United Nations. We support his appeal that the great potential of this international Organization for the prevention and settlement of conflicts be utilized and strengthened.
6.	The essential characteristics of the world today are the relationship between the industrial countries of the North and the developing countries of the South and the relationship between the democratic industrial countries of the West and the communist industrial countries of the East. West and East account for the greater part of the North. The North is a house divided, but the South, too, is torn by tension and antagonism.
7.	We need dialogue between North and South. Internal tensions within North and South obstruct and slow down this dialogue. North and South must, therefore, reduce their internal tensions and dedicate their intellectual and material resources to a common effort aimed at the development of an international order based on equality, accommodation of interests and cooperation; an international order in which everyone has a fair chance, in which people can develop their strengths and abilities; an international order in which human rights are respected and social justice is applied to all.
8.	This calls for what I would term an international domestic policy, a policy rooted in the conviction that the future of one's own country can only be assured if the future of all countries is assured.
9.	The most pressing North South problem is the debt crisis in many developing countries, particularly in Latin America. The Presidents of Argentina and Venezuela have made pointed reference to this situation in their statements to the Assembly. The effects of the debt crisis are felt by South and North. Forceful measures of adjustment are required if the debtor countries are to recover economically. Such measures have political and social repercussions in those countries. Jacques de Larosiere, Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund [VMF], said recently:
"It must be realized that there are social and political limits to economic adjustment. The advantages gained by a country from servicing its debts and pursuing a policy of adjustment must be worth the cost in terms of the human misery caused by the adjustment."
Only in this spirit can the problem be solved.
10.	The crisis is confronting the North, too, with difficulties. The necessary import restrictions by the debtor countries mean export reductions for industrial countries. The international banking system has been put under heavy pressure. This crisis can be solved only by the common effort of North and South. The debt servicing commitments and the servicing ability of the developing countries must be brought back into harmony. We need longer-term rescheduling strategies to support successful adjustment efforts by debtors. Mexico has furnished proof that it is possible to adjust successfully. We have reason to hope that the other countries, too, after a painful initial adjustment phase, will manage to move on to the second phase, in which adjustment and growth again go hand in hand.
11.	We shall overcome the debt crisis only through intensive dialogue and cooperative solidarity. We therefore welcome the comprehensive dialogue on this subject scheduled to take place early next year within the IMF and the World Bank.
12.	If economic recovery and development are to take place in the third world, a package of coordinated measures is necessary.
13.	First, the industrial countries must ensure their own stable growth.
14.	Secondly, protectionism must be fought. Markets must remain open and become more open to exports from the third world. Deeds must be made to match the many words in favour of liberalized trade.
15.	Thirdly, the over-high international interest level must fall. How can permanent growth be achieved in the developing countries in the face of today's level of real interest?
16.	Fourthly, the developing countries need more direct investments from abroad. The industrial countries must therefore continue their investment promotion policy. The developing countries, for their part, must create a favourable investment climate. Direct investments not only transfer capital but also transfer technology and managerial experience and provide easier access to the world market. The transfer of technology to the third world must be promoted with the utmost energy. An agreement on balanced codes for transnational enterprises and technology transfers would encourage investment.
17.	Our special attention and assistance must be devoted to the world's poorest countries. Since 1971, the number of least developed countries has risen from 25 to 36. Their economic growth, and especially their food production, are not keeping pace with population growth. Their debt burden is oppressive. They need increasing official development assistance. For this reason, the Federal Republic of Germany has always given particular consideration to those countries in its development cooperation. For years it has been providing them only with grants. !t has remitted the public debt of most of those countries.
18.	The situation is particularly dramatic in many African countries. Africa needs international solidarity and the coordinated efforts of the international community. Food security must be at the heart of these efforts; acute need must be combated; self-sufficiency must be strengthened. Africa is therefore a focus of our development cooperation. Substantially more than 40 per cent of our entire aid is channelled into that continent. In response to the appeal by the Secretary General, we provided an additional 50 million deutsche mark for special food security action in 1984. The World Bank report on sub-Saharan Africa reinforces our intention to allocate additional funds to Africa in 1985.
19.	At this point I should like to appeal to the industrial countries with State trading organizations to bring their development aid into an acceptable relationship with their economic power and their arms expenditure. They too should open their doors more widely to exports from developing countries. They absorb only 5 per cent of all exports from developing countries, whereas more than two thirds of such exports go to the Western industrial States.
20.	According to estimates by the International Conference on Population, held at Mexico City from 6 to 14 August 1984, the population of the world will almost double in the next 40 years, despite ail the efforts to decelerate population growth. That will multiply the number and the seriousness of the problems facing humanity. We who live today bear responsibility for ensuring that our children and grandchildren inherit a world which permits them to live in human dignity. The danger is growing that "spaceship Earth" will no longer be able to carry mankind.
21.	The universal nature of this danger to the future is forcing the community of nations to pool its resources. More people need more food, drinking water, clothing, accommodation, schools, employment, hospitals and recreation facilities. All these things are not even sufficiently available to the majority of those living now. And yet we must provide them for more than 8 billion people, and time is short.
22.	An increase in population will also impose greater strains on the environment. Even now, we see the deserts spreading, valuable soil becoming salinated and eroded, and vegetation in industrial countries being threatened by acid rain. Year by year, numerous types of animals and plants disappear irretrievably. Seas and inland waters are becoming polluted. Hydrocarbon combustion is jeopardizing the world climate. Industrial waste, refuse and sewage pose enormous technical and financial challenges to the world community. UNEP must become the driving force of a worldwide environmental policy. But all international cooperation is in vain if environmental protection is not practised at home, in our own countries. Polluted air and poisoned water do not stop at national boundaries. For this reason, we are talking and negotiating with all our neighbours in the West and the East on joint action to combat the dangers of pollution. The Conference on the Environment, held at Munich, provided an important stimulus for a joint approach on trans-boundary pollution. In the interest of combating environmental pollution at its source, more account must be taken than has been done hitherto, in public and private economic cooperation with the third world, of the need to protect the natural sources of life.
23.	In the densely populated and highly industrialized Federal Republic of Germany, environmental problems surfaced earlier than elsewhere. We have therefore been able to gather extensive experience in recognizing, measuring and fighting pollution. We are prepared to share this experience with all interested parties.
24.	The major tasks of economic growth and environmental protection, development and the provision of food cannot be solved without the potential offered by the new forms of high technology. New technological developments should serve all mankind; they must not be misused as instruments of power.
25.	Gene technology, for instance, will provide the third world with new and great opportunities with regard to agriculture and the solution of the food problem. It appears possible that plants which can yield fruit even in difficult soil and climatic conditions will be developed using the methods of gene technology. It appears possible also that harvests can be considerably increased and the use of chemical fertilizers drastically reduced. The international research programmes to promote agriculture in developing countries must make full use of the opportunities offered by gene technology.
26.	But this very form of technology makes us aware that new advanced technology not only presents us with opportunities but also confronts us with dangers which we must control from the outset. Respect for creation must guide us in our use of gene technology and must make us vigilant about any misguided attempt to manipulate human heredity. Human dignity demands that such manipulation be banned and made impossible from the outset. That is a topic for the United Nations, too.
27.	Cooperation between North and South must reduce the prosperity gap, overcome hunger and want, disease and ignorance, and ensure respect for fundamental human rights.
28.	The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights must occupy a central place in the work of the United Nations. Peace and human rights belong together. Anyone who violates human rights is thereby breaking commitments he has assumed on the basis of the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenants on Human Rights; he is infringing international law.
29.	For the Federal Republic of Germany, an active policy of support for human rights is a pillar of its policy for peace. A draft convention against torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment—a draft convention which we support and to which we attach great importance—has been submitted to the General Assembly. We appeal to all Member States to accept the draft convention and the control procedures for which it provides and to let it become effective. Torture, one of the most dreadful scourges of mankind, must be banished from the world. No one should be delivered into the hands of torturers, and no torturer should go unpunished.
30.	We welcome the favourable reaction to our proposal for an optional protocol prohibiting capital punishment. I ask for further constructive cooperation. I address my appeal also to those States which do not yet want to give up the death penalty.
31.	Racism, particularly	in South Africa, constitutes a fundamental violation of human dignity. We appeal to the Republic of South Africa to clear the way for the realization by all its citizens of elementary human rights.
32.	The United Nations needs institutions that permit better protection of human rights. The appeals for the appointment of a high commissioner for human rights and for the institution of a court of human rights point the way to this goal.
33.	The Charter of the United Nations represents a magnificent effort to overcome the inherited structures, based on the possession and projection of power, and to create new structures for peace. But the United Nations has not yet united the nations of the world. The world is still marked by rivalry between nations and power blocs, rooted in distrust. That is the result of bitter historical experience. World history has taught nations to be prepared for the possibility of force from outside.
34.	Force is still being used. The Afghan people long for the right to preserve in peace their independence, their self-determination and the faith of their fathers. Laos and Kampuchea are fighting for their independence. In the Gulf war, people are still dying a senseless death. Central America is riven by tension from without and within. The independence of Namibia is still being withheld. In South Africa, people are discriminated against because of their colour. There will be no rest for the Middle East as long as violence and not negotiations are the order of the day. Without an undertaking to refrain from the use of force, without the realization by the Palestinian people of their right to self-determination, without recognition of the right of all States, including Israel, of their right to exist, there will never be a lasting and just peace in the Middle East.
35.	We must strengthen the peace-making influence of the United Nations. The Secretary General has rightly pointed out that there should be less talk about the inefficiency of the United Nations and more about a lack of willingness on the part of States to tap its potential. To this end, the principle of universality must remain inviolate. Despite all our differences, we must always so conduct the dialogue as to make its continuation seem desirable to all participants. We all know how difficult it is to settle or even to restrict conflicts once they have broken out. That is why conflicts must be nipped in the bud. For this purpose we need an effective early warning system permitting the Security Council and the Secretary General to act swiftly. We support the proposals made by the Secretary General on this matter.
36.	In the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization, the Federal Republic of Germany, along with other delegations, has submitted proposals on the prevention of international conflicts.
37.	Our refugee initiative, aimed at reducing the horrendous flow of refugees through political cooperation, also serves the purpose of stifling potential conflicts.
38.	Observance of the prohibition of the use of force is the first step that must be taken. An undertaking not to use force does not mean renouncing convictions, values and interests. It focuses on the form and the means used by States to settle their differences. The undertaking to refrain from the use of force is one of the fundamental and indispensable principles for ordering the peaceful coexistence of States. The policy of the Federal Republic of Germany is a policy for peace, embedded in the commitment to refrain from using force. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization, to which we belong, is built on this foundation. In their Bonn Declaration of 10 June 1982, the allies stated:
"Our purpose is to prevent war and, while safeguarding democracy, to build the foundations of lasting peace. None of our weapons will ever be used except in response to attack."
39.	We know that military strength alone cannot guarantee a peaceful future. Disarmament and arms control are therefore integral parts of our security policy. In Europe, East and West face each other with huge arsenals; throughout the world, enormous resources, which could otherwise help us and the developing countries shape our future, are spent on arms. The prevalent distrust can be measured by reference to world arms expenditure figures. Confidence-building and disarmament are demands addressed to the entire international community, to East and West, to North and South alike.
40.	Today, no region of the world can find peace and security on its own. Arms control in Europe strengthens peace and stability in the world. The worldwide and regional dialogue on disarmament and arms control has not been interrupted. Pessimism and resignation must not doom our efforts, which must be guided by the will to utilize the available instruments to pursue an active policy. That means, above all, that negotiations must take place. This principle must apply everywhere and in respect of all weapons. No weapons system must be excepted. No one may consider only his own security interests; the legitimate interests of others must also be acknowledged. No one may seek security at the expense of others.
41.	We welcome the fact that President Reagan, speaking from this rostrum [4th meeting], proposed to the Soviet Union a comprehensive disarmament dialogue. That dialogue is in the interest of all peoples. The United States and the Soviet Union bear a particular responsibility on account of their nuclear potential and their obligations deriving from the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
42.	Like the President of the United States, we favour the resumption of nuclear arms negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union without preconditions. We support the American desire for drastic reductions in the field of intercontinental strategic weapons. As hitherto, we want global renunciation of land based intermediate range missiles by the United States and the Soviet Union. We support every balanced agreement made to this end.
43.	We call for arms control with regard to outer space while there is still time.
44.	At the Vienna Talks on Mutual Reduction of Forces, Armaments and Associated Measures in Central Europe, we want to achieve parity in conventional forces in Central Europe by means of mutual troop reductions.
45.	We urge the participants in the Conference on Confidence and Security building Measures and Disarmament in Europe, meeting at Stockholm, to agree to concrete, militarily significant and verifiable measures for security and confidence-building. Such measures must apply to the whole of Europe.
46.	We advocate that the undertaking to refrain from the threat or use of force be made concrete and be reaffirmed within the mandate given to the Stockholm Conference. It must apply among all States within the alliance systems and to the actions of participating States throughout the world.
47.	We call for a fresh initiative in the process of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe. The Finnish proposal that the tenth anniversary of the Helsinki Final Act be marked by a conference at a political level merits support.
48.	We appeal to all Members of the United Nations to enter into the process of confidence building in all parts of the world in a practical and serious manner, thereby improving worldwide the conditions for disarmament and arms control.
49.	It remains important, in view of the universal increase in military expenditure, to publish military budgets and make them comparable. We call for a United Nations register providing information on arms exports and imports throughout the world.
50.	We want a worldwide, comprehensive and verifiable ban on chemical weapons. It is not sufficient to ban chemical weapons in Europe only, thereby preserving the option of using them in other parts of the world.
51.	The commitments entered into as a result of disarmament negotiations must be verifiable. The Federal Republic of Germany will contribute its share to achieving success in disarmament negotiations.
52.	Europe has experienced the horrors of two world wars. The European Community was born of these experiences. We seek European Union. The peoples joined in that union will develop their strengths and capabilities in such a way that Europe can take its rightful place in the world.
53.	Franco German friendship is an example of how the lessons of history can be taken to heart. The joint commemoration by the Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany and the President of the French Republic of the war dead at the Verdun military graves is a symbol of reconciliation and friendship.
54.	The States of the European Community want to master the future together. But Europe is more than the 10 States—soon to be 12—of the European Community. We seek cooperation with all the States of Europe. We Germans are aware of the responsibility deriving from the history of our country and from our situation at the heart of Europe. The Federal Republic of Germany has linked its fate firmly to that of Europe. Our policy is a policy for peace in Europe. With the other States participating in the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, we want to create, on the basis of the Helsinki Final Act a rueful order in Europe in which cooperation can develop freely between States, irrespective of the differences in their systems. We seek a peaceful order in which, as envisaged in the Helsinki Final Act, nations, can determine their own fate and live free from the fear of violence, threats and restriction of their liberty and in which people can enjoy the exercise of their lawful rights and the fruits of peaceful international exchanges.
55.	It is a policy for peace in Europe too when we declare, as stated in the letter on German unity, that our political aim is to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will regain its unity through free self-determination.
56.	The treaties concluded between my country and our Eastern neighbours in the 1970s cleared the way for the Helsinki Final Act. We stand by every word of those treaties. The Federal Republic of Germany respects the territorial integrity of all States within their present boundaries. It proceeds from the existing situation in Europe. It makes no territorial claims on anyone and will not do so in the future either. The Federal Republic of Germany considers the borders of all States to be inviolable and will continue to do so. We call upon all States to educate their young people in peace and in respect for other nations and other opinions. Education in hatred jeopardizes peace; polemics against the peaceful intentions of other nations poison the political atmosphere.
57.	The Federal Republic of Germany wishes to breathe life into the treaties concluded with its Eastern neighbours. We want the Helsinki Final Act to be implemented in all its parts. We want to continue the process of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe. That process has improved the situation in Europe; it has stood up under severe strains in the international climate. The contribution of all participants in the Conference, large States as well as small, will remain indispensable to security and cooperation in Europe. We want cooperation with all the States adherents to the Warsaw Pact. We want cooperation—political, economic, technological and environmental. We want close cultural exchanges.
58.	We shall resolutely and patiently pursue our charted course towards compromise and understanding. We shall not let ourselves be disheartened or confounded. We shall consistently pursue with the Soviet Union the dialogue and cooperation based on the Treaty of Moscow—and continued even during difficult times. That Treaty, like the long-term economic agreement, opens up great vistas that must be exploited.
59.	The desire for German Polish understanding and reconciliation determines our thinking and action towards the Polish nation. The Treaty of Warsaw, concluded on 7 December 1970, breached once and for all the vicious circle of injustice and retaliation. It was one of the most important milestones in German and European post-war politics.
60.	Our cooperation with the German Democratic Republic, even at times of East West tension, is an expression of the historically rooted responsibility of both German States for peace in Europe. This responsibility must also prove its worth in the joint solution of human and technical problems. People must be able to experience personally the benefits of detente. In this respect we have made progress. It is our wish that both German States should continue along the route marked out by the Basic Treaty normalizing relations and the Helsinki Final Act. It is our wish that they should set an example by meeting their obligations under the Final Act. In this way we shall live up to the requirement inherent in the recognition of our joint responsibility.
61.	An improved relationship between the United States and the Soviet Union is vitally important to East West relations and to world peace. Contemplation of the principles of equality and mutual consideration embodied in the United States Soviet declaration of 1972 could smooth the way for such a development. President Reagan, in his statement to the Assembly [4th meeting], expressed the determination of his country to cooperate with the Soviet Union in securing world peace. That ought to meet with a favourable response from the Soviet Union. We can offer no substitute for dialogue between the United States and the Soviet Union, but we, like other medium and small sized States, make our contribution to improving East West relations, and it is no mean contribution.
62.	Europe, so often afflicted by wars and the source of many wars in other parts of the world, must today serve as the starting point for initiatives aimed at peace and cooperation in all parts of the world. For this reason, as a member of the European Community, the Federal Republic of Germany also relies in its relations with the third world countries on a policy that seeks, as stated in the second Lome Convention, "to reinforce, on the basis of complete equality between partners and in their mutual interest, close and continuing cooperation in a spirit of international solidarity".
63.	We seek friendship and partnership on an equal basis with the countries of the South. We support the principle of genuine nonalignment because it preserves independence and provides protection from foreign hegemonic aspirations. The Movement of Nonaligned Countries is increasingly becoming a stabilizing factor in international politics.
64.	The most populous country in the world, the People's Republic of China, is of great importance to world stability. We are gratified to note that China is opening its doors to Asia and to the world at large and is exercising its co-responsibility for international peace and cooperation.
65.	The regional groupings offer small and medium sized States the opportunity to pool their resources and together to maintain their independence. The European Community cooperates closely with the States members of ASEAN and the Andean Pact within the framework of cooperation agreements. We advocate close cooperation between the members of the European Community and the States of the Gulf Cooperation Council. We are playing our part to ensure that the Euro Arab dialogue will be further intensified.
66.	In a few days the Foreign Ministers of the States members of the European Community, together with Spain and Portugal, will be meeting at San Jose with their counterparts from the countries of Central America and the Contadora Group to launch a political dialogue and to lay the foundations for economic cooperation between the European Community and Central America.
67.	North and South must talk to one another, negotiate with one another and find joint solutions to the present and future problems of humanity. The North South dialogue will be successful only if it is conducted in awareness of the equal dignity of all the world's cultures. The subject of cultural exchanges between North and South must not be banished to the fringe of talks; it must be at the very heart of such talks. Our world is full of cultural prejudices that are often rooted in ignorance. We all have more to learn from one another. The North may be richer than the South, but it is not thereby wiser, more human or more cultivated. The cultures of North and South must each recognize the equality of the other in its own cultural dignity. It is a matter of the mental attitude with which we encounter other peoples.
68.	How often has arrogance towards other peoples arisen from contempt for their cultural identity and achievements. To understand a country, one must understand its culture. Experience of the equivalence of cultures is not inbred in peoples. It requires intensive cultural exchanges. We are prepared to give; we are prepared to take. Cultural exchanges contribute to the establishment of a peaceful international order.
69.	During these days the nations of the world have turned to United Nations Headquarters in New York in hope and anxiety. They are uneasy. It is not merely the presence of tensions that worries them, it is the apparent increase in those tensions, and they wonder what will happen if the tensions continue to increase.
70.	The problems confronting us are serious and difficult. No one expects us during these days to discover a magic formula that will solve them all at once. But the nations are right to expect one thing, namely, that we should give signs of hope, signs that the Governments of the world have recognized the danger, signs that they can halt the rising tensions. The nations do not want to hear us repeating long familiar, irreconcilable positions or apportioning blame. They want to know what specifically we intend to do in order to serve the common cause of peace. We must not disappoint them.
71.	I have explained how my country fulfils its responsibility. The Federal Republic of Germany faces the challenge of peace with the confidence of a country whose citizens can freely develop and freely help to build a humanitarian and just world. This great aim of a just and humanitarian world should guide us as we celebrate the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations in 1985 and as we observe in 1986 the International Year of Peace.

﻿First of all, I should like to pay a tribute to you, Sir, as President of the General Assembly. Your farsighted opening address matches our own concerns and positions on many points. Through you I should also like to salute the country you represent here, Zambia, and its President, Kenneth Kaunda, a tireless advocate of peaceful evolution in southern Africa.
117.	It is an honour for me to lead, for the fifth time, the French delegation to a session of the General Assembly. This session, which welcomes the admission of the 159th Member of the United Nations, Brunei Darussalam, is a noteworthy opportunity also for me to affirm from this rostrum, as did the President of the French Republic at the thirty eighth session and the Prime Minister at the thirty-seventh session the importance France attaches to the building of an international order defined in terms of law and watched over and nurtured by the organs of the United Nations family: the  Security Council, which enjoys permanent decision-making power, as defined in the Charter of the United Nations; the General Assembly, which gives each State the right of political expression; and the specialized agencies, including those of Bretton Woods, whose spheres of jurisdiction have been and will continue to be specified and enlarged as necessity dictates.
118.	The duty of the international community, of the United Nations, is to provide a framework, a means of expressing the aspirations of our peoples to justice, security and independence and to try to find answers to the problems that arise among our nations. If the United Nations fails in this task, current conflicts will worsen and others will be added to them; whole regions of the world will become arenas of confrontation. This we know. We also know—and I will return to this point later—that the whole of economic life is threatened by potentially explosive situations that might be catastrophic for some and would spare none.
119.	This is another way of saying that my Government once again this year endorses the Secretary General's report on the work of the Organization [A/39/1] and wishes to be associated with that veritable manifesto for the multilateralism and universality of the United Nations. We also note the frankness and clear-sightedness of the criticisms that he has deemed it necessary to express of the work of the United Nations itself: his condemnation, for example, of the proliferation of resolutions that go unapplied, or his concern at the ever-growing politicization of a great many technical and economic problems.
120.	These preliminary remarks are especially important in view of the fact, which we should have the honesty to recognize, that these past 12 months have not brought much satisfaction to most of the world's peoples. The train of poverty has lengthened as a result of economic deterioration and the contraction of world trade. Natural disasters have at times assumed catastrophic proportions. In another forum—the Development Committee of the World Bank—my colleague, the Minister of Cooperation and Development, has described the tragedies of Africa. Think of the legions of refugees driven from their villages, and sometimes their countries, by hunger, fear and the threat of annihilation. Think of the famine and the encroaching desert. It is essential to recognize forthwith that the problems of that continent are priority problems and to underscore the importance of meetings on this subject, from the Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa, held at Geneva from 9 to 11 July 1984, to the debate on the World Bank's interesting special report on Africa.
121.	Poverty and decline, which seem to many irremediable, are affecting other parts of the third world also. All too often, and almost everywhere, hope of improvement is fading, expectation of a new development is waning, resignation is setting in, despair is becoming more widespread.
122.	In short, I repeat, negative trends seem to me to have cast dark shadows the last few months. At best, there has been stagnation; in general, ground has been lost and the overriding feeling is not optimistic among the weak and the poor, which is to say the vast majority of the world.
123.	Things are scarcely better on the political level. There is the impression that nothing is being resolved between East and West. For months the superpowers have refused to talk with each other. One of them sought to make the resumption of the negotiations which were broken off for more than a year subject to preconditions that prejudged the outcome. Advice was given to the closest allies to put their contacts on hold as well. Admittedly, a ray of hope has filtered through at this session—the encouraging news that meetings have finally been scheduled.
124.	Elsewhere, wars and the threats of war persist. The bloody conflict between Iran and Iraq continues; the Israeli Arab confrontation shows no sign of abating; the integrity of Lebanon has not been restored; the independence of Namibia is being continually postponed; Cyprus is torn apart; foreign forces in Afghanistan and Cambodia have not been withdrawn; insecurity and the fear of outside intervention still dominate the scene in Central America. The single bright spot is the decision on the immediate withdrawal of all foreign forces from Chad, a move that should enable the people of that country to shoulder their responsibility fully and to regain their unity, on the initiative of their Head of State.
125.	How can we fail to remember, above and beyond the violations of the rights of peoples and States that I have just cited, the increasing attacks on human rights? A id we hear growing and swelling the demand of ever larger numbers of people for justice, freedom and equality. Yes, these past 12 months have been sad and discouraging.
126.	In the face of such a situation, which has deteriorated over the years—and I am referring particularly to the world economic disorder, which I shall refer to again—the international community has no right to remain silent. Still less has it the right to remain inactive if it does not wish to dash the hopes of the peoples of the industrialized world, born in the aftermath of the massacres of the Second World War, and the hopes of the developing countries, born in the wake of the great wave of independence.
127.	I should now like to review the various items.
128.	In the East West confrontation, no one will deny that primary responsibility in the normal course of events belongs to the two superpowers. Therefore, we expect those Powers to re-establish contacts and dialogue.
129.	The first objective has to be, as the President of the United States said the day before yesterday, to reverse the arms build-up, particularly the build-up of nuclear weapons, to avoid unleashing a new arms race triggered by the portentous announcement of imminent progress in new technologies—I am thinking in particular of space technology—and to revitalize and actively pursue the process of bringing about balanced and controlled arms limitation.
130.	Concerned members of the international community can and must contribute actively to such progress. France, for its part, attaches great importance to the Conference on Confidence and Security building Measures and Disarmament in Europe, meeting at Stockholm, which should make it possible to restore a certain level of confidence among the countries of Europe, from the Atlantic to the Urals, in the field of conventional forces. In any case, my country will be active in the quest for a balance of forces, which is a prerequisite for peace. Its own military nuclear effort will remain exclusively on the level of defensive deterrents. Last year, at the thirty eighth session, speaking from this rostrum, President Mitterrand outlined our position on the various discussions on this subject, namely, the strategic arms reduction talks and the negotiations on intermediate range nuclear forces, which we hope will be resumed at an early date, and our participation in possible nuclear disarmament negotiations, once existing arsenals have been reduced to quite different and less unreasonable proportions and once other conditions have been met. Our position has not changed since then.
131.	France also intends to participate actively in international efforts to prevent, under effective monitoring, particularly serious developments—I would remind members of our active participation in the discussions on chemical weapons—and in the efforts to control the new alarming and destabilizing progress in the most disturbing areas of future technology. That is the reason for the initiative taken by France at the recent meetings of the Conference on Disarmament, at Geneva, regarding the use of space for antimissile and anti-satellite activities. It is also the reason for our considerable interest in any initiative on this matter. 
132.	France, a loyal partner in the Atlantic Alliance—need I reaffirm this?—nevertheless retains its freedom of judgement and action. Together with its close partners, it will encourage closer relations among the peoples of Europe, whom history united for centuries and then divided over the course of the last 40 years.
133.	The peoples of Europe themselves have indeed the desire, the right and the possibility of contributing decisively to the easing of tensions. Let the right of each to express his own identity and freely to choose his future be recognized and we shall see new ties developing among European countries of different and even opposing ideologies and alliances, because our peoples want to know one another better, to rediscover together the old elements of their common past, to expand economic and cultural ties and to seek occasions for meetings and direct contact among individuals.
134.	It is important, moreover, that the differences between the superpowers, the rivalry between East and West, do not prevent the rest of the world from living its life. We are convinced of the importance of nonalignment when it is in keeping with the national will. True nonalignment can and should strengthen international stability. We are determined to help this. My President underscored this point a year ago when he actively took part in the Meeting of Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Heads of Delegation of the Nonaligned Countries held in New York from 4 to 7 October 1983 and organized by the President of the Movement of Nonaligned Countries, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, Prime Minister of India. Members will have noted that relations between my country and the nonaligned countries have increased and gained in trust and depth over the past few years.
135.	The desire to affirm the identity of each quite naturally includes systematically encouraging the expansion of relations among neighbours, thus furthering regional cooperation. France, which has known so many wars with its neighbours over the centuries, has rediscovered the close friendship that is only fitting with its great German neighbour. It has embarked irreversibly on the construction of the European Community in all areas—commercial, economic and political It has found in that entity a greater strength and a better potential for hearing what is happening in the world and for being heard in it. In this way, France confirms and strengthens its capacity for independence.
136.	What France wishes and accomplishes for itself and its neighbours it also wishes for all others in the world. Every time a possibility of regional organization appears, my country will support it, regardless of the location. Members should not be surprised, therefore, at our commitment to the Organization of African Unity [OAU], the League of Arab States and also, farther from Europe, ASEAN, the Andean Pact countries, and others.
137 Quite naturally also, cooperation among regions should be encouraged. This is one way to advance relations between neighbouring countries while still preserving the real independence of all, even the weakest among them and those experiencing a period of difficulty or needing external aid at this time. Members must not think that the second Lome Convention linking the 10 member States of the European Community to 65 African, Caribbean and Pacific countries is the result of mere chance, any more than is the meeting to be held at San Jose the day after tomorrow which is to bring together the 10 member States of the European Community, the two candidates for admission—Spain and Portugal—and the five countries of Central America in the presence of the four countries that are members of the Contadora Group—and I could give many other examples. This is a well-thought-out policy.
138.	In the global context, it is possible to trace the main lines of the action that my Government finds desirable in the face of today's major issues.
139.	First of all, I should like to refer to the subject of warfare, and above all where there has been the greatest bloodshed in the past two years—I mean, between Iran and Iraq. The repeated appeals of the United Nations, and particularly the resolutions of the Security Council, must be heeded by the two belligerents and not just by one of them.
140.	The use of inhumane weapons should be renounced so as to spare the civilian populations. A tribute should be paid to the Secretary General for his efforts and the initial results he has obtained. Everything possible must be done to bring about a return to the customary freedoms in that region, particularly freedom of navigation. In this way, progress will be made towards ending this terrible connect, which will cease to have a raison d'etre once the parties return to the borders recognized by the international community and once the issues in dispute can, for the most part, be dealt with at the negotiating table.
141.	Elsewhere, there are grave tensions that could lead to war: I am referring to Cyprus, for example, whose sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity cannot be called into question. We are encouraging the Secretary General in his noteworthy efforts.
142.	I am also thinking of Central America. The Central American countries should be encouraged to settle their mutual disagreements through a series of discussions and arrangements among themselves, in accordance with the principles set forth in the revised Contadora Act on Peace and Cooperation in Central America, with all interference in internal affairs and all outside intervention rejected. The political forces should thus be able to voice their own opinions and the republics of Central America should be helped finally to overcome economic and social situations that are a legacy of the past. Threats and aggression are no longer acceptable.
143.	I am also referring to peoples that have been divided, the heroic people of Korea, for example. Over the centuries they have asserted their identity and unity only to find themselves subsequently drawn by war into an intolerable division, while in fact they have a right to unity. We hope the Koreans will soon sit among us as other peoples do.
144.	Then, there are places where human rights are violated by outside intervention or constraints, by the unwanted occupation of foreign troops: in Afghanistan, where armed intervention by foreign forces increases as resistance by the people increases; in the Middle East, where the Palestinian people are suffering and despair of seeing their rights recognized, of knowing at long last the homeland which will be theirs; where the State of Israel, for lack of guaranteed security—which is its inalienable right— within the borders that have been recognized by the international community, pursues a policy incompatible with the indispensable recognition of the rights 
of the other peoples of the region; where Lebanon, which has already suffered so much, is unable to secure respect for the Security Council resolutions concerning the southern part of its territory and to obtain an end to all foreign presence; in southern Africa, where Council resolution 435 (1978), on Namibian independence, continues to be disregarded, even defied, while the war continues in Angola, with the presence and participation on that territory of South Africa's army; in Western Sahara, whose people have a right to self-determination; in Cambodia, that country of a great and ancient civilization, bled white by appalling genocide and now occupied by its neighbours to the east.
145.	What horrors these clear violations of the rights of peoples and States have entailed! And all too often these violations go hand in hand with scorn for human rights, with the negation of fundamental values that should be the basis of any society, as the Charter of the United Nations has recognized and affirmed.
146.	France will speak out, will voice its condemnation, will take action wherever the lives and dignity of individuals are threatened, wherever people are held in constraint and deprived of their basic freedoms. It will continue to express its reprobation everywhere, with the same words and the same conviction. This pledge holds true for Governments and countries that are very different from one another—from the countries that signed the Helsinki Finn Act to the countries east and south of Africa and on the South American shores of the Pacific. Everywhere we shall strive to alleviate suffering and obtain the freedom of those who are unjustly imprisoned, those whose names are known and stand as symbols, from Shcharansky to Mandela and the countless others who are anonymous expiatory victims.
147.	The United Nations deserves support and a tribute on this level: the Commission on Human Rights; conventions that are constantly being refined and improved on; resolutions condemning racism and discrimination. It is also beginning—and I welcome this—to stress the global nature of the problem, by opening debate on economic and social rights and thereby moving, in conditions that France finds right and opportune, towards an enlargement of the definition of fundamental human rights. Such progress of law at the world level deserves constant encouragement.
148.	But there are other serious threats to fundamental human rights that have to be considered. We must ask ourselves why the current world economic crisis is so serious and our market economy system powerless to contend with that crisis and resolve the economic disorder that has prevailed in the world for a number of years now.
149.	After 1945, a certain economic order governed the industrialized world. There was monetary order, agreed upon at Bretton Woods; although it was, of course, threatened when the dollar left the gold standard, order nevertheless persisted and exchange parities were relatively stable. There was budgetary order; the industrialized countries made every effort to balance their budgets. There was a degree of predictability in the prices of raw materials. There was order in trade—admittedly, largely fuelled by the needs of reconstruction after the massive destruction of the war and the population growth that immediately followed it. All these elements of order opened the door to a category of society that in the nineteenth century was called the proletariat—in other words, the most underprivileged in the industrialized countries—and, since then, the developing countries.
150.	It seemed that growth was assure and would go on forever. Countries that had untapped or inadequately developed resources in the world decided—quite rightly—to equip themselves to exploit their wealth. They invested in people. Hundreds of thousands of young persons were sent off to receive higher education; infrastructures were developed; business capital was increased.
151.	In all our countries in Europe and in the third world, a larger production apparatus emerged, accompanied by more onerous administrative, economic and social structures. This was achieved at the price of a high level of indebtedness—a level justified, however, in a period of seemingly assured growth and when borrowing was carried out in predictable and reasonable conditions. At the same time, especially in countries that were still largely rural, a trend towards urbanization led to the migration of hundreds of thousands of peasants, who settled in urban communities where the future seemed to lie in industrial production and the service sector. All this seemed rational and reasonable.
152.	Then, suddenly, the game changed: the markets of the industrialized countries, having reached the saturation point, closed up. There was no longer any expansion. Countries, including France and others in the industrialized world, which had had a labour shortage for a number of years suddenly had an excess labour force and unemployment.
153.	At the same time, disorder had set in: monetary disorder, with its corollary of sizeable fluctuations in exchange rates; budgetary disorder, with huge deficits forcing States to turn to the financial markets; and the dizzying climb of interest rates. The Bretton Woods system had disappeared, and quite naturally the most economically powerful country irresistibly attracted the world's liquidities; its currency, the dollar, soared while its interest rates increased under the effect of the budget deficit.
154.	The market economy world became chaotic and unpredictable. A, the same time, growth ceased everywhere. The effects of the current remarkable recovery in the United States have still not changed the direction of this development. Markets saturated elsewhere are no longer able to absorb additional purchases; indeed, many markets are actually deteriorating from year to year.
155.	For the third world, this development has been—and I shall not mince words—catastrophic: the more a country's economy advanced, the mere serious the phenomenon. Such countries had counted on economic growth; they were thus deprived of the whole apparatus needed for amortization, at a time when nothing was generating the necessary resources for his. The surpluses of the oil producing countries have disappeared. In other developing countries, debt has climbed to its current levels: $700 billion for the third world as a whole, $350 billion for Latin America.
156.	Debt servicing had become intolerable burden, since there was no longer any growth in revenue. Higher interest rates only exacerbated the situation. Since 1982 in every country in Latin America, debt servicing, had it been undertaken without any adjustment, would have far exceeded the total liquidity accumulated in the reserves. At that point, a reversal set in. The gross domestic product fell. Imports declined drastically, by 60 per cent in some countries in the space of three years. Consequently, the industrial countries were themselves affected, especially those that depend very much on their relations with the third world, as is the case of France. The negative growth in the third world has thus been an important factor in the increase of unemployment in the industrialized countries. The purchasing power of our countries declined abruptly as a result. The vicious circle of depression and deflation was complete.
157.	What, then, have been the responses?
158.	International organizations have found palliatives—that is, means of responding immediately to immediate problems, and they deserve great praise for this. They have found answers even as the major international banks have been endangered, with the total of precarious debt far exceeding their capital.
159.	answers have been found for the short term, and, more rarely, for the medium term. The Paris Club has examined the cases of 25 countries in 18 months. The quid pro quo of this rescheduling had to be the adoption of strict and rigorous policies, which the IMF has defined with the remarkable professionalism that is characteristic of it. It has dealt with 45 countries.
160.	The third world countries concerned accepted the measures imposed with great courage. For the most part, they indicated their determination to go ahead with monetary adjustments, to accept realistic pricing for services and foodstuffs, to freeze wages, to increase taxes, to fight capital outflows. In short, they accepted tremendous suffering for their peoples in acknowledgement of pledges that had been made and were to be respected. Shall we recognize sufficiently the courage it took in each country and in meetings such as those at Cartagena in June and at Mar del Plata this month?
161.	What has been the price of this? First of all, the creation of a disinflationary phenomenon which reduces singularly an essential element of world growth; secondly, the imposition of the sacrifice of ambitions and the abandonment of policies that leaders considered and presented as the way to ensure greater justice; and, lastly, an increase in the number of the jobless.
162.	But the hundreds of thousands of men and women who migrated to towns lost the protection of the rural world without finding a new system of security in exchange. Without jobs, what will become of these uprooted people? Does this not spell hopelessness for generations of young people? It was reasonable to bank on growth and development; yet now this wager has generated trouble, doubt and danger.
163.	This approach has settled nothing, for without development why should the future be any improvement on the present? Postponing the due date of a debt in the hope that tomorrow the debtor country will be in a better position to service it is meaningless unless between today and tomorrow there is growth, development, increased income and an improved repayment capacity.
164.	But the evolution over the past two years has tended to discourage investment: interest rates are high, exchange rates are unstable, the banks that provided most of the financing have lost confidence. In 1983, for the first time, the net flow of capital towards the South was negative. No further comment is necessary.
165.	Meanwhile, the international meetings that have followed one on the heels of another have at best succeeded in providing a timid analysis of the phenomenon—the sixth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, held at Belgrade in 1983; the Fourth General Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, held at Vienna last August. International assistance funds are declining in real value: the replenishment of aid is inadequate; UNDP has had to cut back on its commitments. France stands out as an exception because we have increased official development assistance over the past three years; we are alone or almost alone in this.
166.	I know that the description is a bleak one and perhaps it will be considered exaggerated. However, we must look to the future. For the past two years, a favourable line of thought has been emerging; in all the industrialized countries and in all the countries of the third world, the same analysis has appeared.
167.	Whatever sets off the concern or the criticism—interest rates, indebtedness, budget deficit, monetary instability, lack of liquidity, difficulties for the banks—the reasoning is global. We know it must encompass all subjects, for they are linked, and it concerns all countries—interdependence is complete. We also know, however—and this was underscored at the London Economic Summit of the seven industrialized countries, held in London last June— that each country, each case, has its own specific characteristics. Thus, a global analysis is coupled with specific ways of utilizing the means. There is now a remarkable community of views as far as the analyses and reasoning are concerned. This should give us a chance to activate and mobilize powerful economic forces.
168.	What should be done? Obviously, I shall not give a simple answer. The problem is too serious and too complex for a single answer. Action is called for in several areas.
169.	We must first try to replace the current disorder by a more stable and predictable situation, particularly in the areas of currency and raw materials. We must rebuild an international economic order.
170.	In the monetary field, as my colleague, the Minister of the Economy and Finance, pointed out once again in Washington a few days ago, we must be able to act on interest rates. This is asserted by everyone in every part of the world. Their level is a major obstacle to recovery. Real interest rates have never been so high; they must return to reasonable levels. Therefore, we must attack the root cause, namely, the excessive deficit in Government spending, which leads to a destabilizing public drain on the financial markets.
171.	Actions over a longer term are also called for in order to lay the foundations of genuine international monetary reform, as the President of my country emphasized at length at the 1983 meeting of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development in Paris. This does not mean going back to the Bretton Woods agreements, which reflected another period, but greater stability and reasonable predictability of exchange rates must be ensured. The European Community has largely succeeded in achieving this with the European Monetary System, and we believe that it is also possible within a triad of the dollar, the yen and the European currency unit [ECU].
172.	I shall not dwell on the subject of raw materials, although it is an essential one. It is true that prices have experienced a certain upward movement but they remain erratic, and the lack of predictability has awesome consequences for the rationalizing of the supply demand relationship and for the ability of the producer country to forecast the pace of its development through self-financing. So we must continue to organize these markets by drawing up new agreements in instances where these are economically feasible; by renewing existing agreements and making them more effective; and, lastly, by establishing the Common Fund for Commodities already agreed to by more than 75 countries.
173.	Once some order has been re-established, efforts will have to be made to consolidate the financial recovery of the most heavily indebted developing countries, which are also often those with the most promising future, otherwise they would not have found a lender.
174.	The emergency solutions so effectively implemented by the IMF must be complemented by and coordinated with more far-reaching action. The London Economic Summit of the industrialized countries, like the meeting of Cartagena of Latin American countries, emphasized—correctly, in our view—the need for better integration of debt rescheduling plans in the medium term. This means defining plans for adjustment over a reasonably long period and coordinating them with rescheduling operations over a period of several years. It also means strengthening joint action by the IMF and the World Bank in order to ensure a better relationship between adjustment and development. In this way, austerity and growth will be linked. The economic effects of action of this kind will be coupled with the psychological effects of renewed hope among those bearing the unavoidable burden of the disciplines adjustment imposes.
175.	Of course, these organizational efforts will be really valuable only if sufficient resources are channelled to the developing countries to finance economically sound projects and developments, thus giving a new stimulus to growth. This means making use of all sources of financing.
176.	Concerning official development assistance, bilateral and multilateral assistance must at last reach the level the United Nations has called for, of which I have already spoken. The funds provided by the international community should approach the volume recommended by those responsible in this area. It is heart-breaking that the seventh replenishment of the IDA is limited to $9 billion, while the big contributors were almost unanimous in accepting $ 12 billion. The IFAD and the other programmes of the United Nations and its family must be funded, as must the regional development banks, whose activities are worthy of attention. The special fund for Africa, already mentioned, should have priority in this respect. France pledges a special contribution once this fund has been set up.
177.	The adoption of such policies by Governments and by the international community should help restore confidence and revive the potential for action by the banking sector. In fact, anything that can encourage public and private investment in the third world is a step in the right direction, it being understood that the recipient countries are entitled to set the main guidelines for such investment.
178.	Concerning shorter-term flows, in particular capital from commercial banks, the private sector must be encouraged to maintain and consolidate these flows. This is in their own interest and they must be convinced of this. No pressure, no outside incentive can replace confidence. Private flows will be permanently ensured and consolidated only if confidence is re-established in the determination to build sound bases and in the prospects for debtor country stability and development. The agreements recently signed with some countries testify to this.
179.	Such confidence should also be easier to rebuild if international and governmental public financing institutions, in particular the IMF and the World Bank, are able to assist. In this respect, we must extend and develop co-financing that associates private funds and funds from international organizations. In this way, the international structure can act as a catalyst to mobilize capital brought together by the banking circuit. Private and public funds are closely associated.
180.	Let it be quite clear that these arguments are presented—and I say this unashamedly—in the interest of all. Some time ago I spoke of a planetary "New Deal." What was President Roosevelt's gamble when he came to power? He put his money on a recovery stimulated by the weakest elements of society, through the resulting expansion of the market. Time proved him right. Of course, it is always hard, not to say deceptive, to make a transposition when two situations are so different. However: the problem facing us today is similar to the one that faced him. We must inject new hope, or discipline will be painful; we must find means of stimulating recovery that will not condemn the weakest but that will, rather, make use of their capacities for progress. Is a worldwide "New Deal" possible? I want to believe it is.
181.	I owed it to representatives here present to provide this very broad overview, for I am standing at the rostrum of an assembly whose responsibility is global, covering the whole world, from north to south and from east to west, dealing with all aspects of human activity—political, economic and social. I have thus outlined some of the principles that guide my country's policy. We have reaffirmed them on many occasions; we will continue to do so with the calm and the confidence that arise from our convictions.
182.	France's foreign policy is guided by a few simple underlying principles. It serves essential values, values that since the appearance of the first individual have put mankind at the centre of the efforts of every civilized society and every society aspiring to be civilized, values that consequently acknowledge the rights of peoples and thus the rights of nations, values, lastly, that cry out that peace is possible through the balance of forces in a climate of free expression and through a search for progress for all.
183.	France intends to uphold these principles in close cooperation—indeed, in conjunction—with its partners in the European Community, for we believe that the consolidation of that Community is an important element for our part of the world, a factor in the prosperity and peace of the world as a whole.
184.	This hope will have a genuine chance only if, all over the earth, individuals respect each other's diversity, if they examine their difficulties together, if they try to build international order together and, to that end, together adopt appropriate rules of law. Thus, I close as I began, by reaffirming our commitment to the United Nations, our Organization, and by thanking you, Mr. President, and you, Mr. Secretary General, for the orientations you have given us from the very beginning.
﻿First, may I add my voice to the voices of those who have already congratulated you, Sir, on your election to the presidency of the thirty-ninth session of the General Assembly.  I wish you every success in conducting its affairs in the months ahead. To the outgoing President, Mr. Illueca, I extend my thanks for the conscientious way in which he discharged his duties. And it is with great pleasure, and some pride, that I congratulate Brunei Darussalam on becoming, on 21 September, the 159th Member of the United Nations.
38.	Let me also, at the outset, pay a warm tribute to the Secretary General. His unceasing efforts to bring about the solution of the world's problems continue to win our highest esteem and support.
39.	Two years ago, the Secretary General, in his first report on the work of the Organization,' pointed to a crisis of multilateralism. He suggested that the world was "perilously near to a new international anarchy". His report this year shows, with customary perceptiveness and honesty, how little progress we have made towards the objectives he set two years ago. The Secretary General has told us frankly what we, the Member States, can do—indeed, have to do—to overcome the obstacles that have so far prevented our achieving the vision of a better world which inspired those who drew up the Charter of the United Nations now almost 40 years ago.
40.	At Fulton, Missouri, only a year after the birth of the United Nations, Winston Churchill spoke of the political will needed to tum the fledgling Organization into a practical force for peace. He said:
"We must make sure that its work is fruitful, that it is a reality and not a sham, that it is a force for action, and not merely a frothing of words, that it is a true temple of peace . . . and not merely a cockpit in a tower of Babel."
41.	Winston Churchill would certainly have endorsed the profoundly practical instinct that is so evident in the Secretary General’s reports. And 1, too, strongly support the Secretary General’s latest call for us to "ask ourselves what useful steps can be taken in a given situation rather than starting by thinking of all the extraneous reasons why they cannot be taken".
42.	For Churchill's insight is as relevant as ever. Effective international cooperation to tackle the world's problems needs more than polished speeches and well drafted resolutions. It needs courage and imagination; above all, it needs a steadfast commitment on the basis of universality to take practical action in pursuit of realistic objectives.
43.	Nowhere is that more necessary than in our approach to the problems of the world economy. The annual economic summit of the seven major industrialized countries is a good example of the kind of pragmatic approach to problem-solving I have in mind. Last June the United Kingdom hosted in London the tenth such meeting. We were able to reach a large measure of agreement on the essentials for world recovery. At the same time, we took real account of the difficulties which many countries still face. Despite those difficulties, the past 12 months have brought substantial improvements. Two years ago, world trade actually fell. Last year, it grew only 2 per cent. This year, the IMF has forecast growth in world trade of 8.5 per cent.
44.	This recovery has not been confined to the industrialized world. For many developing countries, too, the outlook has improved and is improving further. The current account deficit of the nonoil developing countries is this year expected to be less than half its level in 1981. And this year the growth rate for developing countries should reach 3.7 per cent. This significant improvement has not been achieved without hardship.
45.	I pay a tribute to the success adjustment policies pursued by many developing countries, often in the face of real social and political difficulties. These policies need to be sustained and more widely adopted if we are to manage and diminish the problem of international indebtedness, and they need the full support of the industrialized countries. This point has been rightly stressed by the Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund, Mr. de Larosiere. In his words:
"The efforts of developing countries need to be supported by the industrial countries, who have it in their power to create a more robust and dynamic world economy, as well as by concerted action to ensure adequate international financing flows and open trading conditions."
46.	A major cause of the problems of developing countries is the high level of international interest rates. The United States economy has shown how real new employment can be created in a society that is open and willing to face the need for change. But the current size of the United States budget deficit and the high interest rates that go with it still pose a threat to world recovery. We welcome the United States Administration's recognition of the need to tackle the problem. We hope that it will be sustained and carried into action. Lower world interest rates would benefit us all. They would ease the burden of debt repayment. That in turn would allow many countries to increase their imports, and a general increase in trade is in everybody's interest.
47.	The world's economic problems can only be solved through cooperation in this spirit of interdependence. Certainly my country is determined to work in close cooperation with debtor nations, case by case, to achieve mutually acceptable solutions to their difficulties. The challenge is to implement practical measures which stand a real chance of success.
48.	The British Government has put forward a number of proposals. We discussed them at the London Economic Summit in June. My colleague, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr. Lawson, described them at the IMF meeting in Washington yesterday. He made proposals for the use of multiyear rescheduling, for an enhanced role for the World Bank and its associates, for more private investment in debtor countries and for more stable long-term finance. If carried into practice, these proposals would do much to help the debtor countries. But, without doubt, the greatest contribution would come from sustained and widening recovery
49.	The industrialized countries have a special responsibility for helping to spread this recovery beyond their own frontiers. We must be in earnest in our fight to resist and to reduce protectionism. World trade must be revived through open markets. Here too, given the crucial importance of the dollar exchange rate and so of interest rates, the United States has a unique part to play.
50.	We have been disappointed that the resources available to the IDA have not been increased as we hoped. This makes it all the more important to undertake a special effort to help the poorest countries, above all in Africa. We cannot ignore the special conditions that have afflicted much of Africa or the Secretary-general’s plea for support. Special measures are needed for special conditions.
51.	The truth is that there are no instant solutions. The need is for common determination to work for solid, often unspectacular, progress on all fronts. Solutions to the economic problems I have described need to be rooted firmly in political reality if they are to endure. I am encouraged by the fact that Governments have been willing to identify practical steps that they can and will take together. That is the main reason why prospects for the world economy are better now than they were a year or two ago.
52.	The approach that is working in the economic field applies equally to political relations between States. Here too, there is a need for practical measures to solve real problems. Nowhere is that need more urgent than in East West relations—not because of what is happening but because of what is not happening, because in this area there has not been anything like the same meeting of minds over the way forward as there has been on economic questions. In his report the Secretary General speaks of "great Power tension accentuated by a lack of progress in disarmament and arms limitation". I share his analysis. That is why we need to make a fresh start. President Reagan this week put forward a series of proposals that could lead us in that direction. We must all reject the temptation to identify difficulties with that approach and instead identify the ideas with which we can agree.
53.	In the past year, Mr. Gromyko and I have met on no less than four occasions. On each of those occasions, I have been struck not so much by the differences between us—although these are real and substantial—as by the similarity of what we say are the basic aims of our peoples. This similarity of underlying approach is reflected in the desire of both sides to break the spiral of the arms race, in our shared aim of better relations between East and West, and often in apparently similar words and phrases. I found myself in complete agreement with the statement of the high level Economic Conference of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance, held in Moscow in June,that "no world problems—and that includes the historic dispute between socialism and capitalism—can be solved by force of arms". So what separates us is not so much the words we use as the meaning we attach to them. Our task must be to bridge that gap, to reconcile, in a spirit of mutual understanding, our differing purposes with our underlying interest in our common safety and security.
54.	Each side has proclaimed its desire for a more comprehensive dialogue. I refuse to believe that that cannot be achieved. I believe we can find a common way of resolving such issues of supreme importance to us all. In that same speech in Missouri, Churchill called for greater mutual confidence. He said:
"There is deep sympathy and goodwill in Britain—and I doubt not here also—towards the peoples of all the Russias and a resolve to persevere through many differences and rebuffs in establishing lasting friendships ..."
Forty years later that remains our hope.
55.	During 1984 the West has made far-reaching but practical proposals in every arms control negotiation. At Stockholm we have submitted specific measures which would enhance confidence and security throughout Europe. At Vienna we have made I major new proposal to resolve the long-standing disagreement over the level of Eastern forces. At Geneva, Britain has taken two initiatives on verification of a chemical weapons ban, while the United States has submitted a new draft treaty.
56.	Against that background I deeply regret the Soviet suspension of the nuclear arms talks. Of all subjects on the East West agenda, the control and reduction of nuclear weapons is by common consent the most important. And yet it is the one aspect of arms control which is not at present the subject of negotiation. The United States has offered to resume these talks, anywhere, at any time, without preconditions. The whole world would applaud a positive Soviet response.
57.	So, too, on the question of arms control in outer space. On 29 June, the Soviet Government proposed that talks should begin in Vienna in September. It asked for a prompt response. The Americans gave it, constructively and seriously. But so far the Russians seem to have been unable to take "yes" for an answer. Dialogue cannot be a one-way process—still less, negotiations. No one can converse with an empty chair. I hope the Soviet Union will find the political will to take its place at the table. When it does, it will find the West ready and willing to talk.
58.	The negotiations on the future of Hong Kong which the British and Chinese Governments have been conducting since 1982 are an excellent illustration of the way in which difficult issues may be resolved. Earlier today, in Beijing, the two Governments initialled a draft; agreement on the future of Hong Kong. It is a triumph of good sense. It shows how, in the search for solutions to international problems, agreement is only possible with courage, imagination and political will on all sides. Chairman Deng Xiaoping's idea of "one country, two systems" is an example of such a positive approach. The people of Hong Kong will wish to judge for themselves the outcome of these negotiations. But already I am confident that we have achieved a historic agreement.
59.	Britain also has a special relationship with, and a close interest in, the island of Cyprus. I hope that there, too, we may see early progress in the continuing search for a solution. The Secretary General’s current efforts to bring about a resumption of the intercommunal talks must not be allowed to fail. Only thus will a settlement of the wider problem be possible. That is why the British Government supports the Secretary General in his task. We stand ready to do all we can to assist him.
60.	I turn now to three troubled regions of the world where failure to resolve the disputes which divide the parties could have grave consequences.
61.	In the Middle East, it is deeply disappointing that once again this year we are no nearer a solution of the Arab Israel dispute, but with the arrival of a new Israeli Government there is now an opportunity to turn a new page. The outlines of a just settlement have been clear for many years. It must reconcile Israel's right to exist within secure and recognized borders and the Palestinians' right to self-determination. But plans or statements of principle from the international community are in themselves of limited value unless the parties to the dispute have the political courage to take the bold steps necessary for peace.
62.	Such steps are possible now without anyone's security being endangered. The new Israeli Government could halt the policy of installing illegal settlements in occupied territory. The Arab countries and the Palestinians could formulate a realistic and a common negotiating stand before it is too late. The United States has a unique position of influence with parties on both sides of the dispute. Its role is indispensable. President Reagan reaffirmed on Monday his commitment to his country's search for a just and lasting peace. I very much welcome that. As the President of the Council of Ministers of the European Community made clear yesterday fusing], we and our European partners stand ready to help and to use our influence to work for the peace which has eluded us all so long.
63.	In Lebanon, the efforts of the Lebanese Government to bring peace to that country which has suffered so long deserve the support of all of us. The 10 member countries of the European Community have called consistently for the early withdrawal, in agreement with the Lebanese Government, of all foreign forces. The presidency statement yesterday reiterated that plea. In our view, national reconciliation and withdrawal of those forces should go ahead together. UNIFIL has continued to perform a useful role in southern Lebanon, a role which—as the Secretary General said in April—could with advantage be enlarged.
64.	In the Gulf, we shall continue to support any initiatives which offer hope of an end to the long and tragic conflict between Iran and Iraq. We welcomed the decision to send a United Nations team to investigate allegations that chemical weapons had been used. The British Government condemns unequivocally the use of chemical weapons by anyone. We are encouraged that both sides continue to support the Secretary General’s appeal to avoid attacks on civilian centres of population. We hope that they will take further steps to limit the scope of the conflict and that this will prepare the way for an honourable settlement of the dispute.
65.	Southern Africa is another area where failure to make progress towards solving disputes could have consequences far beyond the region itself. The events of the past few weeks have amply demonstrated the wider dangers of the present policies of the South African Government. They underline the urgent need for real progress towards a system of government supported by all South Africans. This can be achieved only by dialogue within South Africa and between South Africa and the world at large.
66.	Even so, there has been some progress towards reducing tension in the region. In particular, I welcome the wide-ranging contacts between Mozambique and South Africa following the Agreement on Nonaggression and Good Neighbourliness, signed at Nkomati on 16 March 1984. We have also welcomed the agreement between Angola and South Africa, reached at Lusaka on 16 February 1984, on the withdrawal of South African forces from southern Angola. We shall continue to work for further steps towards an early settlement of the Namibian question.
67.	In Central America, too, there is a need for concerted action if we are to check the trend towards instability and foster social and political development. The roots of the conflict and political turmoil racking the region are indigenous, but the problems have been exploited and exacerbated by those who care little for regional stability and democratic evolution, preferring to pursue their own political objectives.
68.	That is why we were encouraged by the democratic elections in El Salvador this year and why we like our partners in the European Community strongly support the Contadora initiative. I much look forward to the meeting at San Jose next weekend between the Foreign Ministers of the 10 member countries of the Community and Spain and Portugal, and of the Central American and Contadora countries. This will be an important opportunity for us to underline our active interest in promoting and encouraging peace. Our purpose is to make a practical contribution to democracy and development in the region.
69.	I must now turn to the relationship between my country and Argentina, whose newly elected President addressed the Assembly on Monday [5th meeting]. Let me stress again that we welcome wholeheartedly Argentina's return to democratic government. We are ready, from that new basis, to try to work towards more normal relations between us after the tragic events of two years ago. We firmly believe that this would be in the interests of Britain, of Argentina, of all our friends in Latin America and of the Falkland Islanders themselves.
70.	Of course Britain and Argentina have different—and deeply held—positions on the question of sovereignty over the Falkland Islands. No one should forget that we were negotiating on that very subject in 1982 when Argentina launched its brutal invasion of the islands. The present Argentine Government was not responsible for that disastrous action, but its consequences cannot just be brushed aside.
71.	As I have said, we attach great importance to improving our relations with Argentina, and we have made a genuine and sustained effort to reach agreement with the Argentine Government on a basis for direct talks. It was clear that, if those talks were not to founder at the outset on the very issue that divides us, the question of sovereignty could not be addressed. We therefore needed to find a way of meeting the legitimate requirements of both sides. With the help of the Swiss and Brazilian Governments as protecting Powers and after a great deal of detailed work, a clear and satisfactory basis for talks was achieved and agreed by all.
72.	When the talks began at Berne in July, Argentina took a position at variance with this agreed basis. Their representatives insisted that no progress could be made towards normalization without the certainty that a mechanism would be established to permit negotiations over sovereignty. This overturned the very basis on which talks between us had been agreed. The talks therefore came to an end. This was an important opportunity missed. I think that many people will have been disappointed, as I was, that President Alfonsin, in his speech to the Assembly two days ago, presented the same position once again explicitly as a precondition of any talks between us.
73.	Let me also underline that there is a further fundamental principle involved in this dispute which cannot be overlooked—the principle of self-determination. It is a principle which is jealously guarded by the people of Great Britain and, indeed, by every Member of the United Nations. The Falkland Islanders, like any other people, have the right to self-determination. We had hoped that the new Argentine Government, with its attachment to democracy and human rights, would be ready to recognize this fundamental human right of the Falkland Islanders.
74.	Those who call on us to negotiate on the sovereignty of the islands should think what exactly it is that they are asking us to do. For Argentina, such negotiations could only have one outcome: the transfer of sovereignty over the islands irrespective of the wishes of the Falkland Islanders. To ask us to do that is to ask us to overturn the principle of self-determination enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
75.	We shall continue with the economic and constitutional development of the Falkland Islands. We shall maintain the minimum level of forces required to defend the islands. Let me emphasize those words, "defend the islands". Our military dispositions are designed solely for that purpose.
76.	We have sought ways of improving relations with Argentina by tackling practical issues where real progress is possible to the benefit of both sides. It is still my profound belief that, in the difficult circumstances I have described, the only way forward is to find a way of taking such practical steps as will enable confidence to be re-established between our two peoples.
77.	The right of peoples to choose their own Government is also at issue in Afghanistan and Cambodia. The outside world has little idea of the suffering which the Afghan people endure. We cannot ignore the harsh realities of the problem, which my Irish colleague, Mr. Barry, has already described [6th meeting]. We give our full support to the efforts of the Secretary General, which are seeking to ensure that the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and successive United Nations resolutions shall be applied to restore an independent and nonaligned Afghanistan. This cannot happen until Soviet forces are withdrawn.
78.	In Cambodia, the Vietnamese occupying force remains, despite the resolutions passed by an overwhelming majority in recent years calling for a complete withdrawal. The British Government continues to support the Cambodian people's right to determine their own destiny, free from outside interference.
79.	The continued division of the Korean peninsula has been a matter of concern much longer than the occupation of Afghanistan and of Cambodia. My visit to Panmunjom earlier this year reminded me of this sad fact. The British Government remains convinced that the suggestions put forward by the Republic of Korea for direct talks between the two sides represent the best prospect for a peaceful solution.
80.	There is one final region of the world I should mention, although it is not one much visited by Foreign Ministers. This year is the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Antarctic Treaty/ The Treaty is a remarkable example of political foresight. It provides an excellent model of practical cooperation achieved through international agreement. The fact that a further four States have acceded to the Treaty in this anniversary year shows its continuing value. The British Government would not wish to see any development that would undermine this important Treaty.
81.	We discuss many global and regional political issues in this Hall. But when we do so it is easy to forget the fundamental reality of the freedom and wellbeing of the individual. The architects of the Charter of the United Nations were quite clear about this. They set down, as a major purpose of the Organization, to achieve cooperation "in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language, or religion". The gulf between this intention and the gross abuses of human rights which still occur in so many parts of the world appals me. These abuses are sometimes carried out in the name of political, social or religious ideologies, and indeed by some of the leading signatories of the Helsinki Final Act/ Sometimes such abuses result from conditions of anarchy and chaos. My Government deplores them all, wherever they occur and whatever the reason with which their perpetrators may attempt to justify them.
82.	A particularly gross form of abuse of the most fundamental human rights of all—the rights to life and liberty—is terrorism. The horrifying events in Beirut last week served as a grim reminder of this growing evil. Terrorist acts may often be the work of small groups of crazed fanatics. But more and more they have had the material backing of a few misguided Governments. As the Secretary General’s report [A139/1] makes clear, there has been a steady increase in politically motivated violence in all its baleful forms. Few areas of the world have been spared. As so often, it is innocent men and women who pay the price for this assault on the basic values of civilized society. Indiscriminate murder for the furtherance of political ends is wholly unacceptable. We must resist it with every legitimate means available to the international community.
83.	The growing involvement in terrorism by Governments and their representatives abroad has brought to light another urgent problem: the abuse of diplomatic immunity. This is something which must deeply concern us all. Many representatives know that my Government is reviewing the working of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations. We are seeking ways to tighten control of unacceptable activities by members of diplomatic missions. The Convention has, generally speaking, performed useful service for over 20 years. Its underlying principles have for centuries stood the test of application between sovereign States of widely differing character. What is lacking is determination on the part of signatory States to apply rigorously enough the safeguards and sanctions it contains. The Declaration on International Terrorism, issued at the London Economic Summit, held from 7 to 9 June 1984 and the measures agreed by the European Community a6 Dublin earlier this month are evidence of how, given the political will, States can swiftly take practical action to deal with international problems.
84.	Let me in conclusion return to the theme with which I began. In speaking today of all the global and regional problems which confront us, I have many times referred to the need for realistic solutions and for a practical approach. I do so out of profound personal conviction, a conviction that is continually reinforced by my experience in political life in my own country and in international affairs. Put simply, it is this. None of the disputes and disagreements before us is of its essence insoluble. In many cases, we can already envisage the outline of a solution. In almost every case, what is needed, and what is missing, is political will—above all, the political will to work for practical agreement, to have the courage, imagination and dogged determination to negotiate in a rational and realistic fashion. Often, perhaps in most cases, that will mean the pursuit of limited, but attainable, objectives. Such an approach is a gradual one, demanding the steady creation of confidence between the parties. It will imply the breaking down of issues into manageable proportions, and it will require a spirit of understanding which takes account of the political and economic realities on both sides of the argument.
85.	Such an approach puts a discount on ringing declarations of intent and on uncompromising statements of minimum objectives. But it places a premium on steady, perhaps unspectacular, negotiation, often in private, and when it pays dividends, it pays handsomely. I said earlier that the British and Chinese Governments had initialled a historic agreement on the future of Hong Kong. But it is more than that. The agreement itself and, perhaps even more, the process by which it was achieved are powerful symbols of the way in which seemingly intractable problems can indeed be susceptible to treatment. And that, Mr. President, is the prescription which I end by offering you this afternoon.
﻿Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your unanimous election to the presidency of the thirty-ninth session of the General Assembly. We are particularly gratified to see you, a distinguished son of Africa and an eminent representative of a country with which India has traditionally close and cordial relations, preside over the proceedings of this Assembly. We are confident that under your able stewardship we shall be able to deal effectively with the many important questions on our agenda.
186.	I should like to take this opportunity also to place on record our appreciation of the effective and statesmanlike leadership provided to the Assembly's thirty-eighth session by your distinguished predecessor, Mr. Illueca, of Panama.
187.	I wish to pay a tribute to the Secretary-General for the indefatigable energy and quiet competence he has displayed in his stewardship of the United Nations during the past year. His patience and perseverance are characteristic of a style of functioning that has added much prestige and honour to the office of the Secretary-General. He has won our admiration for his skilful handling of several crisis situations. We wish him every success in the future.
188.	We welcome to the United Nations family its newest member, Brunei Darussalam. Its admission as the 159th Member is a reaffirmation of the principle of universality of membership of the Organization. We look forward to working in close co-operation with that country's delegation in the United Nations.
189.	We are at the threshold of the fifth decade of the United Nations. As the United Nations approaches its fortieth anniversary it is but appropriate that we pause to review the historic role the Organization has been playing. This is also a time for introspection and reflection so that we can improve our own performance and make the Organization more effective.
190.	In November 1948, the first Prime Minister of India, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, addressing the General Assembly'" on behalf of newly independent India, stated that the Charter of the United Nations, in noble language, had laid down the principles and purposes of that great Organization, and he thought it would not be possible to improve upon that language. The objectives were clear, he said, and yet it had often happened that the main objectives had been lost sight of amid matters of secondary importance. He further stated that he was convinced that the best of objectives could not be reached if men's eyes were bloodshot and men's minds clouded with passion. The lesson of history, he noted, and more especially the lesson of the last two great wars, which had devastated humanity, was that out of hatred and violence could come only hatred and violence. The Assembly was in the midst of a cycle of hatred and violence, he said, and it was obvious that if that cycle persisted and war, which the Assembly was specially intended to prevent, broke out, not only would there be tremendous devastation all over the world, but no individual Power or group of Powers would achieve its objective.
191.	The words of Jawaharlal Nehru are valid even today. The optimism that was generated in the early years of the United Nations has in recent years been sadly dissipated. We are facing not only an acute and troubled international situation but, more important, a period when faith in the world Organization appears to be weakening. There is today in some quarters a cynical disregard of the role and contribution of the United Nations, as, indeed, a profound suspicion of all multilateral approaches where these do not coincide with or directly promote the interests of these countries. We are facing the danger of a retreat from multilateralism which can only adversely affect the prospects of international peace and security and undermine the very foundations of this unique Organization. India and other non-aligned countries are determined to reverse this trend. As India did at the outset of the establishment of the United Nations, I would like now once again to reaffirm, on behalf of the Government and people of India, our undiminished faith in the United Nations and our continued commitment to the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter.
192.	In his thought-provoking report on the work of the Organization [A/39/1], the Secretary-General has reiterated the need to preserve and strengthen the Organization for harmonizing the actions of nations and to enhance the concept of multilateralism, which is a basic premise of our activity in the United Nations. He has rightly asserted that the realization of the full potential of the United Nations depends upon a willingness to take active steps to experiment with new approaches on the assumption that our common and agreed objective is human survival in reasonably decent conditions. We need to ponder over this issue. The fortieth anniversary of the United Nations should provide us with a unique opportunity for rededication, but also for a reassessment, some soul-searching and, above all, concrete remedial action. Our commitment to the multilateral approach is important and must be strengthened if we want the vision of the founding fathers to be realized.
193.	Throughout the years of our freedom struggle, India's leaders viewed independence not merely in national terms but as a part of the struggle of oppressed peoples everywhere for justice—political, economic and social. In the course of its transformation, India has built up a vast industrial infrastructure which has enabled it to keep pace with the scientific and technological advancements taking place in the world. Our democratic institutions, evolved over the years, have given the people of India a deep sense of participation and commitment in determining the nation's economic, social and political priorities. India's economy envisages a predominant role for the public sector in areas of basic industry as well as a flourishing private sector consistent with our socio-economic philosophy, which aims at prosperity and growth with social justice. The planning process adopted by India as an indispensable instrument for the development of all sectors of our economy involves the full participation of our people.
194.	In our international relationships, adherence to the policy of non-alignment has been both instinctive and inevitable. Even before the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries held its first summit in 1961, the essential principles of non-alignment had become the basis for the conduct of our foreign policy.
195.	Today the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, with its membership of 101 countries, constitutes the vast majority of the membership of the United Nations. It is an indication of the intrinsic appeal and relevance of this Movement, as well as its significance and its achievements to date, that almost every newly independent nation seeks membership.
196.	As Prime Minister Indira Gandhi said in her address to the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi from 7 to 12 March 1983:
"Its significance is not to be measured by the number of divisions or the megatons of destructive power we command, but by the intensity with which we desire peace and freedom, development and international justice.
"Other Governments may have conflicting opinions on right and wrong. We the non-aligned have chosen peace, which surely is the right and inevitable choice. We have sought and continue to seek friendship with all, except Governments which are racist or threaten the hard-earned freedom of others. Non-alignment is not vague, not negative, not neutral.
"Non-alignment is national independence and freedom. It stands for peace and the avoidance of confrontation. It aims at keeping away from military alliances. It means equality among nations and the democratization of international relations, economic and political. It wants global co-operation for development on the basis of mutual benefit. It is a strategy for the recognition and preservation of the world's diversity."
197.	The question of disarmament has always remained a basic concern of India and other countries of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. Governments and peoples all over the world are becoming increasingly aware of the grave threat posed to the very survival of mankind by the development, accumulation and deployment of nuclear weapons and their delivery systems. Two special sessions of the General Assembly have been devoted exclusively to this question. Yet new weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems are continuously being researched, tested, produced and deployed. A new arms race has begun in the chemical weapons field. New technologies are being developed which would make space, which has hitherto remained largely peaceful, a dangerous arena of military confrontation. Striking advances are also being made in conventional weaponry, giving it a versatility and lethal quality unknown in previous years.
198.	The escalating arms race, the rise in international tensions and the absence of willingness for constructive dialogue among the major nuclear- weapon Powers have increased the risks of the outbreak of a nuclear war. Clearly, the dangers of the total annihilation of mankind, indeed, of any life on this planet, are so great and increasing with such inexorable rapidity that we cannot permit ourselves the luxury of either indifference or despair. Dangerous doctrines, such as those of nuclear deterrence and of limited nuclear warfare, are being propounded. No country will remain unaffected by the horror of nuclear conflict once it is unleashed. By the same token, none of us can remain indifferent to the need to speed up disarmament negotiations. It is ironical that the principal justification for adding new and costly weapon systems to the arsenals of the great Powers has been that it provides better negotiating positions for those countries in any arms limitation talks. The logic of this position is that disarmament can commence only after countries have armed themselves fully. Such bizarre logic cannot be expected to serve as a basis for any serious arms limitation exercise.
199.	A fresh and concerted world-wide effort must therefore be made to halt the arms race. Nuclear- weapon States bear the greatest responsibility and must adopt urgent, practical measures to prevent a nuclear war. Specific proposals have been made by India and other non-aligned countries for a convention under United Nations aegis prohibiting the use of nuclear weapons under any circumstances. The idea of a freeze on the production and deployment of nuclear weapons is gaining popular support and needs to be given a practical shape in order to break the present impasse in arms negotiations. Efforts for a comprehensive nuclear-weapons-test-ban treaty must be expedited. Existing arms limitation agreements must be observed and new ones negotiated. At the same time, a concerted effort ought to be made to prevent a new and potentially more dangerous and destabilizing round of the arms race in the area of space-based systems. Diplomats and experts engaged in arms limitation and disarmament negotiations must now take due note of the mass popular upsurge in the world against nuclear weapons.
200.	A major peace initiative in this regard was taken recently by the Prime Minister of India, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, together with the Heads of State or Government of Argentina, Greece, Mexico, Sweden and the United Republic of Tanzania. This five- continent initiative, launched on 22 May 1984, states, inter alia, in the Joint Declaration [A/39/277]:
"As leaders of nations, States Members of the United Nations, we have a commitment to take constructive action towards halting and reversing the nuclear-arms race. The people we represent are no less threatened by nuclear war than the citizens of the nuclear-weapons States. It is primarily the responsibility of the nuclear-weapons States to prevent a nuclear catastrophe, but this problem is too important to be left to those States alone." 
201.	The Joint Declaration urges, as a necessary first step, the five nuclear-weapon States to halt all testing, production and deployment of nuclear weapons and their delivery systems, to be immediately followed by a substantial reduction in nuclear forces. This first step must be followed by a continuing programme of arms reduction leading to general and complete disarmament, accompanied by measures to strengthen the United Nations system and to ensure an urgently needed transfer of substantial resources from the arms race into social and economic development. The essential goal must be to reduce and then eliminate the risk of war between nations. The six- Power peace appeal has received the overwhelming support of the international community. People all over the world have an overriding interest in collective security and the avoidance of nuclear war. The appeal represents a significant step in mobilizing wider world support for the objectives of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries on disarmament, as set out by the New Delhi Conference.
202.	Non-aligned and like-minded nations must now think of other forms of action. The bulk of the global military expenditure of $1 trillion a year is accounted for by a handful of industrialized countries. A significant reduction in this enormously wasteful expenditure would not only help ease tensions the world over but also contribute to recovery and growth in the world economy and could be used to augment the currently decreasing levels of assistance to developing nations. The proposal for a world conference on disarmament and development de-serves to be taken up seriously by Member States.
203.	India attaches great importance to general and complete disarmament, particularly nuclear disarmament, and the prevention of nuclear war. A number of proposals submitted by my delegation to begin a serious nuclear disarmament programme are already before the General Assembly. It is our earnest hope that during this session our proposals, as well as others in this field, will be considered in all seriousness and that meaningful decisions will be taken.
204.	In our own neighbourhood, the Indian Ocean continues to be an area of competitive attention and mounting great-Power military presence, posing a direct threat to the security and integrity of the littoral and hinterland States. The increasing militarization of the Indian Ocean and its use as an arena for strategic power-play is a matter of immense concern to us. The establishment of new command structures has been accompanied by the introduction of sophisticated weaponry into the area. The 1971 Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace remains unimplemented.
205.	Ever since the expansion of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Indian Ocean in 1979, it has been the earnest hope of the littoral and hinterland States that the permanent members of the Security Council and the major maritime users of the Indian Ocean would contribute towards the early convening of the Conference on the Indian Ocean and to the early realization of the objectives of the 1971 Declaration. The evidence of the last few years has belied this expectation. On the contrary, efforts are afoot to distort the fundamental structure and elements of the 1971 Declaration. We believe that the Conference, to be held at Colombo, should be convened urgently to begin the process of elimination of great-Power military presence from the Indian Ocean in realization of the objectives of the Declaration. During the current year, the non-aligned countries have made serious efforts to complete necessary preparatory work for the Conference and have submitted a framework for its agenda. We hope all members of the	Ad hoc Committee will display the necessary political will and address themselves to this question in a constructive manner.
206.	The countries of South Asia are currently engaged in an active search for regional co-operation on the basis of mutual benefit. This is in consonance with our own policies over the years of reinforcing the fabric of understanding and co-operation among the countries of the region. At the South Asian Regional Co-operation Meeting of Foreign Ministers, held at Male on 10 and 11 July of this year, a detailed review of the implementation of programmes was undertaken. We recognize that this will be a long process and will call for much patience and perseverance. Even now the induction of sophisticated arms in our neighbourhood serves external strategic interests and is complicating the task of peaceful co-operation in our region. Notwithstanding that, we have no doubt that the process of regional co-operation will continue to gain strength in the months and years ahead and will not only assist the economic and social development of the countries of South Asia but also ultimately promote good-neighbourliness and harmony in the whole area.
207.	While on the subject of South Asia, it is with considerable regret that I find it necessary to refer to recent developments in Sri Lanka which have taken a turn for the worse, have caused us deep anguish and have aroused global concern. There has been a recrudescence of indiscriminate violence and killing by the armed forces on a scale which recalls the tragedy of July 1983. Reports indicate that the armed forces in that country have conducted large-scale operations in areas where the Tamils constitute the overwhelming majority of the population, resulting in heavy loss of life and property of the innocent Tamil population. If the spate of violence in the northern province continues, it is bound to have serious repercussions in other parts of Sri Lanka and precipitate an influx of refugees into our country. We already have 40,000 Sri Lankan refugees in Tamil Nadu.
208.	The ethnic problem in Sri Lanka cannot be solved by military action. It is a political problem involving the just rights of the Tamil minority, md only the determined pursuit of the political process of consultation and mutual accommodation can lead to a constructive way out.
209.	After the communal violence of 1983, the Prime Minister of India offered her good offices to help find a political solution to the problem. President Jayawardene of Sri Lanka accepted that offer, and the efforts of our special envoy to promote the process of dialogue have been undertaken with the full concurrence of the Government of Sri Lanka. While talks within the framework of the All Party Conference are continuing, innuendos and insinuations are repeatedly being made against India.
210.	We have reaffirmed our stand in favour of Sri Lanka's integrity and unity and have expressed opposition to all forms of violence and separatism. Because of the large number of Tamil refugees from Sri Lanka in the Indian state of Tamil Nadu and because of the many age-old links between the Tamil populations of the two countries, the repression and denial of human and political rights of the Tamils in Sri Lanka give rise to repercussions in our country with which we are trying to deal as best we can. But it is a travesty of facts to suggest that we are in any way responsible for Sri Lanka's problems. The problem exists right there in Sri Lanka and it has to be resolved there. For our part, we do not and will not permit any activities directed against Sri Lanka from our soil. It is therefore regrettable that leaders of Sri Lanka continue to make baseless allegations against India that it is providing sanctuary and support to Tamil militants. India is doing no such thing. I should like to reiterate that such false and unfounded allegations can only create unnecessary and avoidable difficulties and misunderstanding in the relations between the two countries.
211.	The Prime Minister of India has categorically stated that India does not intervene in the internal affairs of Sri Lanka or, indeed, of any other country. India does not support any separatist movement; it does not support or condone resort to violence of any kind. It is our sincere hope that, through consultations, a viable political solution will soon be found assuring the safety and legitimate rights of the Tamils as full and equal citizens, so that the people of Sri Lanka can live together in peace and harmony.
212.	I cannot over-emphasize the necessity for the utmost restraint on the part of all concerned and a determined pursuit of the political process to find a viable and acceptable solution in which the fundamental human and civic rights of the Tamil population of Sri Lanka will be safeguarded.
213.	The efforts for a political settlement in Afghanistan are continuing, though progress has been slow. While there is universal reaffirmation of the inadmissibility of interference in the internal affairs of States, as also of the induction of foreign troops in any country, there is no doubt that the situation in South-West Asia can be resolved only through an overall political settlement based on principles set out in the Political Declaration adopted at the New Delhi Conference.' The efforts of the Personal Representative of the Secretary-General in past months have sought to impart momentum to this process and deserve our support.
214.	Of equal concern to us are the continuing difficulties that have come in the way of peace in South-East Asia. The events of the past year have made us only more conscious of the opportunities, as well as the pitfalls, that lie in the search for a solution of the problems afflicting that region. India is convinced that there can be no military solution to this question. What is needed is a balanced approach that takes into account the security and other considerations of all the countries in the region and eliminates outside interference. We are hopeful that the new processes of dialogue opening up between the countries of Indo-China and ASEAN will yield positive results in coming months and make for a much-needed sense of trust and reconciliation among the countries of the region.
215.	The futility of war as a means of settling disputes has been highlighted in the tragic fratricidal conflict between Iran and Iraq. The continuing war has involved great sacrifices by both sides, resulting in enormous losses not only of material wealth but also of precious and irreplaceable human lives. The critical situation in the region threatens not only the security of the Gulf but also the safety and economic well-being of much of the world. As Chairman of the Movement of the Non-Aligned Countries, India has remained in touch with both sides to bring an end to this conflict which weakens the Movement's unity and solidarity. We are heartened that the Secretary- General's call for a halt to bombings in the civilian areas has met with a positive response from both sides. We hope that the two sides will continue to show restraint and see the inevitability of getting down to negotiations for the settlement of their differences. We are convinced that there can be no victor or vanquished in a conflict of this nature. Its continuation will only weaken the ability of the two countries to meet the challenges that face them as developing countries.
216.	The events in West Asia continue to arouse our anguish and indignation. The continued denial to the Palestinian people of their basic and inherent right to self-determination and nationhood, Israel's arrogant defiance of the will of the international community, the critical situation in Lebanon, the consolidation by Israel of its stranglehold over the occupied territories, including its settlements policy—all constitute sordid chapters in a seemingly endless tragedy.
217.	The turmoil in West Asia remains a most serious threat to world peace today. Recent months have witnessed deterioration in the situation, resulting in further acts of aggression and intimidation by Israel against the Palestinian and Lebanese peoples. We remain firm in our support for the brave homeless and harassed Palestinian people, led by the Palestinian Liberation Organization, their sole authentic representative. Occupation of the territory of neighbouring States will not guarantee Israel security; it can if anything, only have the opposite effect. A comprehensive solution comprising the total and unconditional withdrawal of Israel from all Arab territories occupied since 1967, the exercise by the Palestinian people of their inalienable national and human rights, including the right to establish an independent State in their homeland, and mutual guarantees of security among States of the region must be achieved.
218.	We support the convening of an international peace conference on the Middle East under United Nations auspices for finding a comprehensive, just and lasting solution in accordance with well-established principles laid down in United Nations resolutions. The situation in the region does not brook any delay, and urgent preparatory measures should be undertaken so that the conference can be convened at the earliest possible time. In this context, India is appreciative of the efforts being made by the Secretary-General towards the convening of the conference and the process of consultations initiated by him with the parties concerned to find a comprehensive solution. We stand ready to extend our full support and co-operation in this connection.
219.	It is now a century since Namibia fell prey to colonialism at the Berlin Conference of 1884-1885. For the larger part of the period and up to the present day, this Territory and this valiant people have suffered a particularly brutal and repressive colonial presence, an extension of the abhorrent system of eighteen years of direct United Nations jurisdiction over Namibia have brought the Territory closer to independence only in theory, as the United Nations plan for Namibian independence remains unimplemented in spite of its universal acceptance as the basis for a peaceful settlement. Sadly, the question of Namibia has become embroiled in the web of East-West tensions, with entirely irrelevant and extraneous considerations being introduced into what is, and must essentially remain, a question of decolonization. The South West Africa People's Organization	the sole and authentic representative of the Namibian people, has shown admirable restraint, flexibility and statesmanship. South Africa's answer has always been characterized by arrogance, defiance of world opinion, and prevarication. The non-aligned believe that only sanctions can force Pretoria to pay heed.
220.	We believe that Security Council resolution 435 (1978) remains the only basis for a peaceful settlement of the Namibian question. India, along with other non-aligned countries, rejects any kind of linkage or parallelism in regard to the implementation of this resolution. The Security Council must consider more resolute action in the exercise of United Nations responsibility over Namibia to ensure the implementation of its own resolutions. Meanwhile, we remain steadfast in our support for the Namibian people under the leadership of SWAPO, their sole and authentic representative, and in our resolve to assist them in all possible ways in their valiant struggle for liberation.
221.	We are being increasingly confronted with the proposition that racist South Africa is moving towards reform of its policy of apartheid. Mr. Botha found platforms to proclaim this to the world during his visits to several Western European countries, visits that should never have been permitted to take place and have had the effect of undermining the international campaign to isolate Pretoria. The charade of elections on the basis of a "new dispensation" was organized in an attempt to confirm this impression. A country known for its indiscriminate and repeated acts of aggression against neighbouring independent States is projecting itself as a votary of peaceful coexistence. This propaganda, which emanates from Pretoria and finds an echo in capitals of some of South Africa's powerful friends and allies, will deceive no one. South Africa's attempts to hoodwink the world will not succeed.
222.	The root cause of all the problems in southern Africa is the policy and practice of apartheid. The international community must not let flag its vigilance against apartheid or its efforts to counter it by every possible means. In this context, we are happy to note the clear-sightedness shown by the Coloured and Asian communities in rejecting, despite pressures of all kinds, the so-called constitutional reforms mooted by the racist regime. As the Prime Minister of India, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, stated in a recent message: cannot be reformed; it must be ended."
223.	The front-line States of southern Africa have long been a bastion of resistance against racist South Africa, though it has meant great suffering and sacrifice on the part of the peoples of those countries. The world must take urgent and resolute action to fortify the front-line States and strengthen the Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference so that those States could better withstand Pretoria's repeated acts of aggression and destabilization and its threats and blandishments.
224.	The adoption of a resolution on Central America by consensus in the Assembly last year [resolution 38/10] augured well for peace and reconciliation in that troubled region. So also have the untiring endeavours of the Contadora Group of nations. The non-aligned countries have pledged full support to the Contadora exercise. We commend the Contadora countries for their perseverance and dedication and for the progress so far achieved.
225.	Nevertheless, the situation in Central America remains tense and delicate, capable of explosion at the next spark. Again this year, Nicaragua felt compelled to take recourse to the Security Council following continuing hostile acts directed against it, in particular the mining of its ports and harbours. We would like to see the endemic problem of the region resolved by its own peoples without meddling from outside quarters. We hope that accord will be achieved before long on a comprehensive agreement along the lines contained in the draft Contadora Act on Peace and Co-operation in Central America.
226.	Efforts to resolve the vexed question of Cyprus have received a serious set-back in the last year following the proclamation of a so-called Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus and subsequent steps taken with a view to consolidating that unilateral declaration of independence. The Government and people of India have deplored the unilateral declaration of independence and firmly support the unity, territorial integrity, sovereignty, independence and non-alignment of Cyprus, a country with which we have traditionally had friendly and co-operative relations. We believe that the unilateral declaration of independence must be rescinded and intercommunal talks resumed under the auspices of the Secretary- General with a view to arriving at a lasting settlement, taking due account of the rights and aspirations of both the Greek and the Turkish Cypriot communities. In this context, we welcome the steps recently taken by the Secretary-General aimed at a resumption of the intercommunal dialogue as well as the positive response of both sides to the call of the Secretary-General.
227.	The international economic situation continues to cause great concern. When we met here in 1983 there were claims that respite from the severest recession in post-war history was in sight. The industrialized countries may be experiencing some recovery, but it remains uneven in its spread and there are doubts about its durability. The vast majority of the developing countries have not experienced any improvement. As a group, their gross national product has remained stagnant and many of them have experienced declining growth rates. Falling commodity prices, adverse terms of trade, rising debt burdens, barriers to trade and declining financial flows continue to affect them adversely.
228.	These conditions have resulted in sharp reductions in imports and postponement of investment in projects and human resources development programmes which may have set back their growth prospects for years to come. Austerity measures compelled by circumstances over which they have had little control have precipitated social disruption and political instability in a number of countries. The net effect of these measures has been to attract a transfer of resources from these countries to the financial institutions of the developed countries. The appalling costs in terms of human misery and destitution that these measures have implied are not brought out in the adjustment figures put out by international agencies. These adjustments, as the Committee for Development Planning has put it, have taken place "at the margin of life and death".
229.	The gravity of the economic situation in Africa is a cause of particular concern to the international community. The critical conditions there have been further aggravated by adverse climatic factors leading to widespread hunger and malnutrition. In the clearest sense, this represents a test of the will and ability of the international community to meet this challenge through international co-operative endeavour and to make it a part of the overall struggle of developing countries against hunger and poverty.
230.	It is common wisdom to say today that, in an interdependent world, the progress of the rich cannot be achieved at the cost of the poor. This interdependence was again acknowledged and emphasized at the London Economic Summit of the industrialized countries in June this year.
231.	The test of the faith in interdependence lies in the willingness to take co-operative action. As a group, developing countries are larger markets of the European Economic Community, the United States and Japan than each of these three is for the other two. When import volumes have had to be reduced by as much as 50 per cent in many developing countries, its dampening effect on recovery in some industrialized countries should be evident. Sustained economic recovery of the developed countries is dependent on the reactivation of the economic development of the developing countries. But the actual policies pursued by many developed countries seem frequently to reflect a rejection of the concept of interdependence and the policy measures that this would entail.
232.	At a time when financial resources for development are needed by developing countries, net private flows of resources to them have in several cases become negative. Official development assistance has declined in real terms, as is evident from the fact that, in the case of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries, aid as a share of their gross national product has fallen from an average of 0.38 per cent to 0.36 per cent in 1983. Multilateral financial institutions are facing the worst crisis of resources since they were created. A case in point is the IDA, which is of paramount importance to the poorest countries. The level at which it has been possible to agree on its seventh replenishment is 20 per cent less m nominal terms and 40 per cent lower in real terms over that of its sixth replenishment.
233.	Protectionism is steadily on the increase. The United Nations World Economic Survey 1984 estimates that over half of world trade is now subject to some form of non-tariff barrier. The practical effect of protectionist measures is particularly intense in sectors like textiles, in which developing countries are the most efficient producers. We are thus blamed for our alleged inefficiency and penalized when we are efficient.
234.	We cannot but express our disappointment at the attitude demonstrated by some developed countries during meetings of the Economic and Social Council and at the Fourth General Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, held at Vienna from 2 to 19 August 1984, in their approach both to substantive issues and to the conduct of negotiations. It is difficult to avoid the impression that this was part of the systematic and persistent efforts by certain countries to make the United Nations system the scapegoat for their lack of political will. We strongly urge the developed countries to reconsider their positions and to work to restore the norms and consensus on the basis of which the United Nations system can continue to play its rightful role as a central forum for joint action for mutual benefit.
235.	It is legitimate to expect that now that recovery in developed countries has started, even though in an uneven and limited way, Governments in developed countries will deal in a more comprehensive and co-operative manner with the deeper structural problems of the world economy. It is necessary to adopt and implement a comprehensive set of measures for reactivating growth in developing countries. We must recognize the realities of the situation and work towards the establishment of a real dialogue between the North and the South. Policies which are recognized to stand in the way of the resumption of the development momentum in the developing countries need to be rectified. The ultimate objective of any good policy must be the contribution it can make towards the removal of existing inequalities and in achieving better growth rates for all.
236.	Deliberate measures have to be taken now to attain more normal levels of growth. This cannot be achieved merely by the trickle-down effect. The agenda for global economic recovery and development suggested in the Economic Declaration of the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries" provides a balanced set of actions. Intensive consultations have taken place on the two-phase approach towards global negotiations put forward by the non-aligned and developing countries, but agreement on its launching has been impossible to obtain. While this matter is being pursued, we propose in the meantime that at this session of the General Assembly serious negotiations take place to provide action-oriented content to the Programme of Immediate Measures contained in the Declaration. Particular attention would have to be given to an improvement in the terms of trade of the developing countries and to a roll-back of protectionism. We have to tackle the crushing debt burden of developing countries in its global context and in a comprehensive manner, dealing with both the financial and the developmental aspects. Agreement needs to be reached for a substantial increase in the net flow of financial resources, particularly official development assistance, to developing countries. The resource position of multilateral development institutions would need to be considerably strengthened to meet the growing needs of developing countries.
237.	This session of the General Assembly has several other important tasks ahead of it. In its most fundamental sense, development has to be achieved in human terms. The prevailing imbalance in which 47 per cent of the world's population has only 5 per cent of the world's share of resources has grave implications for the future of humanity. The close link between population policies and economic and social development has been long recognized. The International Conference on Population, held at Mexico City from 6 to 14 August 1984, adopted useful recommendations for the further implementation of the World Population Plan of Action. My delegation attaches great importance to its quick and effective implementation, and we urge the international community to give full support to the national efforts of the countries in attaining its objectives. Similarly, in a related field, we welcome the support extended by the child survival and development strategy of UNICEF to national efforts, including those of my own country.
238.	Access and acquisition of modern scientific and technological knowledge is essential to carry out the economic and social transformation of developing countries. Because of our colonial past, many of our countries missed out on the industrial revolution. We have no intention of being left out of the technological revolution. We think that the area of science and technology is particularly suitable to devise new and imaginative mechanisms of international co-operation for mutual benefit. In this respect, we attach great importance to the establishment of the long-term financing system for science and technology for development. My own country is fully prepared to meet its responsibilities in this regard, and we urge all other countries, particularly the developed countries, urgently to finalize the financial arrangements which would enable the launching of the United Nations Financing System for Science and Technology for Development.
239.	It is more than a year and a half since the Heads of State or Government of the non-aligned countries, at their New Delhi Conference, called for the convening of an international conference on money and finance for development. Since then, the idea has gathered further momentum and gained w\der support. It has been pursued in a number of forums both within and outside the United Nations system, such as the Economic and Social Council; the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its sixth session, held at Belgrade from 6 June to 2 July 1983; the General Assembly; the Conference of the Heads of Government of Commonwealth Countries, held at New Delhi in November 1983; and the Williamsburg and London Economic Summit Conferences of the major industrial countries, held in May 1983 and June 1984. Recently, a group of five eminent experts appointed by the Chairman of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, the Prime Minister of India, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, completed a detailed study of the substantive and procedural issues that would arise in the context of convening such a conference. This report has been made available to the member Governments of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, as well as those of other countries. The need for improvement in the system, whether it be described as evolution or adaptation, reform or restructuring, is now widely recognized. It is now time to set in motion the preparatory process, with the participation of all interested parties, for moving towards serious negotiations on the subject. We sincerely hope that a consensus in this direction will soon evolve. It would be in keeping with the urgency of the situation and the international community's commitment to the multilateral process for these consultations to conclude in a preparatory process to coincide with the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations.
240.	India's commitment to the purposes and principles of the United Nations is firmly grounded in the traditions of our foreign policy. As the Prime Minister of India said at the thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly on behalf of the non-aligned countries: "Firm faith in the United Nations is central to the non-aligned". The observance of the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations next year should provide us all with an opportunity for rededication to the ideals that have animated the founders of this Organization.
241.	The non-aligned countries will be in the fore-front of preparations for the commemoration of that anniversary. It would be fitting if participation in the commemorative session by Member States was at the highest level, in order to enhance the significance of the occasion.
242.	The non-aligned countries also suggested at the New Delhi Conference that 1985 should be observed as the Year of the United Nations. Such an anniversary should not become an occasion for mere celebration. Member countries and their peoples need to consider carefully the contribution of the United Nations system over the past four decades, its continuing relevance in the current international situation, and the ways and means by which the Organization can be strengthened in order to meet more effectively the challenges facing contemporary society. Its procedures and methods of work should be improved in order to enhance its overall performance.
243.	Human institutions may and do face temporary set-backs. Rather than give way to despair and allow things to drift, we should make relentless efforts to reinvigorate the United Nations. In this endeavour, the abiding faith in it of the peoples of the world remains its strongest support, and we should do all we can to mobilize it.
244.	The year 1985 will also mark the silver .jubilee of the historic Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, enshrined in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV). That the membership of the United Nations has grown so impressively in recent decades is due in no small measure to the endeavours of the Organization in the field of decolonization. We hope that the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration will be appropriately observed. As a country with a deep and abiding commitment to decolonization, India looks forward to participating in that exercise.
245.	The year 1985 will also be observed as International Youth Year. Youth, which constitutes a crucial segment of the population, can make a valuable contribution to the development process and to the promotion of international understanding, co-operation and peace. It is therefore imperative that the younger generation be provided with all the necessary conditions for participating in national development activities and in the study and resolution of major national, regional and international problems. The observance in 1985 of International Youth Year is indeed timely, as it will serve to draw attention to the specific needs and aspirations of the future generation.
246.	In her address to the General Assembly last year, at its thirty-eighth session, Prime Minister Indira Gandhi referred to a new order struggling to be born amidst the upheavals of the present-day world:
"For us, the non-aligned, and for all who are deeply concerned with the future of humanity, the question is whether we help the birth of this new creation or throttle it before it can draw breath. The matter is not simple, because history has proved time and again that ideas and movements can be obstructed, but not stopped. How long can a few pockets of affluence continue to exert influence on the large populations, the natural resources, the cultural strength of the others? How long can allies and supporters, who may not have a base in their own countries and who are not in tune with the changing times, be perpetuated? You cannot kill an idea by killing its adherents. The new-born will not die; the birth can be delayed but the cost will be much higher and the affluent will have to pay. When peaceful change is thwarted, violent upheaval occurs. Previously, the end of a civilization brought destruction and trauma in its trail. If we keep to past trends, we too will be engulfed by circumstances. But today we have the opportunity, which may well be the first in human history, for humankind to bridge the transition from the old to the new in a conscious way, to build a new era, to move together to a new future."
﻿It gives me pleasure, Mr. President, to associate myself with the warm congratulations offered to you from this rostrum. They are a tribute to your country and to yourself, as well as to a continent which is playing such a prominent role in the United Nations. I hope and trust that, under your leadership and guidance, the deliberations of this session of the General Assembly will be constructive, positive and responsive to the grave problems that face us.
101.	It is gratifying to observe the family of nations grow from year to year, reinforced with new partners in our common endeavours. The United Nations will either stand or fall on the principle of universality. The only attitude we should disavow is the promotion of narrow, selfish interests which run counter to our common international efforts.
102.	Every session of the General Assembly must set out in a spirit of hope that, despite the disappointments of the past, we can and should renew our efforts and work for a better world. Forty years ago, the founders of the United Nations looked back on a tragic past and undertook to forge instruments that would ensure a better future for humanity. So do we, in accordance with ancient Jewish tradition, look back year after year upon the disappointments of the past with firm belief in a better future, buoyed by an unflagging hope in the triumph of that human spirit which never deserts us.
103.	The fortieth anniversary of the end of the Second World War will occur in 1985, as has already been noted from this rostrum. This was a landmark in history and even more so in the annals of my people. Israel and the Jewish people, who still carry so many scars of that terrible war, will commemorate the occasion appropriately. The event will undoubtedly be marked by all nations, as was indeed recommended by the thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly, which invited States Members "to adopt . . . measures declaring punishable by law any dissemination of ideas based on racial superiority or hatred . . . including Nazi, Fascist and neo- Fascist ideologies". The Assembly also appealed to all States to accede to the Convention on the Non-Applicability of Statutory Limitations to War Crimes and Crimes against Humanity. There are still a few pockets of neo-Nazism that continue to linger, and they should be dealt with firmly, but the true heirs to this inhuman creed are those organizations and Governments that continue to this day to deny the right of existence of another State and strive for its outright destruction. There should be no room in civilized society for such doctrines or for those who promote them.
104.	The United Nations concept embraces the whole of mankind. Its raison d'etre is the welfare, present and future, of humanity, with special attention accorded to the underprivileged, the disabled and the oppressed. Our special attention should be focused on the problems of children and of youth and on their appropriate education and training. This should be our central task in building up our nations and societies.
105.	The coming year will be marked by the conclusion of the United Nations Decade for Women, with the World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the Decade to be held at Nairobi. Our hope is that that Conference will become a high point in women's struggle for equality and will not be exploited for narrow and barren political interests.
106.	Technological progress holds the promise of providing solutions to some of the most pressing problems of developing nations, but nowhere is it more sorely needed than in the field of agriculture and food production. It is now widely recognized that the international development effort has failed to meet its most important challenge, the production of food for the fast-growing population of our world. Agriculture is the key to the present challenge, but its development and that of the rural society that sustains it have been sadly neglected.
107.	Great strides have been made world-wide in industry, in the development of infrastructure, transportation, education and health, but food production has remained deficient. It is a terribly sad comment on our society that in this modern age millions go hungry and die of famine; hundreds of millions, mainly children, suffer malnutrition, their future as productive members of their society endangered. Per capita food production in Africa, for instance, has in fact dropped 15 per cent in the last decade. Countries in other continents have required emergency food supplies. Nations that were once self-sufficient have become importers of food and, as a result of their economic difficulties stemming from the increase in the cost of energy, their true independence has become endangered.
108.	Catastrophe awaits many nations if we do not find the way to assure adequate food for our world's growing population. World security and stability begin with the assurance of basic human needs. A change of direction is thus urgently needed in the goals of international development. That is the challenge of this decade. This goal can be reached despite the scarcity of arable land and water and despite the meagre resources that are available in various countries. In fact, Israel has emerged in only one generation from severe austerity and food rationing to self-reliance; we have increased our food production twelvefold and have become a net exporter of food.
109.	Israel recently marked the twenty-fifth anniversary of its programme for international development co-operation. This programme had its beginning in the late 1950s and early 1960s with the emergence of newly independent nations that sought rapid development. Imbued with a pioneering spirit that thrived on successful adaptation and innovation in the development of their own country, the people of Israel considered it a duty to share the knowledge acquired through their own rapid development experience with the peoples of other emerging nations.
110.	Israel calls upon all Governments to set aside political differences and narrow economic interests to join forces in the campaign against hunger. Israel will continue to co-operate with other nations in technology and development and stands ready to join other Governments, international agencies and non-governmental organizations in working to meet this great challenge to humanity.
111.	Israel is the fulfilment of an age-old dream and prayer for the re-establishment of the Jewish State in the Land of Israel. It is the home of all Jews who wish to make it their home, and it is the defender and protector of all Jews who are oppressed or persecuted because they belong to the Jewish people. These principles are enshrined in Israel's Declaration of Independence, in its laws and in the conscience of its people.
112.	We are aghast at the fact that, 40 years after the eradication of Nazism, rampant anti-Semitism and racial discrimination still exist in a number of countries. The situation of Soviet Jewry has recently taken a definite turn for the worse. From this rostrum I call upon the Government of the Soviet Union to remove the harsh limitations and restrictions imposed upon Jews who seek repatriation and reunion with their brethren in Israel. The continued harassment of Soviet Jews has become one of the most pressing humanitarian problems of the day, a violation of the most basic human rights as expressed in the Helsinki accords. Hundreds of thousands of Jews are being systematically denied their rights and many are forced to live as outcasts, deprived of their livelihood, harassed or imprisoned in gaols and labour camps under inhuman conditions.
113.	Soviet Jews are deprived of access to Jewish culture. A systematic campaign is waged against those Soviet Jews teaching and studying the Hebrew language. Ill-concealed under the cloak of anti-zionism, officially inspired anti-Semitism is being increasingly manifested in the Soviet media.
114.	We call upon the Soviet Government to change its policy, which is unjustifiable. The Soviet Jews are not involved in any anti-Soviet activity, nor are they violating Soviet laws or working against Soviet interests. Their only wish is to study their ancient culture and their national language and to live as Jews in their historic homeland. It should be recalled that in front of this very Assembly official representatives of the Soviet Union have declared that the Jewish people have a right to a State of their own. Soviet Jewry demands nothing more than to exercise this right.
115.	In our own part of the world, the Middle East, the Jews of Syria continue to suffer under a harsh regime that holds them hostage and refuses to grant them basic human rights, the most important of which is the right to emigrate and join their brethren. Periodic killings of Jews, either sanctioned or tolerated by the authorities, maintain a climate of terror among the Jews of Syria.
116.	In Ethiopia, an ancient Jewish community struggles to maintain its heritage, culture and integrity under dire hardship. We acknowledge the gesture of the Ethiopian Government, which has recently enabled Jews and non-Jews from all over the world to visit that community, and we express our sincere hope that it will take all necessary steps to protect and respect their religious and cultural rights and enable those who so desire to be reunited with their families in their ancient homeland.
117.	On 13 September 1984, a Government of national unity, encompassing the overwhelming majority of political parties in Israel, was established. Its creation is a reflection of the wide consensus that unites the people of Israel on the main issues on the Government's agenda in the economic, defence and political domains.
118.	In its foreign relations, Israel is dedicated, as always, to the goal of peace and accommodation with all its neighbours. In the north, we stand ready to reach an understanding with Lebanon which will guarantee the security of our common border and thus make possible the withdrawal of all forces from southern Lebanon. Syria remains dogmatically opposed to the idea of peace with Israel. Nevertheless, we are adamant in our conviction that there can be no solution other than peace. In the east, we have repeatedly called on the Government of Jordan to join us in negotiations for peace. In the south, of course, we have peace with Egypt, but we are convinced that peaceful relations should be deepened and strengthened in the face of so much rejectionist pressure against peace.
119.	The chances of progress towards further peace and stability between Israel and its neighbours must be appraised, however, in the context of the realities of the region.
120.	The Middle East continues to be beset by violence, bitter conflicts and wars. In a few weeks of bloodshed along the Iran-Iraq border, more men and children die than in all the Arab-Israel wars. Thousands die every year in domestic strife and hostilities entirely unconnected with the Arab-Israel conflict. Yet, as everyone in this Hall knows full well, a disproportionate amount of the time of the General Assembly is devoted year after year to a contrived and counter-productive review of the Arab-Israel conflict, the main purpose of which seems to be only to slander Israel.
121.	In the last two decades, the violence and oppression that characterize so many regimes in the Middle East have erupted on the international scene in waves of terrorism, hijacking and assassination. When in 1972 the Secretary-General proposed that the United Nations promote measures to counter international terrorism, we were among the first to welcome that initiative. Regrettably, it has been thwarted by States that sponsor and support terrorism. Middle Eastern terrorism, sanctioned by these Governments, has been thus allowed, through neglect and indifference, to expand to more and more countries. Today the cancer of terrorism has spread to all continents. The latest form of terrorism and international piracy is the mines that threaten shipping and the freedom of navigation in the Red Sea. Recently, we were again horrified by the murderous bombing of the United States Embassy at Beirut, a calculated and deliberate act of terrorism.
122.	Terror is a malignant disease that will spread everywhere if not contained. But at least in one instance concerted international effort has produced results. When terrorism first raised its ugly head in the mid-1960s, its prime target was international civil aviation. Planes were hijacked almost daily, aircraft bombed, passengers terrorized and murdered. The proper functioning of civil aviation today is a result of powerful measures taken jointly by many nations to ensure the safety of passengers and aircraft and to combat the threat of hijackings. But such successful international co-operation remains an exception. Terrorism is still an item on the Assembly's agenda, but it is debated ineffectively, shunted aside by vested interests which offer its representatives support, sustenance and even quasi- recognition. As long as the family of nations continues to evade its responsibilities, to appease rather than punish, to pardon terrorists rather than prosecute or extradite them, to afford terrorists diplomatic immunity, the disease will spread and claim yet more victims in our homes and communities.
123.	Whenever a particularly outrageous terrorist attack takes place, as for example the recent bombing of the United States Embassy at Beirut, a wave of outrage sweeps public opinion in all parts of the civilized world. People naturally demand instant retaliation against such despicable acts and a fitting punishment for the criminal perpetrators.
124.	While punishment has its necessary place in any system of justice, the overriding problem here is not whom to punish and how punishment should be delivered. Rather, it is how to prevent terrorism and root it out from the international arena. There is only one way to deal with this problem. Those countries which agree that terrorism must be eradicated should join forces and wage a permanent war on the terrorist organizations. This is the only way to expose, pre-empt, weaken and finally destroy them. This is a war of self-defence in its true sense, a campaign that the free world should undertake on behalf of its peoples and of the entire human race.
125.	For its part, Israel has been waging an unrelenting war on Arab terrorism and has dealt it a number of crippling blows. The so-called PLO, which had established its own mini-terrorist State in Lebanon, from which it carried out and assisted terrorist acts in five continents, was expelled from that country. But Israel cannot be expected to shoulder alone the burden of fighting international terrorism. Since we are all potential victims of terror, we must fight it together. If we do not, terrorism will endanger our basic freedoms and all the standards of civilized behaviour for which the United Nations stands.
126.	The attitude underpinning Arab terrorist attacks against Israel is the continued denial by Arab States of Israel's right to exist. Translated into wanton attacks on civilians, the ideology is cruel and inhuman. But it has produced the very opposite result to that intended. Israel has taken the necessary measures to protect its people and enable them to live and prosper alongside their Arab neighbours throughout the Land of Israel. We have to state with regret that any sign of ostensible moderation in the attitude of Arab Governments towards Israel is negated by their sustenance and support of terrorist organizations committed to Israel's destruction and by their continued attempts to expel Israel from United Nations bodies and other international organizations. We will welcome a change in the Arab stance if it is given concrete expression, such as a clear-cut disengagement from the so-called PLO and other terrorist organizations and a straightforward statement of readiness to make peace with Israel.
127.	Sadly, such a breakthrough for peace was set back by the General Assembly's rejection of the Camp David accords and the Israel-Egypt peace treaty, for no other reason than that certain Arab States reject the idea of peace with Israel. Camp David has been the only ray of light in an otherwise dismal and dark picture of hostility. It will continue to serve as a beacon of hope until its message is finally accepted by the peoples and Governments of our region.
128.	The United Nations can contribute to peace in the Middle East by a change of direction. It should embrace the idea of peace between Israel and its neighbours condemn the blatant attacks on Israel and reject outright the attempts to expel it from international forums. Recently, an attempt to expel Israel from the UPU was properly rejected by an overwhelming majority. It is now time for the United Nations as a whole to muster the courage to condemn such behaviour. It will mark an important milestone in rehabilitating the image of the United Nations and its standing in the world community.
129.	Recently, the idea of convening an international conference on the Middle East was resurrected. It was advanced by a State that has no diplomatic relations with Israel and that recommends the participation of representatives of terrorist groups. The Arab-Israel dispute is not in need of another international forum. There have been more than enough such gatherings and proposals, and they have all proved futile. They served as a stage for propaganda and for competition between Arab States in the politics of public confrontation with Israel. A conference such as the one being proposed would strike a blow at the principle of direct negotiations, which has proved to be the only means of producing agreements between Israel and its neighbours, from the time of the General Armistice Agreements in 1949 through the Camp David accords in 1978.
130.	We therefore call on Member States that have the interest of peace at heart to bring their influence to bear on our Arab neighbours to the east and north to adopt the only successful and tested path to peace—direct negotiations with Israel.
131.	Such negotiations produced the agreement with Lebanon which was signed on 17 May 1983. That agreement provided for security arrangements against terrorism and an agreed basis for normal relations between our two countries across the recognized international boundaries. It was approved by the legislatures of Israel and Lebanon, but Syria and those that cannot tolerate the idea of peace with Israel destroyed it by the application of sheer, brutal force. The agreement was designed to lead to the withdrawal of all foreign forces from Lebanon, the restoration of Lebanese independence and the establishment of security measures along the Lebanon- Israel border.
132.	Today, some 40,000 Syrian troops occupy 65 per cent of Lebanon and show no sign of any intention to leave. The Lebanese Government is dominated by Syria and is not capable of conducting free negotiations that would resolve its problems with Israel. Obviously, Israel will ensure its legitimate security needs and make the necessary arrangements in southern Lebanon to protect the people of northern Israel against any repetition of the terrorist attacks of recent years. I reiterate our readiness to withdraw all our forces from Lebanon, subject to the above-mentioned arrangements.
133.	By now it should be clear to everyone, including the Arab States in our area, that Israel has no interest in maintaining any military presence in Lebanon. But we have to make certain that after the last Israeli soldier leaves Lebanon, the terrorists will not return to attack us.
134.	Let me repeat: anyone, any people or State that is interested in the evacuation of the Israel army from Lebanon must see to it that the terrorist organizations expelled from Lebanon by Israel do not return to our borders to renew their attacks. This is an essential condition for peace. Israel is ready to cooperate in any serious effort towards a fair solution to this problem.
135.	Since the conclusion of the Camp David accords, Israel has repeatedly called on Jordan, Egypt and the Palestinian Arabs to join in negotiations for an agreement on autonomy. Unfortunately, Egypt has discontinued its participation in the talks, while Jordan and the Palestinian Arabs have refused to join them. Arab rejectionism and extremism continue to have a stranglehold on those who may have been willing to embark on the path of moderation and peace.
136.	From this rostrum, I turn yet again to our neighbours with the same call. Let us move forward together on a new path. Let us talk to one another. Let us engage in a common effort to resolve our conflicts, rather than perpetuate the negative attitudes which find frequent expression in this building.
137.	Until this call is heeded, Israel will continue to strive for an end to Arab rejectionist attitudes and aspire to mutual acceptance, tolerance, understanding and dialogue, which are consonant with the most basic goals of the United Nations.
138.	Israel is aware of the substantial contribution which the peaceful uses of nuclear energy can make to the well-being of the world and of the right of all countries to benefit from such uses. We support those international arrangements that would ensure the status and inviolability of nuclear facilities dedicated to peaceful purposes.
139.	Israel has long been concerned by the dangers posed by nuclear armaments and has therefore consistently supported the objective of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons.
140.	We believe that the most credible barrier to proliferation in such a sensitive area as the Middle East is a freely negotiated nuclear-weapon-free zone. In this belief, we are encouraged by the Latin American experience and the recent progress towards establishing the South Pacific as a nuclear-weapon- free zone.
141.	In the vital field of disarmament, we are impelled by a permanent moral imperative. Progress in this field is indispensable if we are to remove the nuclear threat. It may be a commonplace to say that time is running out, but it is nevertheless true. A very recent experience demonstrates that weapons, once they exist, are used. During the current terrible Iran- Iraq war, new non-conventional weapons, such as gas, have been used. This latest addition to the arsenal of fighting armies, against established international conventions and basic decency, cannot but arouse the deepest anxiety. It should be opposed vigorously by anyone concerned for the future of our civilization. All of us are aware that a moderation of the armament spiral, both conventional and non- conventional, will free huge resources needed for the welfare of mankind, in particular that of the developing countries.
142.	In conclusion, our mission is twofold. Our first task is the improvement of the quality of life in this world, especially for those who are suffering or who lack the means of sustenance; the hungry millions are waiting for us to do our duty. Our second task is to concert our efforts to eradicate from our midst terrorism and all other violations of civilized norms. We must dedicate equal effort to achieving both goals. We cannot accomplish our humanitarian task unless we overcome the dangers that threaten our society. Both objectives can be achieved provided we muster the courage and the will to do so. Our reward will be true peace. There can be no greater goal for the United Nations.
143.	The vision of our ancient prophets of universal peace was intended for a distant, Utopian future. But, if we succeed in removing these two formidable obstacles—hunger and terrorism—from our path, the march of humanity towards the fulfilment of that vision will be immeasurably advanced, our stride quickened and our hearts uplifted with the promise of better days.
﻿Mr. President, I congratulate you on your election. When Africa's problems are looming so large, it is appropriate that an African should once again preside over the General Assembly. We are confident that your presidency will help make this session a fruitful one. New Zealand will do all it can to assist you.
3.	We welcome the newest Member of the United Nations, Brunei Darussalam, a country of our own part of the world, with which we have long-standing ties. New Zealand has long believed that the membership of the Organization should be universal. We welcome every step in that direction. We would not want to see the principle of universality compromised in any way.
4.	I would not adequately reflect the views of most New Zealanders if I did not, right at the beginning of my first address to the General Assembly, talk about an issue that has become very prominent in public debate in our country. New Zealanders—not just a few of them, but people from all sectors of the community—have become gravely concerned about nuclear weapons and the continuing and deadly competition in their production, their refinement and their deployment.
5.	New Zealand is a small and remote country, perhaps a little distant from the mainstream of world affairs. We are fortunate enough to live in a region that constitutes a pocket of tranquillity in a deeply divided and troubled world. Like many members of the international community, New Zealand faces serious economic problems and some social ones as well; but we are at least able to come to grips with these problems without having our attention diverted by those immediate worries out security that are all too familiar for many Members of the United Nations. We are not occupied; we are nobody's client; we have excellent relations with all our neighbours; in 1984 no other country has New Zealand in its sights. For our longer-term protection we rely on our membership of the Western Alliance. That membership is formally expressed in a security treaty with the United States and Australia which for 33 years has been a central feature of the foreign and defence policies of successive New Zealand Governments, including my own.
6.	Against this background, why is it that New Zealanders are becoming increasingly worried about a contest that is centred in two capitals half a world away? With no more immodesty than many others, New Zealanders like to think of themselves as practical and sensible people. They are simply alarmed at the continuing build-up of nuclear arsenals, because they can see no sense in it. How does it make sense continually to augment and refine an existing capacity to make the rubble bounce and bounce and bounce again? New Zealanders have felt deepening frustration at the inability of the States that hold nuclear weapons, in particular the two super-Powers, to agree on practical measures to halt and reverse the process of building more and "better" nuclear weapons. If ordinary people everywhere can see the irrationality of that race, they ask, why cannot the super-Powers see it also? And, if they can see it, why do they not do something about it?
7.	Quite recently, another dimension has been added to these concerns. Our people, like others round the world, have known for a long time that the possibility of nuclear war is a terrible and frightening one. They have known for very many years that if the countries that have these weapons eventually descend to hurling them at each other, then those countries and their peoples will be destroyed. They have also recognized that other countries, including New Zealand, would suffer very severely indeed. But New Zealanders had not previously supposed that the direct physical consequences for them could be overwhelming. If common humanity and concern for others dictated anxiety about nuclear war, it was thought, perhaps we could afford to be slightly less anxious than others.
8.	Within the last year or so, New Zealanders have been told that even that last tattered shred of reassurance is probably no longer available. Reputable scientists from east and west have told us that the global, climatic and long-term biological consequences of a nuclear war would be much more severe than had been previously thought. What is more, that would be the case if even a relatively small part of existing nuclear arsenals was used or if the weapons were used only against so-called counter-force or military targets. The scientists have also told us that nuclear war in the north may generate a nuclear winter in the south as well. They have gone further and advised us that there is a possibility of the self- inflicted extinction of the human species. That, we are told, is what could flow from the deliberate, if irrational, act, the mistake, the miscalculation or the accident.
9.	To New Zealanders this is a truly appalling state of affairs. Refinements or modifications of the predictions which the scientists have made about the consequences of nuclear war may be made as a result of further work, but they will concern only the exact range of utter disaster.
10.	What the scientists have already made entirely plain to all of us—plainer than ever before—is that the nuclear weapons that may have helped to maintain an uneasy peace between two great countries for more than three decades have become a threat to the security and survival of countries and peoples everywhere. The situation we are facing is quite unlike any other with which the international community has had to grapple before. It is one from which, unpalatable though it may be to think about, no country— and, for that matter, no individual—can back away. We shall not escape from it if the traditional prescriptions of great-Power politics are applied.
11.	What the scientists have not demonstrated, of course, is that nuclear war will occur or that it is more likely now than it was in the past. But the question how close we may be to falling into the abyss does not take account of the essential point. The fact is that a nuclear war is possible, whether it is half a year or 100 years away or whether, as we all hope, it never occurs.
12.	None of the nuclear-weapon States can tell us that it will not occur, that they will never do what they have in their power to do. The results of the use of nuclear weapons would be so grave that it is absolutely incumbent upon the nuclear-weapon States to do everything possible to avoid their use. And that would remain the case even if the consequences of nuclear war should be shown later to be only half or a quarter as bad as the scientists have predicted.
13.	My Government can find no encouragement in the recent response of the nuclear-weapon States to this situation. The refinement and deployment of nuclear weapons continues apace. There are disquieting indications that the military competition between the super-Powers may, in the coming years, move to the new environment of outer space. Multilateral arms control negotiations are stalled and, in some cases, in danger of being discredited. I would ask the Soviet Union to respond positively to the United States invitation to resume key bilateral arms control talks in order to get a dialogue under way again.
14.	My Government hopes that the two super-Powers will take a long hard look at the course of developments in the nuclear arms race. It is clearly in their own interests and in the interests of all of us to make a new and very much more determined attempt to reach agreements that will enable them to change direction. None of us underestimates the complexities involved in reaching agreements that will permit a mutual, balanced, verifiable—and very large—reduction in existing levels of nuclear weapons. We are aware that it will not be easy to manage safely the transition to a more secure world where, as a stage in the road to their elimination, the number of nuclear weapons is drastically reduced and where innovations in weaponry, if they are to occur at all, are not of a kind that cause instability. That process will require trust and good will. It is also likely to require the taking of risks. But the most dangerous risk of all is to do nothing: to allow compulsive competitiveness to continue indefinitely.
15.	We ask, in addition, of the Soviet Union that it reflect on the fact that many countries, of which New Zealand is one, have the greatest difficulty in under-standing its current reluctance to take part in bilateral arms control negotiations with the United States. The events that occurred between 1939 and 1945 gave the Soviet Union every reason to be concerned about preserving the peace. It will advance that cause by returning to the bargaining table and looking at ways and means of beginning the process of de-escalation.
16.	Countries such as my own have to recognize that the contribution we can make to assist this process is limited; but we are bound to continue to try. There are several things we want to emphasize. The most urgent of these is the need for massive reductions in strategic nuclear arms. There are other things as well. New Zealand has, for many years, argued the case for the conclusion of a comprehensive test-ban treaty.
17.	It needs to be understood that our advocacy of that measure is not prompted solely by the fact that one of the nuclear-weapon States continues, despite repeated pleas from all the countries in the region, to test its weapons in the South Pacific. We see a prohibition of the testing of nuclear weapons by any country in any environment as a critical first step in halting and then turning back the arms race. We have been disappointed at the lack of progress made in securing such a prohibition. My delegation will again at this session of the General Assembly sponsor a draft resolution which seeks to encourage and speed up that work.
18.	A comprehensive test ban will also be of the greatest importance in preventing the further spread of nuclear weapons. Everything possible must be done to stop that from happening. My Government will want to take an active part in the Third Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons next year. We see that Treaty as fundamental to world security.
19.	There are, of course, other techniques of modern warfare which are not much less unpleasant than nuclear weapons. Biological weapons have already been outlawed. The need for a comprehensive agreement to outlaw the manufacture and use of all chemical weapons is another matter of concern to New Zealand. During the past year there appears to have been some prospect of progress in that direction. We urge the Conference on Disarmament to get on with the task.
20.	If the international community is to chart a way out of the current impasse on nuclear weapons, this will be done through global measures in which the nuclear-weapon States will play the major role. But regional initiatives can also make a contribution. My Government regards the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco) as a significant regional advance. We are also fully committed to, and will vigorously defend, the Antarctic Treaty, which demilitarized a whole continent to the south of New Zealand and prohibited the basing or testing of nuclear weapons and which, for more than 20 years, has effectively guaranteed the stability of that region.
21.	Very recently, a new initiative has been taken in our part of the world. On the proposal of Australia and with the full support of my Government, the heads of Government of the 11 countries that make up the South Pacific Forum agreed on 28 August of this year, at a meeting in Tuvalu, on the desirability of establishing a South Pacific nuclear-free zone at the earliest opportunity. The heads of Government spelt out the principles that will be applied in the construction of such a zone. It was agreed that there should be no use, testing or stationing of nuclear devices in the South Pacific; that no South Pacific country would develop or manufacture or receive from others or acquire or test any nuclear explosive device; and that nuclear activities in the South Pacific would be conducted in accordance with applicable international principles and treaties, notably the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. The meeting acknowledged the need for a South Pacific nuclear-free zone to respect the principles of freedom of navigation and overflight. It was accepted that South Pacific countries would retain their unqualified sovereign right to decide for themselves, consistent with the objectives of the zone, on their security arrangements and on such questions as the access to their ports and airfields by vessels and aircraft of other countries. It was agreed that in the course of the next year a draft of a treaty to establish the zone should be prepared.
22.	This initiative represents, I believe, a major advance for the region. It would net, we know, spare us from the consequences of nuclear war but, when in place, it would significantly strengthen the existing measures, both global and regional, to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons. It would also, I believe, convey a clear signal that the South Pacific countries do not want their region to become an arena for rivalry involving nuclear weapons.
23.	New Zealand would hope to be in a position to report to the General Assembly next year and, before that, to the Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons that good progress has been made in creating a South Pacific nuclear-free zone. New Zealand and the other countries of our region naturally expect that, when the necessary work has been done within the region, all the nuclear-weapon States will co-operate with us to ensure that the zone becomes a reality.
24.	The recent meeting of the South Pacific Forum turned its attention also to the evolving situation in New Caledonia.
25.	The question is not really where that Territory is going. Rather, it is how it gets there, and at what pace. The French Government has, I believe, made a clear and irreversible commitment to self-determination for the peoples of New Caledonia. There is a particular mix of interests and problems that must be resolved carefully and by the people most directly concerned, that is to say, by all the ethnic groups that have a legitimate stake in the future of New Caledonia.
26.	All members of the Forum agreed that the changes that are to come in New Caledonia—and they must and will come—should be made speedily and peacefully, that is to say, without violence and without external interference. It is up to all parties concerned to exercise moderation. They must work together to achieve the kind of political future that satisfies the demands of a truly democratic and harmonious multi-ethnic society in New Caledonia.
27.	A significant amount of progress has been made. A lot remains to be done. That was recognized at the Forum. There we were agreed that the process of decolonization would be advanced by a public statement from France about its commitment to independence for New Caledonia. We gave it as our view that the referendum planned for 1989 should be brought forward; 1989 was, we felt, too distant a date. And we suggested some intensification of preparation for the country's eventual independence to ensure the full and active participation of the Kanak people in the country's educational, vocational and administrative life.
28.	We called too, at that Forum, on the Independence Front to play its part in the early and peaceful evolution of New Caledonia to independence by recognizing the need for independence to reflect fully the multiracial nature of New Caledonia.
29.	What we stressed above all was the crucial role of dialogue—that those involved should keep talking to each other. That was the message which the Tuvalu Forum sought to convey to France and to the Independence Front. I am hopeful that an initiative taken by the Forum to foster the process of dialogue will soon get under way and that a group of Ministers from Forum countries—including New Zealand— will be able to talk to the leaders of the Independence Front and to the French Government to tell each of them about the concern of the countries in our part of the world that New Caledonia should move through conference and dialogue, not through confrontation and dispute, to independence. We in the South Pacific have always found solutions to problems through dialogue, discussion, consensus; and it is through dialogue and consensus that we wish to see New Caledonia take its rightful place soon in the community of the nations of the South Pacific.
30.	Neither we nor our South Pacific partners want to see unwelcome external influences intrude upon events of New Caledonia, nor to see the transition to independence marred by an outcome that is not in accordance with the wishes of all those in New Caledonia who have made that country their permanent home. Our part of the world has been fortunate in that it has been free from the conflict and violence that have so often accompanied decolonization elsewhere. We do not want that record to be blemished. I am confident that it will not be.
31.	If it is important to all of us living in the South Pacific that our region remain free from conflict, we are equally concerned to ensure that our backyard, the Antarctic, does not become an area of international rivalry and discord. I have already noted that the Antarctic Treaty demilitarized Antarctica. What is even more important, the Treaty provides the only possible guarantee that the region will continue to be free from international rivalry and conflict. The study on the question of Antarctica, submitted by the Secretary-General should help countries more remote from the region to understand the contribution the Treaty has made and continues to make to the achievement of the purposes of the United Nations. I hope it will convince them that the Treaty system, which is open to all Members of the United Nations, must be preserved and strengthened.
32.	I referred a moment ago to a conviction that there has been an irrevocable commitment to self- determination for the people of New Caledonia. I wish I could say the same about the situation in southern Africa. Namibia continues to be unlawfully occupied by South Africa. The United Nations has had no choice but itself to accept a special responsibility for the Territory. It has guaranteed to its people that they will be able to exercise their right of self- determination. But that promise has been subverted by South Africa's determination to accept no settlement except on its own terms, and by the military power which reinforces the obstinacy and aggression that South Africa has also shown towards its other neighbours.
33.	I wish, too, that it could be said that the agreements South Africa has recently concluded with neighbouring States signified a new era in the region. Regrettably, they do not appear to be agreements made willingly in order to resolve difficulties and develop closer working partnerships, or agreements in which peace and justice were equally sought by both sides.
34.	Nor can it be said that the South African Government has offered justice to the people of South Africa in its new constitutional arrangements. There is not the slightest indication that it is ready to share political power with the black majority. Nor is there any sign that it is willing to dismantle the system. The essence of that system is unchanged. In recent and separate elections the Coloured and Indian communities have spurned the South African Government's attempt to draw them into an alliance and, by so doing, have confirmed their rejection of the apartheid system.
35.	New Zealand likewise rejects apartheid and all it stands for. We are committed in our country to building a multiracial society based on freedom, justice and consent. The South Africans have already learned that my Government will not compromise with a system that rejects those values.
36.	If my Government believes that there is today more reason than ever before to keep the basic issue of war and peace right at the top of the agenda of the United Nations, we also see an urgent need to move quickly and firmly to tackle the economic problems facing the world.
37.	The world economy is just beginning to emerge from the worst trial it has known for over 30 years. Investment and production have increased, inflation is down and world trade is increasing. But doubts persist. Unhappily, even now many countries have yet to benefit significantly from the recovery in some of the leading industrial economies. The international financial system has shown enough flexibility to survive the recent crisis. That is a relief. But it is hard to feel very optimistic about the future when many countries are still struggling to meet their financial obligations and in many others large numbers of people are actually facing starvation.
38.	The protracted debates in international forums during the past few years have not done much to alleviate the real problems confronting us. New Zealand would like to encourage the development of a gradual movement towards pragmatism and compromise. New Zealanders have never seen much prospect of resolving the world's economic problems through confrontation. Dialogue and consensus are the techniques that we are trying to use in our own country, and they seem to us to hold out the best chance of success on the international scene.
39.	The recent economic crisis has had at least one good result. During the past year or so, it has become widely recognized among industrialized as well as developing countries that, despite the role that international financial institutions have played in supporting the adjustment and development efforts of individual countries, the present international system is not working well. If proof is still required it can easily be found in the debt problem, on the one hand, and the problem of protectionism, on the other. More and more, international trade is escaping the multilateral rules that should safeguard the interests of all countries, including the smaller among them. The need for an overhaul is pressing. The task now is to find the right technique for the job—that is, a technique that will work. New Zealand has been active in the search for an acceptable and effective procedure for dealing with the problem. New Zealand supports a comprehensive review of the trade and payments system.
40.	Before I finish I want to reaffirm my faith and my country's in the United Nations. Nowadays there are many people who question the usefulness of the Organization for their own countries if not for the world at large. I am not one of them. I believe that the Charter of the United Nations is the foundation of the system of international relations under which we have all lived for nearly 40 years. I believe that the essential function of the United Nations under the Charter is to discourage the use of force by one State against another. I believe that the Organization has played a part in saving us all so far from the catastrophe of a third world war. I belong to a generation in my country which has never experienced at first hand the ravages of war in the sense of the amount of fear that war brings, and throughout my lifetime the United Nations has symbolized, as it has coexisted with a level of peace for which we yearn, the fact that multilateral arrangements can be of benefit to the human race. I believe that the United Nations has an important contribution to make towards bringing the nuclear arms race under control and freeing us from the fear of nuclear war. I believe that I and all New Zealanders and our children can rest more peacefully because of the work that is done within the United Nations, and I believe that that is true for all peoples on our Earth.
﻿Mr. Lusaka, I congratulate you on your election to the office of President of the thirty-ninth session of the General Assembly. Our congratulations also go to the representatives of Brunei Darussalam, a State which has become the 159th Member of the United Nations.
58.	For almost 40 years now, the words "the United Nations" have been firmly established in the world's political vocabulary. There is virtually no major international problem in connection with which those words would not be spoken in different languages, both in this Hall and outside it.
59.	The extensive involvement of the United Nations in world affairs and developments is determined by the very mission of this forum, which was brought into being in order to unite the political will and potential of States for the purpose of maintaining international peace and security.
60.	The conclusion reached by the founding Members of the United Nations was very simple indeed. It was born of the experience of the most bloody and destructive war that has ever befallen mankind. Indeed, it was precisely through united efforts that the aggressor was crushed. High was the cost of the great victory whose fortieth anniversary will be observed next year. All the peoples who fought against fascism contributed to that victory, but the Soviet Union's decisive role in it is indisputable.
61.	United efforts were and are still needed today in order to build the post-war world. For it is the main lesson of the Second World War that States must stand together in the fight against war.
62.	It is common knowledge, however, that as the war-ravaged earth was still smouldering and thousands of towns and villages were in ruins, the international atmosphere once again began to deteriorate and ultimately to become critical. This happened through the fault of those who, in their quest for world hegemony, began to behave contrary to their obligations as allies in the anti-Hitlerite coalition, oblivious to the lessons of the past.
63.	In disregard of the lofty purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, which they too had just signed, a group of States set out to escalate their military preparations by putting together a system of aggressive military blocs with the North Atlantic Alliance as its pivot. Those States pledged themselves to a policy based on a position of strength, a policy of brinkmanship. They are responsible for the advent of the cold war, which for a long time froze the normal flow of international life for which the peoples of the world yearned.
64.	As a result, in the post-war years the world has been in a state of fever. And whenever international relations were marked—as was the case during the period of detente—by budding cooperation between States with different social systems, no effort was spared to undermine those positive processes, which is exactly what happened at the whim of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization [NATO] military bloc. It is precisely this trend in world politics that is the source of the situation that characterizes the international climate today. The threat of war has grown and the foundations of world peace have become more shaky.
65.	This course, which is manifest as never before in the current policies of the United States and of those who choose to be its accomplices, is opposed by a broad front of peace-loving States and forces.
66.	The Soviet Union is in the vanguard of active champions of peace. It has been and remains faithful to its solemn pledge taken right after the criminal Fascist swastika was crushed and the Hitlerite war machine smashed. The essence of that pledge has not faded with the years; it is to fight resolutely to ensure that the flames of world war never flare up again. The fact that it has been possible for almost 40 years to ward it off is largely to the credit of the countries which pursue a policy of peace among nations and frustrate—by their international prestige and influence—aggressive and adventuristic designs wherever they originate. The Soviet Union is one of them.
67.	Together with other socialist countries, we shall continue to work in the interest of improving international relations. This is precisely the thrust of the documents of the meeting of the Political Consultative Committee of the States Parties to the Warsaw Treaty, held at Prague on 4 and 5 January 1983, and of the high-level Economic Conference of the member countries of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance, held in Moscow from 12 to 14 June 1984.
68.	The Soviet Union and the States of the socialist community are concentrating their efforts on attaining the key objective of preventing a nuclear disaster. For if the destructive potential currently amassed in the world were unleashed the human race would probably cease to exist. To prevent that from happening is a goal of overriding importance. AH States represented in the United Nations should contribute to its achievement. No one and nothing can relieve them of the responsibility they have assumed under the Charter of the United Nations for the destiny of present and succeeding generations.
69.	As was stressed recently by Mr. Chernenko, General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics: "The world has radically changed. Its problems cannot be solved by force ... it is imperative to adopt a policy of realism, reason and business-like cooperation in solving the problems that face mankind."
70.	Those who truly hold dear the interests of peace cannot confine themselves merely to stating that there exists a threat of nuclear war. It is necessary to pinpoint the source of that threat. Clarity in this regard is not merely a matter of historical fairness. An understanding of the factors that are pushing mankind towards a nuclear abyss also determines the answer to the question whether or not this calamitous process can be stopped, and how.
71.	It is of fundamental importance to compare the two political trends and the two approaches to the problem of nuclear weapons.
72.	Right after Hiroshima and Nagasaki the world witnessed the inception of a policy of ever greater stockpiles of nuclear weapons and nuclear blackmail. The Soviet Union forcefully called for the outlawing of these most deadly and destructive weapons. Indeed, as early as 1946 the Soviet Union submitted at the United Nations a draft international convention on the prohibition for all time of the production and use of nuclear weapons and on the destruction of their stockpiles. I am sure there are some present here in this Hall who witnessed the discussion of this item at that time.
73.	Yet our former allies in the struggle against fascism did not have the heart to vote for that proposal. Their reaction then was bound to make the peoples apprehensive and it did cause serious apprehension.
74.	And what is the situation today? Statements are being openly made at the highest official levels that the United States has the right to deliver a first nuclear strike, that is to say, to unleash a nuclear war.
75.	Our country sought a ban on nuclear weapons both when it did not possess them and after it developed them. Today, as before, the Soviet Union favours prompt measures to reduce and eventually eliminate nuclear weapons altogether. This is the aim of a comprehensive set of initiatives advanced by the Soviet Union.
76.	Whenever the United States side showed realism and the will to come to agreement on the basis of the principle of equality and equal security—something that did happen before—it proved possible to reach important accords. Thus, a major step forward was taken with the conclusion in 1972 by the Soviet Union and the United States of the Interim Agreement on Certain Measures with respect to the Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms and the Treaty on the Limitation of Antiballistic Missile Systems.
77.	However, in the years that followed, our attempts to reduce or at least to limit nuclear arms failed to produce concrete results. The tug of war between the groups that determine United States foreign policy has been won by the militaristically minded. They attempt to devalue the existing Soviet American accords by wrecking what was achieved earlier through long and painstaking work on both sides, as was done with the SALT II Treaty.
78.	They broke off and refuse to resume the trilateral talks between the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the United States on the complete and general prohibition of nuclear weapons tests. They stalled the ratification of the Soviet United States treaties on the limitation of underground nuclear weapons tests and on peaceful nuclear explosions that had been signed a long time ago. And what tremendous efforts were required to arrive at those treaties and agreements.
79.	Those and other similar actions are but a few examples of the policy of the United States, whose central objective is to try to secure military superiority for itself.
80.	Stories intended to mislead people are being churned out in profusion. Not that they are particularly reticent about saying that, should they eventually feel like negotiating, they would do so only from strength. To that end—they claim—the United States must first build up its military muscle.
81.	It took Washington a long time to send its team to the negotiating table at Geneva. However, at the talks the United States side followed a scenario that was not designed to lead to agreement. How else can one describe the fact that while negotiating the limitation of nuclear arms in Europe our partners did exactly the opposite? Beforehand—I repeat, beforehand—they set the date for deploying new United States medium range missiles on the territories of several Western European States. We were told to accept the United States position or else there would be no agreement. So there is no agreement.
82.	As to the Soviet proposals paving the way to agreements, they were rejected out of hand. Anything aimed at reaching agreement on the basis of equality was opposed with hostility.
83.	It was Washington's deliberate intention to wreck the negotiations on nuclear arms—both medium range and strategic. And it succeeded in this. Juggling with words ostensibly in favour of negotiations is a false propaganda ploy. Its purpose is obvious.
84.	Now they rejoice that they were able to keep the timetable and begin the deployment of their missiles in Europe, as planned. Even here in the course of the General Assembly one can meet representatives of Western European States who are rubbing their hands with pleasure over the fact that the plan for deployment is being implemented.
85.	It makes no difference whether deception is crude or cleverly packaged. A good idea is being exploited for unsavoury purposes.
86.	We have noticed that there are realistically minded politicians and statesmen in the West, including the United States, who realize that it is precisely in this way that the issue of negotiations is being used.
87.	No, the path of stockpiling of nuclear weapons is not the right path to follow. The movement must be in the opposite direction, leading to the removal of these weapons and to their subsequent elimination both in Europe and throughout the world. This is the course of our policy.
88.	The Soviet Union is in favour of serious talks. Not only are we prepared for such talks, but we are insisting on them. Our proposals on the limitation and reduction of strategic arms and on the limitation of nuclear arms in Europe remain valid. They neither offer advantages nor do any harm to either side. The United States must remove the obstacles it has put in the way of the talks. Unless these obstacles are removed, of course, these talks will not take place, and this is what the United States has in mind.
89.	It is often asked: since it is difficult for the time being to arrive at a radical solution to the problem of nuclear arms, would it not be possible to take steps that would create a favourable atmosphere for that, raise the level of trust among States and ease international tension?
90.	We are convinced that such steps are both possible and necessary. An effective measure of this kind would be the implementation of our proposal, endorsed by the United Nations, for a quantitative and qualitative freeze of nuclear weapon arsenals by all States which possess them. Thin could be done in the first place by the Soviet Union and the United States on a bilateral basis to set an example for other nuclear Powers to follow. Could we not do this? We propose to Washington: let us set such an example.
91.	For the time being it is necessary at least to suspend the nuclear arms race. The world has crossed the line beyond which any further build-up and improvement of these arms is not only dangerous but senseless.
92.	In the present circumstances it is futile and hopeless for anyone to expect to get ahead and gain military superiority. It is absolutely illusory to hope to win a nuclear war: whether global or limited, blitzkrieg or protracted—whatever the nuclear war doctrines.
93.	Such is the authoritative and unanimous conclusion of scientists and competent military and civilian experts of world renown, with the exception of those, of course, who have lost their honour and conscience or those who were not at all endowed by nature with either.
94.	What kind of people can fail to see that peace today is fragile? In spite of the obvious, they once again proclaim a policy of "peace through strength". Moreover, they are trying to elevate this policy to the level of statesmanship. All we hear is that strength, strength and, above all, strength is the guarantee of international peace. In other words—weapons, weapons and still more weapons. But does not the experience of the past—both recent and remote— show otherwise?
95.	In the face of the currently aggravated dangerous military and political confrontation it is extremely important not to miss the chance. Agreement should be reached on freezing nuclear weapons and prospects opened up for a subsequent reduction of arsenals of these weapons. 
96.	Sentiments in favour of such a solution have become widespread in the world. As is well known, the broadest sections of the population in the United States and other Western countries spontaneously come out in favour of this solution, and we fully understand their aspirations.
97.	Only ill will can guide those who spawn all kinds of insinuations that the Soviet Union all but manipulates or is behind this movement. Let them ask what it is that the people who take to the streets in mass marches of protest are fighting for. Let them ask those people themselves. Let them ask those people, not us. They will give only one answer: they are fighting for life. What kind of people can assume that the Americans or the British, the French or the Italians, the Germans or the Dutch wish to perish in the flames of nuclear war? We think that those who hope to crush the antinuclear movement by punitive measures realize it full well.
98.	In this light, what is the value of the human rights rhetoric in which they just love to indulge in their speeches, statements before various commissions and committees, in articles and voluminous reports to parliaments. In fact, the proponents of the arms race do not care a bit about these rights, including the paramount human right—the right to life.
99.	There can be no justification for any action that pushes the world to nuclear war. It is only natural that last year the General Assembly adopted—at the Soviet initiative—by an overwhelming majority of its Members resolution 38/75 condemning nuclear war as the most hideous crime that could be committed against peoples.
100.	A nuclear age requires that political thinking be consonant with its realities. Where categories such as "strength", "deterrence" and "superiority" still prevail in this thinking, they must be replaced by concepts of the non-use of force and of trust, equality and mutual regard for security interests.
101.	It would be of fundamental importance if nuclear Powers observed, in relations between themselves, certain norms that were formulated by Mr. Chernenko in his statement last March. It is proposed that these Powers: regard the prevention of nuclear war as the primary objective of their foreign policy, preclude situations fraught with the risk of nuclear conflict and, should such a risk arise, hold urgent consultations in order to prevent a nuclear conflagration; renounce the propaganda of any nuclear war scenario, whether global or limited; assume an obligation to forgo the first use of nuclear weapons; under no circumstances use nuclear weapons against nonnuclear countries which have no such weapons on their territory, respect the status of the existing nuclear free zone and encourage the establishment of new such zones in various parts of the world; prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons in any form; not transfer to any recipient whatsoever such weapons or control over them, not deploy them on the territory of countries where there are no such weapons and not extend the nuclear arms race to new environments, including outer space; seek, step by step, on the basis of the principle of equal security, the reduction of nuclear armaments up to and including the complete elimination of all types of such weapons.
102.	The Soviet Union is in favour of reaching agreement at any time with other nuclear Powers on the mutual recognition of such norms and making them binding. This would serve to reduce the risk of the outbreak of a nuclear conflict.
103.	In view of its special urgency, it is necessary to single out the question of preventing the race in nuclear and other weapons in outer space, which some want to turn into a staging area for war. We all know who is seeking this.
104.	The extension of the arms race to outer space, unless checked in time, could become an irreversible process. Effective measures are needed to keep outer space peaceful.
105.	No one country should believe that this is for others, not for it, to decide. Such an attitude would be a big mistake.
106.	A major step has been our initiative in calling for Soviet United States talks on preventing the militarization of outer space. We believe that the Soviet Union and the United States, as the leading Powers in the field of outer space exploration, should do all they can to keep outer space peaceful and in particular, with a view to accomplishing this task, to lay the foundations for multilateral agreement. This idea seems to be alive among many States. Full responsibility for the failure to hold the talks rests with the United States side. Washington is unwilling to engage in the talks.
107.	Ask any man in the street in any town in the United States, in the Soviet Union or in any other country whether he believes that nuclear weapons should be stationed in space, beyond the Earth's atmosphere, at an altitude of hundreds of kilometres, and that outer space should become a springboard for war preparations, or whether he feels that this should not be allowed to happen. There is no doubt that the answer will be unequivocal: this cannot be allowed.
108.	We urge the United States Government to recognize that the militarization of outer space threatens the whole of mankind, including the American people themselves. We express the hope that the United States will refrain from actions which would make irreversible the process of turn outer space into an arena of military rivalry and it will be willing to engage in talks with a view reaching an agreement. For its part, the Soviet Union continues to be in favour of starting such talks as soon as possible.
109.	The General Assembly would be doing a good thing if it forcefully voiced its concerted opinion that the militarization of outer space should not be allowed to take place and that outer space must be used solely for the good of peoples and not for sowing death and destruction on Earth. We hope that every member of every delegation in this Hall will give serious thought to this.
110.	In seeking to promote this goal in every possible way, the Soviet Union proposes the inclusion in the agenda of the current session of the Assembly of an important and urgent item entitled "Use of outer space exclusively for peaceful purposes for the benefit of mankind". What we are talking about is, in the first place, the banning, without delay and for all time, of the use of force in and from outer space against the Earth, as well as from the Earth against objects in outer space. In other words, agreement must be reached on the prohibition and elimination of space attack weapons of all systems, whatever their mode of basing, designed to destroy objects in space. This applies above all to States with major space capabilities. 
111. The United Nations should speak out emphatically and with all its authority in favour of achieving reliably verifiable agreements on a bilateral and a multilateral basis. The way must be opened for concerted and constructive efforts by States which could eventually lead to the creation of a world organization for the use of outer space exclusively for peaceful purposes.
112.	Among those present here there are bound to be people who in 1982 witnessed the Soviet Union solemnly assume in this Hall a unilateral obligation not to be the first to use nuclear weapons. That decision—which was not an easy one to take—is of exceptional importance.
113.	Our country continues to urge the other nuclear Powers, which have not yet done so, to assume a similar obligation. This would also be a tangible historic contribution to international confidence building. Much is said about trust and confidence, but by no means is everything done to bring it about.
114.	Surely the implementation of the proposal of the socialist countries to conclude a treaty on the mutual non-use of military force in relations between the States of the Warsaw Treaty and the North Atlantic Alliance would help to dissipate mutual apprehensions. It would be a welcome decision if an obligation not to be the first to use either nuclear or conventional weapons against one another—in other words, not to use force—were undertaken by States whether or not they belong to military alliances or have a neutral or nonaligned status.
115.	We have also submitted these and some other major proposals at the Conference on Confidence and Security building Measures and Disarmament in Europe, meeting at Stockholm. They have been submitted in combination with certain confidence building measures in the military field.
116.	Representatives of NATO countries, on the other hand, take what is actually an obstructionist position with regard to these proposals. What is proposed under the guise of military and technical measures is a programme, which they have drawn up, of poorly disguised espionage. The measures they are trying to sell do not, of course, affect a single inch of the territory of the United States—that is, the country in which the foundations of the military machine of the NATO bloc are to be found. It is on Soviet territory that they are proposing to carry out these measures.
117.	The same can be said about the prospects of the Vienna Talks on Mutual Reduction of Forces and Armaments and Associated Measures in Central Europe. The fruitless "data" discussion started by the Western participants has long been stalling those talks.
118.	The NATO countries are evading the business-like discussion of cardinal questions, above all those dealing with arms reduction, although without such discussions there can be no real strengthening of security and stability on the European continent. At the Vienna talks too, there should be no place for any of the kind of political manoeuvring in which our negotiating partners like so much to indulge.
119.	Some two years ago at Geneva the Soviet Union introduced at the Conference on Disarmament draft basic provisions for a convention on the prohibition of chemical weapons. That draft constitutes a well-balanced basis for agreement. Some of its provisions were subsequently revised and amended to accommodate the positions of the other participants in the talks.
120.	Not everyone wants to see a successful completion of those talks. Some would rather see them fail. It would seem that the ostensible interest of certain States serves to conceal their plans for a build-up of chemical weapons. Such tactics should be strongly condemned. We may presume that certain War Departments are doing this. But where are the statesmen? Where are true sobriety and farsightedness, a wide-angle look at peace and the fate of the world?
121.	The drafting of an international convention on the prohibition and elimination of chemical weapons should be speeded up, and the United Nations could contribute to this in no small measure. With time this problem will become eve:, more intractable.
122.	Our country expresses its readiness to take part in multilateral negotiations on the limitation of naval activities and naval armaments and on the extension of confidence-building measures to seas and oceans, especially to regions with the busiest sea lanes or with the highest likelihood of conflict situations. We have already put forward a proposal— and this is worth recalling—for an agreement on appropriate measures, including those applicable to particular regions, such as the Indian, Atlantic or Pacific Oceans, the Mediterranean Sea or the Persian Gulf.
123.	The convening of an international conference on the Indian Ocean is being inadmissibly delayed. The United States and some of its allies disregard the will of the littoral States that wish to see a peaceful Indian Ocean and clear skies above it. As before, the Soviet Union continues actively to advocate the turning of this ocean into a zone of peace, something that would be a major step towards preventing the militarization of the world's oceans.
124.	The arms race is seriously damaging to people even when the guns are silent, for it is increasingly consuming intellectual and material wealth and impedes the solution of global problems such as the elimination of hunger and disease, the search for new sources of energy, and the preservation of the environment.
125.	These tasks will not be accomplished either by declaratory statements or by attempts to make assistance to other countries contingent on their acceptance of a particular model of socioeconomic development. Something else is required, namely, the renunciation of all forms of exploitation and of the use of trade and economic ties as tools of political pressure, and a restructuring of international economic relations on a just and democratic basis.
126.	By pressing for the implementation of tangible measures for curbing the arms race and achieving disarmament in close connection with the solution of world economic and social development problems, we consider that reduction of military budgets in either percentage or absolute terms is a promising way to achieve such a goal. And yes, I am talking about military budgets.
127.	Together with the other States signatories of the Warsaw Treaty, the Soviet Union has submitted a proposal to the countries of the North Atlantic bloc to begin talks on the question of the mutual non increase of military expenditures and their subsequent reduction. In our view, there should be no obstacles to the participation of States that do not belong to these military and political groupings in implementing the proposed measures.
128.	However, so far there has been no response from the NATO countries, and that is no accident. If a picture were taken today using the most sophisticated modem technology to show on a planetary scale the magnitude of the worldwide military preparations by the United States and its allies, it would reveal a view that would stun any thinking person: a palisade of missiles; strategic bombers; naval armadas plying the waters of the seas and oceans; hundreds of military bases scattered all over the globe; and colossal stockpiles of weapons of every type.
129.	Some may say that the Soviet Union too has weapons on land, in the air and on and under water. Our answer is: Yes, we do have them, but not by our choice. The objective facts of post-war history irrefutably show that it was not the Soviet Union, not socialism, but rather the other side that initiated the arms race and each of its new spirals. That is where the truth lies.
130.	Forced to take countermeasures, our country did so only in response to, and to the extent commensurate with, the protection of its own security and that of its friends and allies. We have never sought, nor are we seeking, superiority. We stand for maintaining military equilibrium, and at the lowest possible level at that.
131.	We have put forward no less than 100 constructive initiatives from the rostrum of the United Nations alone. The whole world knows that it was the Soviet Union that came forward with the most radical proposal—general and complete disarmament combined with general and complete control. No one else has proposed this.
132.	Numerous proposals have been made by the Soviet Union to curb the arms race in some of its areas. We have proposed—and our proposal still stands—that agreement be reached on the complete prohibition of nuclear weapon tests and on the prohibition of the development and manufacture of new types of weapons of mass destruction and of new systems of such weapons.
133.	The Soviet Union has also been making sustained efforts to reduce conventional armaments and armed forces by proposing that this problem be solved on both a global and a regional basis.
134.	The world community welcomed the Soviet initiatives that brought forth major international treaties and agreements—the Treaty on the Non Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under Water, the Treaty on the Prohibition of the Emplacement of Nuclear Weapons and Other Weapons of Mass Destruction on the Seabed and the Ocean Floor and in the Subsoil Thereof, the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction, and so on. They continue to serve their purpose to this day and serve it well.
135.	We have voluntarily and unilaterally assumed a number of obligations ranging from no-first-use of nuclear weapons to practical steps limiting our armed forces and armaments in Central Europe.
136.	While making its own constructive contributions, the Soviet Union reacts favourably to proposals made by other countries. We support the idea of establishing nuclear free zones and zones of peace in various parts of the globe. We have responded positively to the recent initiative by Argentina, Greece, India, Mexico, Sweden and the United Republic of Tanzania, contained in their Joint Declaration, which urged all nuclear Powers to stop the build-up of nuclear weapons and begin to reduce their stockpiles.
137.	The proposals that we have made constitute an impressive list of initiatives aimed at easing international tensions and developing peaceful cooperation among States.
138.	Yet no matter what proposals or arguments we advance, our counterparts say "no"—they are not acceptable.
139.	They swear that they favour a halt in the arms race, but only through modernization of arms and through improvement and stockpiling of weapons. Is it not absurd? It is absurd, indeed, and it underlies the entire policy. They would have people believe that they favour a reduction in world tensions, but only by establishing more and more military bases, by intensifying military preparations, by militarizing outer space and by deploying new kinds of United States nuclear weapons in Europe.
140.	What is needed to prevent hunger and disease from claiming the lives of countless millions of people? According to the logic of NATO countries, this can be achieved by throwing as much money and resources as possible down the insatiable maw of the war industry.
141.	It would appear that there is no other path towards ensuring peace than war preparations. This is twisted logic, a logic of frenzied militarism.
142.	All States must have a clear understanding of why none of the important and acute international problems is being solved at present. This applies first and foremost to nuclear weapons and the arms race.
143.	They are not being solved because the NATO States do not want it. The instigator of this policy is, of course, Washington. It has firmly linked its foreign policy plans with the further stockpiling of nuclear weapons as well as other types of weapons of mass destruction. It has put up an insurmountable wall on the path to agreement.
144.	Even elementary decency is lacking in cases where representatives of the two Powers—the Soviet Union and the United States—meet to discuss one thing or another. Everything the United States side says is intended to secure unilateral advantages for the United States. Therefore, from the very outset things are doomed to failure. If there are political genes, then failure is genetically inevitable.
145.	If you read closely the documents setting out the policy of the United States Administration for the future—and there are quite a lot of them—you will see that these documents, which are imbued with the spirit of imperial ambitions and enmity towards the Soviet Union and other peace-loving States, glorify the course aimed at United States domination m the world and extol arms and strength. Thus, they set the stage for deadlocks i.e. solution of all the acute problems of today.
146.	We are convinced that each State, irrespective of its social system, whether big or small, will realize that this is a course that leads to a further aggravation of tensions in the world, to an increased risk of a nuclear catastrophe. 
147.	The Soviet delegation is authorized to state before this high forum that the Soviet Union will follow the same policy course it has pursued up to now, namely, the course aimed at peace, disarmament, limitation and subsequent elimination of nuclear armaments, and the solution of other acute problems of today.
148.	One should face the truth squarely. It is precisely the current United States policy that has made the gap between these two courses in world politics wider and deeper than ever before and has virtually blocked the paths leading to agreement.
149.	Today, many people are wondering anxiously if everything has been lost and the only thing left is to acknowledge that international relations have plunged into total darkness.
150.	We do not accept such a view of the situation in the world. A feeling of doom is alien to our world outlook. An insurmountable barrier must be erected against war. An end must be put to the stockpiling of weapons in the world.
151.	It is understandable that prevention of war is a difficult task. The flywheel of military production is revolving continuously, and influential forces— which place the interests of dominating the world above everything else—will not stop it.
152.	Examples are readily available; they are at hand—all you have to do is reach for them. In defiance of the elementary norms of international law and morality, an act of banditry was committed against tiny Grenada, which dared to assert its sovereignty. It was occupied and robbed of its independence.
153.	We are witnessing gross interference in the internal affairs of El Salvador. No effort is being spared to prop up the regime of the stooges who are committing brutal crimes against the Salvadorian people.
154.	A real siege—military, political and economic—has been mounted against Nicaragua, whose people, defending their national freedom, independence and democratic achievements, are heroically resisting in the (ace of the undeclared war organized against it by Washington. But the Nicaraguan people want just one thing: they want their independence and they want to resolve their internal affairs as they themselves see fit.
155.	The United States still cannot reconcile itself to the existence of socialist Cuba. Threats are being made against Cuba to force that country off the course to which it has been committed in both words and deeds.
156.	The situation in Central America—where a dangerous pocket of tension has been created— should be settled by peaceful means on the basis of an unconditional cessation of United States interference in the internal affairs of the countries of the region. Possibilities for such a settlement have been opened up thanks to the constructive approach of Nicaragua and Cuba and to the initiative of the States of the Contadora Group. The Soviet Union supports the efforts to reach a political settlement of the problem.
157.	Turning now to the Middle East, here again we can see what the imperialist policies mean for peoples and countries. Still fresh in our memories are the barbaric acts in Lebanon undertaken in an attempt to force upon it a capitulation agreement with Israel, and these acts are still going on today.
158.	Yet the facts show that the United States, which relies upon "strategic cooperation" with Israel, has no intention of establishing lasting peace in that region.
159.	The Soviet Union has recently put forward a proposal on the principles of a Middle East settlement. That proposal is well known and has evoked a broad response. We call upon all parties to the conflict to act with sober minded regard for each other's legitimate rights and interests, and upon all other States to facilitate the search for a just settlement in the Middle East.
160.	Provocative intrigues continue against sovereign and nonaligned Afghanistan. The foes of the Afghan people will stop at nothing and will not abandon their hope of plunging it back into medieval darkness. To this end, military incursions from outside are being organized. Is it possible to solve the foreign policy aspect of this problem? Yes, it is. The way to do that is to stop forming, arming and infiltrating into the country from outside gangs of anti-government bandits and saboteurs and not to interfere in the internal affairs of Afghanistan. There can be no doubt that Afghanistan has followed, and will continue to follow, the path it has chosen—the path of independence, freedom, social progress, peace and nonalignment.
161.	In Southeast Asia the situation is being exacerbated by the policy pursued by outside forces. Acts of provocation against Viet Nam, Laos and Kampuchea are going on unabated. Attempts are being made to pit their neighbours, the members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations against those countries. We regard the initiative of the three countries of IndoChina on turning Southeast Asia into a zone of peace, good neighbourliness and cooperation, as also their efforts to start a political dialogue among the States of the region, as constructive.
162.	The Soviet leadership has repeatedly stated its positions on the question of its relations with the People's Republic of China. Those positions are well known. The Soviet Union favours normal, good neighbourly relations between these two great States.
163.	Obstacles are being put in the way of the normalization of the situation in the Korean peninsula, thus increasing tension in the Far East. The Soviet Union has consistently affirmed its solidarity with the Korean people in their struggle for the withdrawal of foreign troops from South Korea and for the peaceful reunification of their homeland, without any outside interference. The proposals of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea provide a positive basis for a settlement of the Korean question
164.	The racist regime of Pretoria has all but been formally named a "historical ally" of the United States. In defiance of the decisions of the United Nations, that regime is trying to keep Namibia under the colonial yoke for as long as possible and is threatening—m particular by overt interventionist actions—the independence of Angola and other neighbouring African States That regime could not engage in such lawlessness were it not for the complicity of some major Powers.
165.	There can be no doubt, however, that the Namibian people will win their freedom and independence. In the present day world, the colonial policy of South Africa and its patrons is a historically doomed anomaly.
166.	The economically weak countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America are being virtually plundered by industrialized capitalist States. The Soviet Union, like other socialist countries, will continue to render assistance, to the extent of its capabilities, to the newly independent States in their efforts to develop their national economies. International economic relations should be restructured in such a way that all countries of the world can make economic and social progress.
167.	Of late, the world has been increasingly confronted with dangerous symptoms in the policy of the United States, such as claims to impunity and licence to do anything it wishes. It does not scruple to declare any criminal ways and means legitimate if these can serve the desired ends. In world affairs, it intends to follow the logic of the idea that one does whatever one's left foot desires. And so it tramples on other peoples' lands with soldiers' iron heeled boots—left, right, left, right.
168.	We are convinced that the time is ripe to take the most serious notice of the fact that certain States, living set out to achieve military superiority and to pursue the policy of terrorism in international affairs, have resorted to actions designed to undermine the socio-political systems of other States.
169.	There is a very long list of documents, decisions, resolutions and various provisions to which States have affixed their seals and which specifically provide that it is inadmissible for countries to interfere in the internal affairs of others. Even the United Nations as a whole has no right to intervene in such matters. It is only necessary to look at Article 2 of the Charter of the United Nations, which states precisely that. When that Article was discussed and adopted in the course of the discussion and adoption of the Charter, everyone solemnly and unanimously supported the idea that not even the United Nations should have the right to intervene in the internal affairs of States.
170.	Yet, flagrant violations of this international law are being committed today before the eyes of the world, while those responsible say that they are acting in such a way simply because they do not HI the social system of some State or other. This destroys the very possibility of ensuring peaceful relations and mutual trust among States and increases the threat of war. Such policies and actions flout the international rules of conduct. They cannot be tolerated and must be terminated. The United Nations, in our view, should speak out emphatically in support of the rule of law in international relations.
171.	In the light of what I have said, the Soviet Union is submitting to the General Assembly for its consideration an important and urgent item entitled "Inadmissibility of the policy of State terrorism and any actions by States aimed at undermining the socio-political system of other sovereign States".
172.	We propose that the United Nations resolutely condemn the policy and practice of State terrorism as a method of dealing with other countries and peoples. It is necessary to renounce any action aimed at changing or undermining by force the social systems of sovereign States, destabilizing and overthrowing their legitimate Governments, or initiating military action to that end on any pretext whatsoever, und to halt any such action already in progress.
173.	All States are duty bound to respect the inalienable right of the peoples of the world to decide for themselves their own destinies and to pursue independently their own political or any other kind of development.
174.	Our proposal stems from the Soviet Union's approach of principle. The adoption of this proposal would contribute greatly to preventing and eliminating international conflicts and to consolidating moral and political barriers against aggression and war.
175.	There is much truth in the statement that the international situation is directly dependent on the state of Soviet United States relations. Today, as always, our country believes in the maintenance of normal relations with the United States—and there has been much talk about this. Until the recent past, that is precisely how these relations were developing, although not without certain vicissitudes, whereas in the years of the Second World War they were relations of allies.
176.	In recent years these relations have been disrupted through the efforts of Washington. They have spared no effort to destroy all the gains accomplished together and to undermine the trust that had been built up earlier. What is more, they all but flaunt their indifference to the reputation of the United States side as a partner in international affairs. Yet, that is not something to flaunt.
177.	History does not begin on the day when a particular United States Administration comes into office. The periods when the two Powers combined their efforts to defeat fascism will stand out as the best pages in the history of Soviet United States relations; and those who determine United States policy today have a great deal to do if they wish their words and the obligations they assume to be trusted. No attempts to substitute modifications in form for the substance of a policy and for the need to move away from militarism towards a policy of peace can be meaningful. That is nothing but an empty vessel. What is required is the determination to make such a move if one is truly guided by good intentions in United States Soviet relations and is really working towards peace. That alone can carry some weight on the political scales.
178.	The Soviet Union believes that it is precisely concrete deeds, not verbal assurances that can lead to normalizing the situation in our relations with the United States. The Soviet Union will not be found wanting. Every American, every American family, should know that the Soviet Union wants peace— and only peace—with the United States.
179.	We have developed normal and, in a number of cases, good and fruitful relations with the countries of Western Europe, but we cannot disregard the fact that some of them have permitted the deployment on their territories of new United States nuclear missiles intended for use as first strike weapons.
180.	Nor can one overlook the fact that in some quarters hopes have not yet been abandoned of revising the post-war realities in Europe. Recently such revanchist sentiments have been fuelled by statements which seek to question the commitments assumed by the members of the anti-Hitler coalition. We would caution against yielding to that dangerous frenzy and we appeal for sober mindedness. No one has the right to disrupt what has not merely become a pillar of international law but was born of the innumerable sacrifices of the last world war.
181.	We regard the countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America, which make up the majority of the Movement of Nonaligned Countries—an influential force in the world today—as our fellow fighters in the struggle between those who work for peace and those who work against it. It is the intention of the Soviet Union to continue to do everything in its power to deepen and develop friendly ties with those countries.
182.	It is our firm conviction that it is possible to correct the current alarming tilt in international developments, to halt the arms race and to set it on a downward spiral, to reduce and then totally eliminate the threat of war. This requires the combined efforts of States, nuclear and nonnuclear, big and small, regardless of their social systems.
183.	As Mr. Chernenko has stressed, "the Soviet Union will cooperate fully with all States which are prewired, by practical deeds, to help to ease international tensions and to create an atmosphere of trust in the world—in other words, with all those who genuinely seek to consolidate the foundations of peace and not to prepare for war."
184.	The future of mankind is the common responsibility of all countries and all peoples, and the peoples of the world are entitled to expect that the United Nations and all its activities will be imbued with a sense of that responsibility.
﻿First of all, I wish to congratulate you, Mr. Lusaka, on your election as President of the General Assembly. I wish you every success in carrying out the responsibilities of that high international office.
3.	It is an honour to be here, and I thank you all for your gracious invitation. I would speak in support of the two great goals that led to the formation of the United Nations—the cause of peace and the cause of human dignity.
4.	The responsibility of the General Assembly—the peaceful resolution of disputes between peoples and nations—can be discharged successfully only if we recognize the great common ground upon which we all stand: our fellowship as members of the human race, our oneness as inhabitants of this planet, our place as representatives of billions of our countrymen whose fondest hope remains the end to war and to the repression of the human spirit. These are the important, central realities that bind us, that per-
us to dream of a future without the antagonisms of the past. And, just as shadows can be seen only where there is light, so, too, can we overcome what is wrong only if we remember how much is right; and we will resolve what divides us only if we remember how much more unites us. This chamber has heard enough about the problems and dangers ahead; today let us dare to speak of a future that is bright and hopeful and can be ours only if we seek it. I believe that future is far nearer than most of us would dare to hope.
5.	At the start of this decade one scholar at the Hudson Institute noted that mankind also had undergone enormous changes for the better in the past two centuries, changes which are not always readily noticed or written about.
6.	"Up until 200 years ago, there were relatively few people in the world," he wrote. "All human societies were poor. Disease and early death dominated most people's lives. People were ignorant, and largely at the mercy of forces of nature."
7.	"Now," he said, "we are somewhere near the middle of a process of economic development ... At the end of that process, almost no one will live in a country as poor as the richest country of the past. There will be many more people .. . living long, healthy lives, with immense knowledge and more to learn than anybody has time for." They will be "able to cope with the forces of nature, and almost indifferent to distance."
8.	We do live today, as that scholar suggested, in the middle of one of the most important and dramatic periods in human history—one in which all of us can serve as catalysts for an era of world peace and unimagined human freedom and dignity.
9.	Today I would like to report to you, as distinguished and influential members of the world community, on what the United States has been attempting to do to help move the world closer to this new era. On many fronts enormous progress has been made, and I think our efforts are complemented by the trend of history.
10.	If we look closely enough, I believe we can see all the world moving towards a deeper appreciation of the value of human freedom in both its political and its economic manifestations. This is partially motivated by a world-wide desire for economic growth and higher standards of living. And there is an increasing realization that economic freedom is a prelude to economic progress and growth and is intricately and inseparably linked to political freedom.
11.	Everywhere, people and Governments are beginning to recognize that the secret of a progressive new world is to take advantage of the creativity of the human spirit; to encourage innovation and individual enterprise; to reward hard work; and to reduce barriers to the free flow of trade and information.
12.	Our opposition to economic restrictions and trade barriers is consistent with our view of economic freedom and human progress. We believe such barriers pose a particularly dangerous threat to the developing nations and their chance to share in world prosperity through expanded export markets. Tomorrow, at the International Monetary Fund, I will address this question more fully, including America's desire for more open trading markets throughout the world.
13.	This desire to cut down trade barriers and our open advocacy of freedom as the engine of human progress are two of the important ways the United States and the American people hope to assist in bringing about a world where prosperity is commonplace, conflict an aberration, and human dignity and freedom a way of life.
14.	Let me place these steps more in context by briefly outlining the major goals of American foreign
A/39/PV.4 

policy and then exploring with you the practical ways we are attempting to further freedom and prevent war. By that I mean, first, how we have moved to strengthen ties with old allies and new friends; secondly, what we are doing to help avoid the regional conflicts that could contain the seeds of world conflagration; and thirdly, the status of our efforts with the Soviet Union to reduce the levels of arms.
15.	Let me begin with a word about the objectives of American foreign policy, which have been consistent since the post-war era and which fuelled the formation of the United Nations and were incorporated into the Charter of the United Nations itself.
16.	The Charter states two overriding goals: "to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime has brought untold sorrow to mankind" and "to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men and women and of nations large and small".
17.	The founders of the United Nations understood full well the relationship between these two goals. And I want you to know that the Government of the United States will continue to view this concern for human rights as the moral centre of our foreign policy. We can never look at anyone's freedom as a bargaining chip in world politics. Our hope is for a time when all the people of the world can enjoy the blessings of personal liberty.
18.	But I would like also to emphasize that our concern for protecting human rights is part of our concern for protecting the peace.
19.	The answer is for all nations to fulfil the obligations they freely assumed under the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The Declaration states that: "The will of the people shall be the basis of the authority of government; this will shall be expressed in periodic and genuine elections". The Declaration also includes the right of everyone: "to form and to join trade unions," "to own property alone as well as in association with others," "to leave any country, including his own, and to return to his country," and to enjoy "freedom of opinion and expression". Perhaps the most graphic example of the relationship between human rights and peace is the right of peace groups to exist and to promote their views. In fact, the treatment of peace groups may be a litmus test of a Government's true desire for peace.
20.	In addition to emphasizing this tie between the advocacy of human rights and the prevention of war, the United States has taken important steps, as I mentioned earlier, to prevent world conflict. The starting-point and comer-stone of our foreign policy is our alliance and partnership with our fellow democracies. For 35 years, the North Atlantic alliance has guaranteed the peace in Europe. In both Europe and Asia, our alliances have been the vehicle for a great reconciliation among nations that had fought bitter wars in decades and centuries past. And here in the western hemisphere, North and South are being lifted on the tide of freedom and are joined in a common effort to foster peaceful economic development.
21.	We are proud of our association with all those countries that share our commitment to freedom, human rights, the rule of law—and international peace. Indeed, the bulwark of security that the democratic alliance provides is essential, and remains essential, to the maintenance of world peace. Every alliance involves burdens and obligations, but these are far less than the risks and sacrifices that would result if the peace-loving nations were divided and neglectful of their common security. The people of the United States will remain faithful to their commitments.
22.	But the United States is also faithful to its alliances and friendships with scores of nations in the developed and developing worlds with differing political systems, cultures and traditions. The development of ties between the United States and China—a significant global event of the last dozen years—shows our willingness to improve relations with countries ideologically very different from ours.
23.	We are ready to be the friend of any country that is a friend to us and a friend of peace. And we respect genuine non-alignment. Our own nation was born in revolution; we helped promote the process of decolonization that brought about the independence of so many members of this body, and we are proud of that history.
24.	We are proud, too, of our role in the formation of the United Nations and our support of the Organization over the years. And let me again emphasize our unwavering commitment to a central principle of the United Nations system, the principle of universality, both here and in the United Nations technical agencies around the world. If universality is ignored, if nations are expelled illegally, then the United Nations itself cannot be expected to succeed.
25.	The United States welcomes diversity and peaceful competition; we do not fear the trends of history. We are not ideologically rigid; we do have principles and we will stand by them, but we will also seek the friendship and goodwill of all, both old friends and new.
26.	We have always sought to lend a hand to help others—from our relief efforts in Europe after the First World War to the Marshall Plan and massive foreign assistance programmes after the Second World War. Since 1946, the United States has provided over $115 billion in economic aid to developing countries, and today it provides about one third of the nearly $90 billion in financial resources, public and private, that flows to the developing world. And the United States imports about one third of the manufactured exports of the developing world.
27.	But any economic progress, as well as any movement in the direction of greater understanding between the nations of the world, is, of course, endangered by the prospect of conflict at both the global and the regional levels. In a few minutes I will turn to the menace of conflict on a world-wide scale and discuss the status of negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union. But permit me first to address the critical problem of regional conflicts, for history displays tragic evidence that it is these conflicts which can set off the sparks leading to world-wide conflagration.
28.	In a glass display case across the hall from the Oval Office at the White House there is a gold medal—the Nobel Peace Prize won by Theodore Roosevelt for his contribution in mediating the Russo-Japanese War in 1905. It was the first such prize won by an American, and it is part of a tradition of which the American people are very 
proud, a tradition that is being continued today in many regions of the globe.
29.	We are engaged, for example, in diplomacy to resolve conflicts in southern Africa, working with the front-line States and our partners in the Contact Group. Mozambique and South Africa have reached a historic accord on non-aggression and co-operation; South Africa and Angola have agreed on a disengagement of forces from Angola, and the groundwork has been laid for the independence of Namibia, with virtually all aspects of Security Council resolution 435 (1978) agreed upon. Let me add that the United States considers it a moral imperative that South Africa's racial policies evolve peacefully but decisively towards a system compatible with basic norms of justice, liberty and human dignity. I am pleased that American companies in South Africa, by providing equal employment opportunities, are contributing to the economic advancement of the black population. But clearly, much more must be done.
30.	In Central America, the United States has lent support to a diplomatic process to restore regional peace and security. We have committed substantial resources to promote economic development and social progress.
31.	The growing success of democracy in El Salvador is the best proof that the key to peace lies in a political solution. Free elections brought into office a government dedicated to democracy, reform, economic progress and regional peace. Regrettably, there are forces in the region eager to thwart democratic change, but these forces are now on the defensive. The tide is turning in the direction of freedom. We call upon Nicaragua, in particular, to abandon its policies of subversion and militarism, and to carry out the promises it made to the Organization of American States to establish democracy at home.
32.	The Middle East has known more than its share of tragedy and conflict for decades, and the United States has been actively involved in peace diplomacy for just as long. We consider ourselves a full partner in the quest for peace. The record of the 11 years since the October war shows that much can be achieved through negotiations; it also shows that the road is long and hard.
33.	Two years ago, I proposed a fresh start toward a negotiated solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict. My initiative of 1 September 1982 contains a set of positions that can serve as a basis for a just and lasting peace.' That initiative remains a realistic and workable approach, and I am committed to it as firmly as on the day I announced it. And the foundation-stone of this effort remains Security Council resolution 242 (1967), which, in turn, was incorporated in all its parts in the Camp David accords.
34.	The tragedy of Lebanon has not ended. Only last week, a despicable act of barbarism by some who are unfit to associate with humankind reminded us once again that Lebanon continues to suffer. In 1983 we helped Israel and Lebanon reach an agreement that, if implemented, could have led to the full withdrawal of Israeli forces in the context of the withdrawal of all foreign forces. This agreement was blocked, and the long agony of the Lebanese continues. Thousands of people are still kept from their homes by continued violence and are refugees in their own country. The once-flourishing economy of
Lebanon is near collapse. All of Lebanon's friends should work together to help end this nightmare.
35.	In the Gulf, the United States has supported a series of Security Council resolutions that call for an end to the war between Iran and Iraq that has meant so much death and destruction and has put the world's economic well-being at risk. Our hope is that hostilities will soon end, leaving each side with its political and territorial integrity intact, so that both may devote their energies to addressing the needs of their people and a return to relationships with other States.
36.	The lesson of experience is that negotiations work. The peace treaty between Israel and Egypt brought about the peaceful return of the Sinai, clearly showing that the negotiating process brings results when the parties commit themselves to it. The time is bound to come when the same wisdom and courage will be applied, with success, to reach peace between Israel and all of its Arab neighbours in a manner that assures security for all in the region, the recognition of Israel, and a solution to the Palestinian problem.
37.	In every part of the world, the United States is similarly engaged in peace diplomacy as an active player or a strong supporter.
38.	In South-East Asia, we have backed the efforts of the Association of South-East Asian Nations
to mobilize international support for a peaceful resolution of the Cambodian problem, which must include the withdrawal of Vietnamese forces and the election of a representative government. ASEAN's success in promoting economic and political development has made a major contribution to the peace and stability of the region.
39.	In Afghanistan, the dedicated efforts of the Secretary-General and his representatives to find a diplomatic settlement have our strong support. I assure the General Assembly that the United States will continue to do everything possible to find a negotiated outcome which provides the Afghan people with the right to determine their own destiny, allows the Afghan refugees to return to *heir own country in dignity, and protects the legitimate security interests of all neighbouring countries.
40.	On the divided and tense Korean peninsula, we have strongly backed the confidence-building measures proposed by the Republic of Korea and by the United Nations Command at Panmunjom. These are an important first step towards peaceful reunification in the long term.
41.	We take heart from progress by others in lessening tensions, notably the efforts by the Federal Republic of Germany to reduce barriers between the two German States.
42.	And the United States strongly supports the Secretary-General's efforts to assist the Cypriot parties in achieving a peaceful and reunited Cyprus.
43.	The United States has been and will always be a friend of peaceful solutions.
44.	This is no less true with respect to my country's relations with the Soviet Union.
45.	When I appeared before the General Assembly, at its thirty-eighth session. I noted that we cannot count on the instinct for survival alone to protect us against war. Deterrence is necessary but not sufficient. America has repaired its strength. We have invigorated our alliances and friendships. We are ready for constructive negotiations with the Soviet Union.
46.	We recognize that there is no sane alternative to negotiations on arms control and other issues between our two nations, which have the capacity to destroy civilization as we know it. I believe this is a view shared by virtually every country in the world and by the Soviet Union itself.
47.	I want to speak to the General Assembly today on what the United States and the Soviet Union can accomplish together in the coming years, and the concrete steps that we need to take.
48.	As I stand here and look out from this podium, there in front of me I can see the seat of the representative of the Soviet Union, and not far from that seat, just over to the side, is the seat of the representative of the United States. In this historic assembly hall it is clear there is not a great distance between us. Outside this room, while there will still be clear differences, there is every reason why we should do all that is possible to shorten that distance. That is why we are here. Is that not what the United Nations is all about?
49.	On 16 January last, I set out three objectives for United States-Soviet relations that can provide an agenda for our work over the months ahead.
50.	First, I said, we need to find ways to reduce, and eventually to eliminate, the threat and use of force in solving international disputes. Our concern over the potential for nuclear war cannot deflect us from the terrible human tragedies occurring every day in the regional conflicts I have just discussed. Together we have a particular responsibility to contribute to political solutions to these problems, rather than to exacerbate them through the provision of even more weapons.
51.	I propose that our two countries agree to embark on periodic consultations at policy level about regional problems. We will be prepared, if the Soviets agree, to make senior experts available at regular intervals for in-depth exchanges of views. I have asked Secretary of State Shultz to explore this with Foreign Minister Gromyko. Spheres of influence are a thing of the past. Differences between American and Soviet interests are not. The objectives of this political dialogue will be to help avoid miscalculation, reduce the potential risk of United States-Soviet confrontation and help the people in areas of conflict to find peaceful solutions.
52.	The United States and the Soviet Union have achieved agreements of historic importance on some regional issues. The Austrian State Treaty and the Berlin accords are notable and lasting examples. Let us resolve to achieve similar agreements in the future.
53.	Our second task must be to find ways to reduce the vast stockpiles of armaments in the world. I am committed to redoubling our negotiating efforts to achieve real results: in Geneva, a complete ban on chemical weapons; in Vienna, real reductions—to lower and equal levels—in Soviet and American, Warsaw Pact and North Atlantic Treaty Organization conventional forces; in Stockholm, concrete practical measures to enhance mutual confidence, to reduce the risk of war and to reaffirm commitments concerning non-use of force; in the field of nuclear testing, improvements in verification essential to ensure compliance with the threshold test-ban and peaceful nuclear explosions agreements; and in the field of non-proliferation, close co-operation to strengthen the international institutions and practices aimed at halting the Spread of nuclear weapons, together with redoubled efforts to meet the legitimate expectation of all nations that the Soviet Union and the United States will substantially reduce their own nuclear arsenals. We and the Soviets have agreed to upgrade our hotline communications facility, and our discussions of nuclear non-proliferation in recent years have been useful to both sides. We think there are other possibilities for improving communications in this area that deserve serious exploration.
54.	I believe the proposal of the Soviet Union for opening United States-Soviet talks at Vienna provides an important opportunity to advance these objectives. We have been prepared to discuss a wide range of issues of concern to both sides, such as the relationship between defensive and offensive forces and what has been called the militarization of space. During the talks we would consider what measures of restraint both sides might take while negotiations proceeded. However, any agreement must logically depend upon our ability to get the competition in offensive arms under control and to achieve genuine stability at substantially lower levels of nuclear arms.
55.	Our approach in all these areas will be designed to take into account concerns the Soviet Union has voiced. It will attempt to provide a basis for a historic breakthrough in arms control. I am disappointed that we were not able to open our meeting at Vienna earlier this month on the date originally proposed by the Soviet Union. I hope we can begin these talks by the end of the year or shortly thereafter.
56.	The third task I set in January was to establish a better working relationship between the Soviet Union and the United States, one marked by greater co-operation and understanding.
57.	We have made some modest progress. We have reached agreements to improve our hotline, extend our 10-year economic agreement, enhance consular co-operation and explore co-ordination of search and rescue efforts at sea.
58.	We have also offered to increase significantly the amount of United States grain for purchase by the Soviets and to provide the Soviets with a direct fishing allocation off United States coasts. But there is much more we could do together. I feel particularly strongly about breaking down the barriers between the peoples of the United States and the Soviet Union and between our political, military and other leaders.
59.	AH of these steps that I have mentioned, and especially the arms control negotiations, are extremely important to a step-by-step process towards peace. But let me also say that we need to extend the arms control process, to build a bigger umbrella under which it can operate—a road-map, as it were, showing where during the next 20 years or so these individual efforts can lead. This can greatly assist step-by-step negotiations and enable us to avoid having all our hopes or expectations ride on any single set or series of negotiations. If progress is temporarily halted at one set of talks, this newly established framework for arms control could help us take up the slack at other negotiations.
60.	Today, to the great end of lifting the dread of nuclear war from the peoples of the Earth, I invite the leaders of the world to join in a new beginning. We 
need a fresh approach to reducing international tensions. History demonstrates beyond controversy that, just as the arms competition has its roots in political suspicions and anxieties, so it can be channelled in more stabilizing directions and eventually be eliminated, if those political suspicions and anxieties are addressed as well.
61.	Towards this end I will suggest to the Soviet Union that we institutionalize regular ministerial or cabinet-level meetings between our two countries on the whole agenda of issues before us, including the problem of needless obstacles to understanding. To take but one idea for discussion, in such talks we could consider the exchange of outlines of five-year military plans for weapons development and our schedules of intended procurement. We would also welcome the exchange of observers at military exercises and locations. And I propose that we find a way for Soviet experts to come to the United States nuclear-test site, and for ours to go to theirs, to measure directly the yields of tests of nuclear weapons. We should work towards having such arrangements in place by next spring. I hope that the Soviet Union will co-operate in this undertaking and reciprocate in a manner that will enable the two countries to establish the basis for verification for effective limits on underground nuclear testing.
62.	I believe such talks could work rapidly towards developing a new climate of policy understanding, one that is essential if crises are to be avoided and real arms control is to be negotiated. Of course, summit meetings have a useful role to play. But they need to be carefully prepared, and the benefit here is that meetings at the ministerial level would provide the kind of progress that is the best preparation for higher-level talks between ourselves and the Soviet leaders.
63.	How much progress we will make, and at what pace, I cannot say, but we have a moral obligation to try and try again.
64.	Some may dismiss such proposals and my own optimism as simplistic American idealism. And they will point to the burdens of the modem world and to history. Well, yes, if we sit down and catalogue year by year, generation by generation, the famines, the plagues, the wars, the invasions mankind has endured, the list will grow so long and the assault on humanity so terrifying that it seems too much for the human spirit ^o bear.
65.	But is that not narrow and short-sighted and not at all how we think of history? Yes, the deeds of infamy or injustice are all recorded, but what shines out from the pages of history is the daring of the dreamers and the deeds of the builders and the doers. These things make up the stories we tell and pass on to our children. They comprise the most enduring and striking fact about human history: that through the heart-break and tragedy man has always dared to perceive the outline of human progress, the steady growth in not just the material well-being but the spiritual insight of mankind.
"There have been tyrants and murderers, and for a time they can seem invincible. But in the end, they always fall. Think on it—always. All through history the way of truth and love has always won."
That "as the belief and the vision of Mahatma Gandhi, and it remains today a vision that is good and true.
66.	"All is gift" is said to have been the favourite expression of another great spiritualist, a Spanish soldier who gave up the ways of war for that of love and peace. And if we are to make realities of the two great goals of the Charter of the United Nations—the dreams of peace and human dignity—we must take to heart these words of Ignatius Loyola: "We must pause long enough to contemplate the gifts received from Him who made us—the gift of life, the gift of this world, the gift of each other."
67.	And the gift of the present, for it is this present, this time, that now we must seize. I leave you with a reflection from Mahatma Gandhi spoken with those in mind who said that the disputes and conflicts of the modem world are too great to overcome. It was spoken shortly after Gandhi's quest for independence had taken him to Britain.
"I am not conscious of a single experience throughout my three months' stay in England and Europe that made me feel that after all East is East and West is West. On the contrary, I have been convinced more than ever that human nature is much the same no matter under what clime it flourishes and that, if you approach people with trust and affection, you would have tenfold trust and thousand-fold affection returned to you."
68.	For the sake of a peaceful world, a world where human dignity and freedom are respected and enshrined, let us approach each other with tenfold trust and thousand fold affection. A new future awaits us. The time is here, the moment is now.
69.	One of the founding fathers of our nation, Thomas Paine, spoke words that apply to all of us gathered here today. They apply directly to all sitting here in this Hall. He said: "We have it in our power to begin the world over again."

﻿Allow me first of all, on behalf of the delegation of the Central African Republic, to congratulate you, Sir, on your election to the presidency of the thirty-ninth session of the General Assembly. Your long experience acquired in the course of your diplomatic career and your superb knowledge of international issues bode well for the great success of the work of this session. My delegation would like to assure you at the outset of its readiness to assist you.
105.	I should also like to take this opportunity to reaffirm the support of the Central African Republic for the Secretary-General, whose work on behalf of the Organization is both dedicated and selfless.
106.	Lastly, our delegation wishes to extend a warm welcome to Brunei Darussalam whose admission is a further reflection of the universal role of the United Nations.
107.	Since the founding of the Organization, its usefulness and effectiveness have continually been called into question. The resolutions it has adopted, the solutions it has worked out, the recommendations it has made, have never really fulfilled the hopes cherished by peoples stricken by crises and conflicts; they have never completely allayed the tensions and upheavals in the world. Therefore, despite the heterogeneous nature of the Organization and its complexity, it should show a more definite spirit of consensus and return to its original objectives, namely, the noble ideals of peace and development laid down in the Charter of the United Nations.
108.	The sweeping currents of ideas, discoveries and technological innovations should lead to a change in the relations between nations; all such changes should lead to a true world balance. Unfortunately, reality is quite different. We are, in fact, witnessing a resurgence of intolerance, insecurity, selfishness and violence. Despite that gloomy picture, we shall not give in to either defeatism or scepticism. Despite numerous stumbling-blocks, the United Nations continues to be the forum in which discussions and negotiations on the fate of the world are held.
109.	In today's world, which is characterized by diversity, the right to be different should be recognized as a fundamental principle governing relations among States, a right to be different that the United Nations fosters and develops, the right of each people to flourish within the context of its own history, its own culture, its own beliefs and the political and economic system it has freely chosen. When denied to others—as is so often the case—this right to be different becomes a source of turbulence, hatred and confrontation.
110.	In Africa, in Asia, in Europe, as well as in America, evidence of such intolerance and selfishness is all too common. Often, peoples are stifled. Their legitimate struggles for their inevitable emancipation and their power to decide their lot in full exercise of their sovereignty are being thwarted by sordid personal interests.
111.	Are examples necessary? The situation prevailing in southern Africa is a very eloquent case in point. It is, of course, true that the agreements recently concluded between South Africa and some countries of the region are an encouraging step along the road towards peace. However, that remains problematical. So long as SWAPO, the sole representative of the Namibian people, is denied recognition of its national rights, peace cannot be lasting and total. It is more than ever important that Security Council resolution 435 (1978) be fully observed and implemented.
112.	The Central African Republic welcomes the recent agreements concluded between France and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to withdraw all foreign forces from Chad. It hopes, however, that the simultaneous withdrawals will be effective and complete, not just from the capital, N'djamena, and its immediate environs, but from all Chadian territory. Chad must regain possession of the whole of its original territory. That would enable the Government of that brotherly neighbouring country finally to dedicate itself fully to the task of reconciliation and national reconstruction begun by President Hissein Habre.
113.	With regard to the question of Western Sahara, our delegation believes that an excellent basis for seeking a solution can be found in the resolutions adopted at the eighteenth and nineteenth ordinary sessions of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity. In that connection, we cherish the firm hope that the next session of that Assembly will provide an opportunity to assess the efforts made by the countries involved.
114.	With regard to the question of the Middle East, everyone knows that the Palestinian problem lies at the heart of the conflict. No acceptable solution can therefore be arrived at which ignores the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination under the aegis of the Palestine Liberation Organization. In that connection, we shall continue to support any initiative in line with the spirit of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) aimed at bringing about a lasting and comprehensive settlement of the conflict.
115.	In the same context, the Central African Republic makes an urgent appeal to the international community to spare no effort to preserve and guarantee the national unity, territorial integrity, sovereignty and neutrality of Lebanon.
116.	In the name of the principle of recognizing the right to be different, Democratic Kampuchea should be enabled fully to exercise its sovereignty. To that end, we hope to see the full application of the principles laid down by the Organization.
117.	The Central African Republic also supports any initiative designed to enable Afghanistan to regain its national rights and its status as a neutral, non-aligned country.
118.	The problem of Korea remains a pressing one. The persistent tension in the Korean peninsula is of concern to the Central African Republic. Thus, as part of our contribution to the efforts being made by the international community to reduce such tension, we shall continue to urge both parties, which undeniably aspire to reunification, to pursue their dialogue on the basis of the South-North Joint Communique of 4 July 1972, which set forth the principles for such action. Free, direct dialogue, free of outside interference, would unquestionably enable the parties to establish the conditions for the restoration of the mutual confidence indispensable for the maintenance of peace in the region. Both parties could, in the meantime, plan for their simultaneous admission to membership in the United Nations.
119.	Given the situation prevailing in Central America, the Central African Republic believes that negotiation is the only appropriate means for achieving a peaceful solution and for promoting the harmonious coexistence of the States of the region,
120.	These several examples of the refusal of certain States to recognize and accept the right to differences are based on a two-pronged interest. First, there is an ideological interest, since those States which reject the right to differences are often members of an alliance bloc. A treacherous complicity does, indeed, exist on the part of part of the international community. That complicity impedes mutual understanding and confidence. And then there is strategic interest in the policies of certain States which have embarked on the arms race in order to maintain their military and economic domination.
121.	Thus, while the Central African Republic welcomes the negotiations under way on disarmament, it also deplores the fact that they are brought to stalemate at a time when the proliferation and development of arms are reaching alarming levels, thus perpetuating the vicious circle of destruction.
122.	The disarmament we so fervently wish for cannot be achieved solely through regional security and arms limitation agreements. All States must be aware of the pressing and collective task of championing international, peace and security.
123.	The Central African Republic is firmly convinced that the effective development of all the countries of our community is a condition for global balance and a guarantee of peace. Development also means the right to life and therefore it cannot be jeopardized. We call on the developed countries to contribute effectively, through bilateral or multilateral agreements, to the realistic development of the countries of the third world. For, one and indivisible, peace requires, if it is to be preserved, the universal development of all the members of the international community.
124.	The inadequacy of the present international economic system is resulting in enormous difficulties for the developing countries. Will the alarm so often sounded ever be heard?
125.	While concerned with providing a minimal decent standard of living for our peoples, our countries are rarely able to find the means to implement the economic plans and programmes which have been drawn up. Thus, we continue to suffer severely from the effects of the world economic crisis and from the shortcomings of the economic system. We deplore the attitude of certain industrialized countries which act as though the developing countries should come to terms with their poverty levels and even be content with them.
126.	The countries of the third world are struggling not only for the right to development but also Tor a more significant mobilization of the means for development. The unbreakable link between the right to development and the right to security requires, in turn, the developing countries to observe an indispensable and reasonable balance between the means allocated for security and those given over to development.
127.	Thus, it is regrettable that, after the adoption in 1974 of the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States, there is still a gap between the socio-economic development efforts of certain industrialized countries and others which are less industrialized.
128.	The international crisis seems to have disallowed any claim of the developing countries to such development, and therefore to life. The assistance which is accorded them, dwindling day by day, is clearly inadequate and the terms of trade are growing worse at a dizzying pace.
129.	Our countries are in debt and are bowed under the burden of the amounts due; these debts are worsened and inflated by the crisis of the international monetary system. At the same time, our balance of trade shows a deficit and access to development sources and new technology, which are so badly needed to maintain development projects, seems to be denied to us solely because we happen to be developing countries.
130.	We continue to be greatly disappointed, and we state this in this lofty gathering, all the more so because our hopes have faded since the work of the sixth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, held at Belgrade in 1983, and of the Fourth General Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, held at Vienna earlier this year.
131.	A joint definition of new international economic regulations by the industrialized countries and by the third world is needed today. The entire international community would benefit from the beginning of global negotiations designed to putting a halt to this crisis.
132.	The results achieved in three years by the Military Committee for National Recovery in working to restore and rebuild the Central African Republic are very encouraging and are a cause of satisfaction for us because the result first and foremost from our own efforts
133.	But such success is also due to the valuable assistance given by friendly countries and by international organizations, including the United Nations. I should like once again to pay a heartfelt tribute to the Secretary-General and his co-workers for the unceasing concern which they continue to show for the Central African Republic. The road is still long and the task an arduous one. That is why we should like to be assured of continuity and stepping up of international assistance.
134.	While observing the third anniversary of ac-cession to power of the Military Committee for National Recovery, the Head of State, General Andre Kolingba, began his speech as follows: "For three years now the Central African Republic has seen the Military Committee for National Recovery at work. These three years have been imbued, above all, with peace,"—I repeat, with peace—"a factor working for stability and a sine qua non condition for any kind of development."
135.	That equation of peace and development is the basis of the philosophy of action advocated by the Central African Republic, on both the domestic and the international level.
136.	For we have faith in the possibility of warding off those ills which loom as a serious threat over the future of the international community. The solution lies in respect by all States for the fundamental values of the right to differences and the right to development.
137.	That is the message which General Andre Kolingba, Chairman of the Military Committee for National Recovery and Head of State, deeply convinced of the ability of the Organization to resolve world problems and drawing inspiration from the well-springs of our philosophy, has entrusted us to present for the consideration of the Assembly.
138.	The entire Central African Republic joins us in wishing all possible success for the work of the Assembly.

﻿72. First of all, please allow me, Sir, on behalf of the Chinese delegation, warmly to congratulate you, the outstanding representative of Zambia, on your election to the presidency of the thirty-ninth session of the General Assembly. I believe that the current session will fulfil its mission successfully under your presidency. I also wish to thank your predecessor, Mr. Jorge Illueca, for his contribution to the thirty-eighth session. At the same time, I should like to take this opportunity to extend a warm welcome to China's close neighbour, Brunei Darussalam, on its admission to membership in the United Nations.
73.	As representatives of the Governments of various countries of the world, we meet here every year to hold extensive exchanges of views on the international situation and to explore ways to maintain world peace, ensure international security and promote human welfare. This fact itself testifies to the importance of the United Nations and its historic mission.
74.	Reviewing international developments over the past year, people cannot but feel worried. With the suspension of their disarmament negotiations, the two nuclear superpowers have stepped up their deployment of intermediate range missiles in Europe and adopted confrontation measures, thus further escalating their nuclear arms race. This poses a new threat to all European countries and deeply disturbs all countries in the world. Over the past year, while the two wars of aggression in Asia went on unchecked, a new armed invasion occurred in Central America. The Middle East is still fraught with crises, and the flames of war in the Gulf region are spreading, causing widespread concern. Basically, the tension and sharp contradiction in southern Africa are not yet relaxed.
75.	Meanwhile, the serious economic difficulties of many developing countries show clearly that the global North South contradiction is sharpening and the gap between the rich and the poor widening. Therefore, I think no one will deny that peace and development, generally speaking, remain the two fundamental questions bearing upon the interests of all the peoples in the world today. I should like to take this opportunity to offer some observations on the two questions on behalf of the Chinese Government.
76.	At present, what concerns and disturbs people most is the threat of a nuclear war. Despite innumerable rounds of talks on nuclear disarmament and a variety of proposals to this end, nuclear weapons have continued to increase and nuclear stockpiles have reached extremely dangerous proportions. As is universally recognized, the two superpowers ought to bear the main responsibility on this question. It is they that possess over 95 per cent of the world's total nuclear weaponry, and it is they alone that are in a position to fight a nuclear war. Should they choose to use only a small portion of their nuclear arsenals, not only would the people of these two nuclear Powers suffer, but the people of the whole world would be plunged into an unprecedented holocaust. For this reason, the numerous small and medium sized countries and people throughout the world are fully justified in demanding that they immediately halt their nuclear arms race and take the lead in drastically cutting back their nuclear weaponry.
77.	The arms race between the two nuclear Powers is extending to outer space. Both sides are stepping up the development of antiballistic missile weapon systems so as to reinforce their strategic offensive capabilities through improved strategic defensive means. Recently they have made some gestures on the question of outer space weapons, each mounting negotiation offensives against the other. However, as people can see, negotiations have not really started and yet each of the superpowers is busy shifting the responsibility for obstructing and sabotaging the talks on to the other. This cannot but arouse suspicion. Do they really intend to hold talks or just to use them to cover up their arms race in outer space?
78.	As the arms race between the two nuclear Powers escalates, the danger of a nuclear war will increase with each passing day. Though already possessing an oversaturation and overkill nuclear capacity, each of the superpowers is doing its utmost to gain supremacy over the other on the pretext of maintaining parity and equal security, lest the other side should surpass it in terms of quantity and quality of nuclear weapons. This practice of progressive escalation of nuclear armaments cannot but arouse doubts as to whether or not they truly have a sincere desire for disarmament. What the people of the world want is genuine and effective disarmament to ensure that people can live in peace and security.
79.	The Chinese Government and people always stand for nuclear disarmament. We hold that efforts should be made to promote progress in conventional as well as nuclear disarmament. The small quantity of nuclear weapons China possesses is solely for the purpose of self-defence. We have solemnly declared time and again that at no time and in no circumstances will China be the first to use nuclear weapons and that it unconditionally undertakes not to use nuclear weapons against nonnuclear States and regions. China has never participated in the nuclear arms race, nor does it intend to participate in that race or to shirk its responsibility in regard to nuclear disarmament.
80.	China's position on nuclear disarmament can be summed up in the following three basic points. First, our fundamental position is the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of all nuclear weapons. Secondly, as a practical step towards nuclear disarmament, we propose that, after the Soviet Union and the United States have taken the lead in putting an end to testing, improving and manufacturing nuclear weapons and have agreed on substantially reducing their nuclear arsenals, a broadly representative international conference should be convened with the participation of all nuclear States to work out together concrete measures for further nuclear disarmament. Thirdly, before all this materializes, for the sake of reducing the threat of nuclear war and showing good faith in nuclear disarmament, all nuclear States should undertake not to be the first to use nuclear weapons and unconditionally pledge not to use, or threaten to use, nuclear weapons against nonnuclear States and nuclear free zones and should reach agreement on mutual non-use of nuclear weapons.
81.	We support the just demand of the people of the world for the prohibition of nuclear weapons and the prevention of a nuclear war, and we appreciate all reasonable proposals conducive to nuclear disarmament and the maintenance of world peace. To promote progress in nuclear disarmament, we are ready to exchange views, within the United Nations or in other forums, on such issues as the prevention of nuclear war, the cessation of the nuclear arms race, and nuclear disarmament, provided all the other nuclear States agree to do so.
82.	As things now stand, we cannot but emphasize that it is of great urgency to demand that the two nuclear Powers stop their nuclear arms race, halt the deployment of new intermediate range missiles, resume negotiations on nuclear disarmament and reduce and destroy those nuclear missiles already deployed in Europe, Asia and elsewhere, and immediately stop extending their arms race to outer space. We stand for the early conclusion of a treaty on the prohibition of the arms race in outer space and a ban on research, testing, development, manufacture, deployment and use of all weapons designed for outer space warfare, as well as destruction of all the existing outer space weapon systems. AH this is highly necessary for demilitarizing outer space and ensuring the peaceful use of outer space by mankind.
83.	China has always opposed the development, production and use of all biological weapons detrimental to mankind. The Standing Committee of the Chinese National People's Congress has already adopted, on 20 September 1984, the decision on China's accession to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction. From now on, China will join other countries to combat all acts that violate this Convention and to work hard for its further improvement so as to advance the whole process of disarmament.
84.	A major cause of the turbulence and tension in the world today is the commission in international relations of such acts as infringement of the sovereignty of other countries, invasion and occupation of their territories, interference in their internal affairs and the use of force against them in violation of the basic principle of the sovereign equality of all States as set forth in the Charter of the United Nations.
85.	We are of the view that all nations, big or small, strong or weak, rich or poor, should be treated as equals and that they should respect one another, live in harmony and engage in mutually beneficial cooperation. The affairs of a country should be determined by the people of that country themselves. External interference of all kinds is illegal and impermissible.
86.	In pursuing their foreign policies, all countries should observe the norms guiding international relations and abide by the Charter. However, the superpowers, on the strength of their size and power, often try to impose their own will on others, thinking they may do whatever they please. Instead of respecting the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of other countries, they have pursued hegemonism and power politics and even carried out armed aggression against weak and small countries. With their support, certain regional hegemonists do not scruple to play the tyrant and have tried to annex territories of their neighbours by force. At this important rostrum of the General Assembly we have condemned more than once the big and small hegemonist Powers for their acts of aggression in violation of the Charter and in breach of international security. Today we once again strongly condemn these acts. People throughout the world will go on denouncing the hegemonists, with full justice, so long as they persist in such acts of aggression.
87.	At present there exist many "hot spots" in the world. Some areas may become "hot spots" tomorrow. Kampuchea is still being trampled upon. The war of aggression against Afghanistan is being intensified and expanded. The situation in the Middle East and Central America remains complex, tense and volatile. In southern Africa, the racists and colonialists are obstructing national independence and threatening the security of neighbouring countries. Some of these "hot spots" have resulted from direct aggression by the superpowers; others have turned into international crises because of their meddling, intervention or behind the scenes support and manipulation. To cool down the "hot spots", relax tensions and resolve contradictions, the prerequisite is to stop interference, control and infiltration by the superpowers and their followers so that the parties concerned in each country or region may seek reasonable solutions to their respective internal problems through peaceful negotiations.
88.	As an old Chinese saying goes, "Common fear leads to unity; common greed leads to rivalry." This is how the world situation stands today. On the one hand, the two superpowers are in rivalry for world hegemony; and on the other, the large numbers of small and medium sized countries are steadily strengthening their unity and supporting one another in the struggle against hegemonism. It is our belief that, in the face of unjust action where the strong bullies the weak and the big oppresses the small, the international community has the responsibility and obligation to speak out for justice and struggle against such acts in order to uphold the norms governing international relations and the principles of the Charter. Far from helping world peace and stability, tolerance towards aggressors will only inflate their arrogance.
89.	The struggles of the world's people against hegemonism, imperialism, colonialism and racism are all just struggles, to which the Chinese Government and people will, as always, give firm support.
90.	We support the position of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea in favour of the holding of tripartite talks, the easing of tension in the Korean Peninsula and the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea, and calling for the withdrawal of United States troops from South Korea.
91.	We support the people of Afghanistan in their heroic struggle to safeguard national independence and resist foreign aggression. We oppose the efforts of the Soviet Union to intensify its aggression against and devastation of Afghanistan, and we demand the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan.
92.	We have always stood by the Arab people and supported their just struggle against Israeli aggression and expansion and the just struggle of the Palestinian people to regain their legitimate national rights; and we demand Israel's withdrawal from Lebanon and from all the other Arab territories it has occupied since 1967.
93.	We support the just struggle of the people of Namibia for national independence and that of the people of South Africa against apartheid and racial discrimination, and we demand the withdrawal of the troops of South Africa from Namibia and the cessation of military threats to the neighbouring countries.
94.	We support the Latin American people and the Contadora Group in their endeavour for peace and stability in Central America and demand that the outside forces stop their acts of military intervention and infiltration in this region.
95.	Here I would like, in particular, to say a few words about the question of Kampuchea. Almost six years have passed since Viet Nam invaded and occupied the independent and sovereign State of Democratic Kampuchea by armed force. Viet Nam refuses to give up its wild ambition of annexing Kampuchea despite repeated setbacks on the battlefield in its successive "dry season offensives". It has time and again played the trick of the so-called partial withdrawal in an attempt to cover up its refusal to withdraw its troops. Its demand to make its troop withdrawal conditional upon the exclusion of one of the patriotic resistance forces of Kampuchea has revealed all the more clearly that to this day it lacks the sincere desire to solve the Kampuchean question.
96.	We hope to see a fair and reasonable solution to the question of Kampuchea at an early date. But a political settlement of this question must be predicated on the withdrawal of all the Vietnamese aggressor troops from Kampuchea. In our view, whether one firmly opposes aggression by Viet Nam and demands the withdrawal of its troops is a fundamental test as to whether one gives resolute support to the just struggles of people subjected to aggression, safeguards the independence of sovereign States, works for the maintenance of world peace and security and upholds the basic norms of international relations. We support the legitimate status and authority of the tripartite Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea, headed by Prince Norodom Sihanouk. We believe that, after the withdrawal of Vietnamese troops, the various Kampuchean political forces will become united on a broad basis and that the Kampuchean people will be able to decide their own future through a United Nations supervised general election, free from outside aggression and interference. We hope to see Kampuchea become an independent, peaceful, neutral and nonaligned State.
97.	The Chinese Government pursues an independent foreign policy, firmly opposes hegemonism and resolutely stands by all peoples who are subjected to oppression and aggression. China will never attach itself to any big Power or group of Powers, nor yield to any outside pressure. We support the Movement of Non Aligned Countries and will not enter into alliance with any big Power. We do not practise the so-called equidistant diplomacy, or play cards or ally ourselves with one big Power against the other. In our external relations we have always followed the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence initiated jointly by China, India and Burma 30 years ago. They are: "mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual nonaggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence". In accordance with these principles, China has improved relations with neighbouring countries, concluded a number of boundary treaties and treaties of peace, friendship and cooperation, and developed friendly relations with many countries in Asia, Africa, Latin America, Europe, North America and Oceania. The Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence have long been written into China's Constitution and are the basic norms China follows in handling its relations with all countries.
98.	We want to live in peace and to develop normal relations with all countries. Even though some countries have differences of one kind or another with us for this or that reason, we are ready to seek a settlement of the differences in a spirit of mutual understanding and consultation so that our relations with them may gradually improve.
99.	Over the past three decades, the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence have stood the test of international vicissitudes and have shown great vitality. Experience shows that they are the basic norms governing relations between States and that they constitute an important weapon against hegemonist interference and aggression. In line with the trend of history and in response to the call of our time, they reflect the aspirations and interests of the people of all countries and have thus won their appreciation and support. Whether relations between countries are good or bad depends on whether or not those countries adhere to the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. If those Principles are adhered to, countries with different social systems can live in amity and engage in friendly cooperation. But if they are not adhered to, even countries with similar social systems may fall out and enter into confrontation or even conflict. We stress the importance of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence here because they are in accord with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations. So long as all countries strictly adhere to the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence in their mutual relations—whether between big Powers, or between big and small countries, or between small countries—it will not be difficult to have international tensions relaxed, and world peace will surely be preserved.
100.	The peace and stability of the world depend on the sustained growth of national and international economies. The development of the third world has become one of the biggest challenges mankind faces today.
101.	This year marks the tenth anniversary of the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, which were adopted by the General Assembly on 1 May 1974, at its sixth special session. At that session 10 years ago [2209th meeting], Deng Xiaoping, Chairman of the Chinese delegation, pledged China's support for the just position of the third world countries calling for the restructuring of the inequitable and irrational international economic order. Despite the persistent efforts made by the developing countries to remove external constraints imposed on their economic development and improve North South relations, the actual results are far from satisfactory. Up to now, global negotiations have not been launched, and the immediate measures for solving the current urgent problems affecting the developing countries have failed to materialize. That this is still a far cry from the objectives set forth in the Declaration and the Programme of Action adopted at the sixth special session of the General Assembly is the result of international obstacles from certain quarters.
102.	At present, economic recovery in the West is still very unsteady, and the economic prospects in developing countries remain grim. These countries are faced with such difficulties as economic stagnation, lack of funds, export restrictions and a heavy debt burden. Their development is being seriously hindered.
103.	The grave difficulties of the least developed countries, particularly the desperate plight of many such countries in Africa, ought to receive close attention and deep sympathy from the whole world. In the areas south of the Sahara, more than 100 million people are plagued by famine, with vast numbers of women and children on the verge of death, as a result of long years of economic stagnation and a drop in per capita income for years running, coupled with the threat of continued drought and reduction of grain output. It is urgent that the international community take concerted action in response to their appeal for help in coping with the difficulties. All developed countries have the obligation to give them adequate aid of all kinds and to help them to overcome their economic difficulties and alleviate the people's sufferings.
104.	The grave debt problem is an urgent issue facing developing countries, Latin American countries in particular. The total volume of external debt incurred by the third world as a whole has reached a staggering figure. Recently, the continued rise in the interest rates of United States banks has further increased the burden on debtor countries. In our view, settlement of the debt problem is a responsibility which the creditor countries, commercial banks and international financial agencies should shoulder together with the debtor countries. The principle for settling this problem should be the promotion of debt service through development. The debtor countries should be asked to adopt readjustment policies aimed at promoting their economic growth, and not to impose a recessionist policy. The creditor countries should take such measures as lowering high interest rates, improving terms of payment, reducing trade restrictions, increasing governmental development aid and providing adequate credits and loans so as to reduce the burden of the debtor countries. We appreciate and support the reasonable proposals put forward by debtor countries for settling the debt problem, and the responsible attitude they adopt. We hope that, through their own sustained efforts and with the attention and help of the international community, the debtor countries will be able gradually to extricate themselves from their difficult position so that the current debt crisis may be eased and overcome.
105.	Protectionism is another urgent problem that affects the economic growth of the developing countries. We have noted with concern that, with the gradual recovery of the economies of developed countries, protectionism is on the rise rather than on the decline. This has become a major obstacle to the economic recovery and development of the developing countries. We call on the major developed countries immediately to adopt effective measures to honour their promises made at various international forums and to halt and reverse the trend of increased protectionism against the developing countries so that the latter may increase their export earnings and create conditions for the expansion of their imports and the growth of their economies.
106.	The world economy is an integral whole. Its stability and growth cannot be based on the affluence of the few and the impoverishment of the many. Without the economic growth of the developing countries, it will be difficult for the developed countries to achieve sustained economic recovery and expansion. The truth is quite obvious and has come to be appreciated and supported by more and more persons with breadth of vision in the West. It is regrettable that some major developed countries have thus far failed to consider in earnest the practical difficulties and urgent demands of the numerous developing countries. These developed countries have remained indifferent to the North South dialogue and global negotiations and have opposed a restructuring of the old international economic order. Theirs is a short-sighted policy.
107.	The Group of 77 has already put forward a series of practical proposals that have taken into consideration the interests of all countries concerned. In order to remove the obstacles in the way of launching global negotiations, they have time and again made major efforts and proposed that the global negotiations be carried out in two phases. The International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade, adopted by the General Assembly in 1980 also gives expression to the common desire of the international community to establish the new international economic order and to revitalize the world economy.
108.	The midterm review and appraisal of the implementation of the Strategy should mainly be aimed at ensuring the full implementation of the series of policy measures set forth in the Strategy. The developing countries have proposed the convening of another international conference on money and finance with the object of promoting development. We hope that all countries concerned will strive to create conditions for the early convocation of that conference. It has been our consistent view that the solution of the immediate problems facing the developing countries should be closely linked with the effort to achieve the long-term objective of establishing the new international economic order. We support all proposals that proceed from the overall interests of the world economy and that help to improve North South relations and promote development in the third world. We are ready to join the other developing countries in making unremitting efforts to establish the new international economic order.
109.	There is great potential for increased cooperation among third world countries with their vast territories and rich resources. While North South negotiations are at a stalemate, South South cooperation among developing countries is making further progress. South South cooperation is not only an effective way for the developing countries to strengthen collective self-reliance in overcoming difficulties and developing their economies, but also an important impetus to the North South dialogue and a booster to their negotiating positions. The Chinese Government is ready to play its part in promoting South South cooperation in accordance with the principles of equality and mutual benefit, stress on practical results, diversity in form and common progress.
110.	Peace and development are two major issues in the world today. They also constitute the primary objectives of China's domestic and foreign policies. The Chinese people are now engaged in a large-scale socialist modernization drive. Their goal can be attained only through long years of efforts in a peaceful international environment.
111.	This year marks the thirty-fifth anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China. We have scored great achievements in these 35 years, particularly in the years since 1979, which have witnessed the sustained growth and coordinated development of China's economy. True, we made detours and paid our price, but we gained experience as well. It is our basic experience that economic development must be based on the actual conditions of one's own country: there is no readymade model to copy and one has to blaze one's own trail. A period of 35 years is far too short for us to turn China, with its large population and vast territory, into a modernized, prosperous and strong socialist country. Thirty five years are not enough, not even another 35 years. China will continue unswervingly to pursue its foreign policy of peace and will make every possible endeavour for the maintenance of world peace.
112.	Based on the idea of "one country, two systems", the Chinese Government has decided to resume the exercise of sovereignty over Hong Kong in 1997 and establish a Hong Kong Special Administrative Region. That is to say, in view of the history of Hong Kong and its realities, a special administrative region where the capitalist system will remain unchanged for 50 years is to be established in a socialist country. This idea, based as it is on China's actual conditions, conforms to a common aspiration and the interests of the 1 billion Chinese people, including our compatriots in Hong Kong. Thanks to their joint efforts, the Chinese and British Governments have reached and initialled an agreement on the question of Hong Kong. The settlement of this question will contribute significantly to the lofty cause of the reunification of our great motherland and to stability and peace in Asia.
113.	China's foreign policy remains firm and consistent, as it is based on the fundamental interests of the people of China and of the rest of the world. We support the people of all countries in their struggle to safeguard sovereignty and independence and develop their national economy and in their struggle against the arms race and the threat of war and hegemonism and in defence of world peace. China wishes to live in peace and develop normal relations with all other countries in the world, including the United States and the Soviet Union. China stands for the easing of world tensions and the settlement of all international disputes through peaceful consultations and earnest negotiations. China also hopes to see the two superpowers, the United States and the Soviet Union, end their nuclear arms race and global rivalry and improve their bilateral relations in the interest of world peace and international security.
114.	Only with peace can there be development. Without development, there can be no stability; and without stability, peace is out of the question. Peace and development are inseparable. They are the two major objectives which the world's people have most at heart and to which the United Nations is committed. We must march towards these two major objectives, however numerous the difficulties and obstacles may be. We are convinced that with the concerted efforts of the people all over the world these objectives can definitely be attained.
115.	It is nearly 40 years since the founding of the United Nations, which, having traversed a path by no means smooth and uneventful, today shoulders an even heavier responsibility for the maintenance of world peace and international security. We appreciate and support the Secretary General’s statement in his report on the work of the Organization expressing the desire and demand to make the United Nations work better. As one of the founders of the United Nations and one of the permanent members of the Security Council, China is determined to make the greatest endeavour possible, together with other countries, to uphold the Charter and strengthen the role of the United Nations.

﻿May I first extend to you, Mr. President, the congratulations of the Federal Republic of Germany on your election to your high office. We consider your personality, your extraordinary talents and your longstanding deep commitment to the cause of the United Nations to be a guarantee of success in accomplishing your difficult tasks. We see in you the representative of a continent and a country with which we are linked by traditionally good and friendly relations.
2.	I wish to express also the gratitude of my country to your predecessor, Mr. Jorge Illueca, for the competent way in which he guided the work of the thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly.
3.	At the same time, I wish to thank the Secretary General and his collaborators for their untiring efforts and for the excellent work done in the past year in the interest of strengthening the United Nations and of peace in the world.
4.	It gives me particular pleasure today to welcome Brunei Darussalam to this forum as a new Member State. We entertain good bilateral relations with Brunei Darussalam and feelings of friendship for it as a member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
5.	In his thought-provoking report on the work of the Organization, the Secretary General recalls the historical achievements of the United Nations. We support his appeal that the great potential of this international Organization for the prevention and settlement of conflicts be utilized and strengthened.
6.	The essential characteristics of the world today are the relationship between the industrial countries of the North and the developing countries of the South and the relationship between the democratic industrial countries of the West and the communist industrial countries of the East. West and East account for the greater part of the North. The North is a house divided, but the South, too, is torn by tension and antagonism.
7.	We need dialogue between North and South. Internal tensions within North and South obstruct and slow down this dialogue. North and South must, therefore, reduce their internal tensions and dedicate their intellectual and material resources to a common effort aimed at the development of an international order based on equality, accommodation of interests and cooperation; an international order in which everyone has a fair chance, in which people can develop their strengths and abilities; an international order in which human rights are respected and social justice is applied to all.
8.	This calls for what I would term an international domestic policy, a policy rooted in the conviction that the future of one's own country can only be assured if the future of all countries is assured.
9.	The most pressing North South problem is the debt crisis in many developing countries, particularly in Latin America. The Presidents of Argentina and Venezuela have made pointed reference to this situation in their statements to the Assembly. The effects of the debt crisis are felt by South and North. Forceful measures of adjustment are required if the debtor countries are to recover economically. Such measures have political and social repercussions in those countries. Jacques de Larosiere, Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund [VMF], said recently:
"It must be realized that there are social and political limits to economic adjustment. The advantages gained by a country from servicing its debts and pursuing a policy of adjustment must be worth the cost in terms of the human misery caused by the adjustment."
Only in this spirit can the problem be solved.
10.	The crisis is confronting the North, too, with difficulties. The necessary import restrictions by the debtor countries mean export reductions for industrial countries. The international banking system has been put under heavy pressure. This crisis can be solved only by the common effort of North and South. The debt servicing commitments and the servicing ability of the developing countries must be brought back into harmony. We need longer-term rescheduling strategies to support successful adjustment efforts by debtors. Mexico has furnished proof that it is possible to adjust successfully. We have reason to hope that the other countries, too, after a painful initial adjustment phase, will manage to move on to the second phase, in which adjustment and growth again go hand in hand.
11.	We shall overcome the debt crisis only through intensive dialogue and cooperative solidarity. We therefore welcome the comprehensive dialogue on this subject scheduled to take place early next year within the IMF and the World Bank.
12.	If economic recovery and development are to take place in the third world, a package of coordinated measures is necessary.
13.	First, the industrial countries must ensure their own stable growth.
14.	Secondly, protectionism must be fought. Markets must remain open and become more open to exports from the third world. Deeds must be made to match the many words in favour of liberalized trade.
15.	Thirdly, the over-high international interest level must fall. How can permanent growth be achieved in the developing countries in the face of today's level of real interest?
16.	Fourthly, the developing countries need more direct investments from abroad. The industrial countries must therefore continue their investment promotion policy. The developing countries, for their part, must create a favourable investment climate. Direct investments not only transfer capital but also transfer technology and managerial experience and provide easier access to the world market. The transfer of technology to the third world must be promoted with the utmost energy. An agreement on balanced codes for transnational enterprises and technology transfers would encourage investment.
17.	Our special attention and assistance must be devoted to the world's poorest countries. Since 1971, the number of least developed countries has risen from 25 to 36. Their economic growth, and especially their food production, are not keeping pace with population growth. Their debt burden is oppressive. They need increasing official development assistance. For this reason, the Federal Republic of Germany has always given particular consideration to those countries in its development cooperation. For years it has been providing them only with grants. !t has remitted the public debt of most of those countries.
18.	The situation is particularly dramatic in many African countries. Africa needs international solidarity and the coordinated efforts of the international community. Food security must be at the heart of these efforts; acute need must be combated; self-sufficiency must be strengthened. Africa is therefore a focus of our development cooperation. Substantially more than 40 per cent of our entire aid is channelled into that continent. In response to the appeal by the Secretary General, we provided an additional 50 million deutsche mark for special food security action in 1984. The World Bank report on sub-Saharan Africa reinforces our intention to allocate additional funds to Africa in 1985.
19.	At this point I should like to appeal to the industrial countries with State trading organizations to bring their development aid into an acceptable relationship with their economic power and their arms expenditure. They too should open their doors more widely to exports from developing countries. They absorb only 5 per cent of all exports from developing countries, whereas more than two thirds of such exports go to the Western industrial States.
20.	According to estimates by the International Conference on Population, held at Mexico City from 6 to 14 August 1984, the population of the world will almost double in the next 40 years, despite ail the efforts to decelerate population growth. That will multiply the number and the seriousness of the problems facing humanity. We who live today bear responsibility for ensuring that our children and grandchildren inherit a world which permits them to live in human dignity. The danger is growing that "spaceship Earth" will no longer be able to carry mankind.
21.	The universal nature of this danger to the future is forcing the community of nations to pool its resources. More people need more food, drinking water, clothing, accommodation, schools, employment, hospitals and recreation facilities. All these things are not even sufficiently available to the majority of those living now. And yet we must provide them for more than 8 billion people, and time is short.
22.	An increase in population will also impose greater strains on the environment. Even now, we see the deserts spreading, valuable soil becoming salinated and eroded, and vegetation in industrial countries being threatened by acid rain. Year by year, numerous types of animals and plants disappear irretrievably. Seas and inland waters are becoming polluted. Hydrocarbon combustion is jeopardizing the world climate. Industrial waste, refuse and sewage pose enormous technical and financial challenges to the world community. UNEP must become the driving force of a worldwide environmental policy. But all international cooperation is in vain if environmental protection is not practised at home, in our own countries. Polluted air and poisoned water do not stop at national boundaries. For this reason, we are talking and negotiating with all our neighbours in the West and the East on joint action to combat the dangers of pollution. The Conference on the Environment, held at Munich, provided an important stimulus for a joint approach on trans-boundary pollution. In the interest of combating environmental pollution at its source, more account must be taken than has been done hitherto, in public and private economic cooperation with the third world, of the need to protect the natural sources of life.
23.	In the densely populated and highly industrialized Federal Republic of Germany, environmental problems surfaced earlier than elsewhere. We have therefore been able to gather extensive experience in recognizing, measuring and fighting pollution. We are prepared to share this experience with all interested parties.
24.	The major tasks of economic growth and environmental protection, development and the provision of food cannot be solved without the potential offered by the new forms of high technology. New technological developments should serve all mankind; they must not be misused as instruments of power.
25.	Gene technology, for instance, will provide the third world with new and great opportunities with regard to agriculture and the solution of the food problem. It appears possible that plants which can yield fruit even in difficult soil and climatic conditions will be developed using the methods of gene technology. It appears possible also that harvests can be considerably increased and the use of chemical fertilizers drastically reduced. The international research programmes to promote agriculture in developing countries must make full use of the opportunities offered by gene technology.
26.	But this very form of technology makes us aware that new advanced technology not only presents us with opportunities but also confronts us with dangers which we must control from the outset. Respect for creation must guide us in our use of gene technology and must make us vigilant about any misguided attempt to manipulate human heredity. Human dignity demands that such manipulation be banned and made impossible from the outset. That is a topic for the United Nations, too.
27.	Cooperation between North and South must reduce the prosperity gap, overcome hunger and want, disease and ignorance, and ensure respect for fundamental human rights.
28.	The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights must occupy a central place in the work of the United Nations. Peace and human rights belong together. Anyone who violates human rights is thereby breaking commitments he has assumed on the basis of the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenants on Human Rights; he is infringing international law.
29.	For the Federal Republic of Germany, an active policy of support for human rights is a pillar of its policy for peace. A draft convention against torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment—a draft convention which we support and to which we attach great importance—has been submitted to the General Assembly. We appeal to all Member States to accept the draft convention and the control procedures for which it provides and to let it become effective. Torture, one of the most dreadful scourges of mankind, must be banished from the world. No one should be delivered into the hands of torturers, and no torturer should go unpunished.
30.	We welcome the favourable reaction to our proposal for an optional protocol prohibiting capital punishment. I ask for further constructive cooperation. I address my appeal also to those States which do not yet want to give up the death penalty.
31.	Racism, particularly	in South Africa, constitutes a fundamental violation of human dignity. We appeal to the Republic of South Africa to clear the way for the realization by all its citizens of elementary human rights.
32.	The United Nations needs institutions that permit better protection of human rights. The appeals for the appointment of a high commissioner for human rights and for the institution of a court of human rights point the way to this goal.
33.	The Charter of the United Nations represents a magnificent effort to overcome the inherited structures, based on the possession and projection of power, and to create new structures for peace. But the United Nations has not yet united the nations of the world. The world is still marked by rivalry between nations and power blocs, rooted in distrust. That is the result of bitter historical experience. World history has taught nations to be prepared for the possibility of force from outside.
34.	Force is still being used. The Afghan people long for the right to preserve in peace their independence, their self-determination and the faith of their fathers. Laos and Kampuchea are fighting for their independence. In the Gulf war, people are still dying a senseless death. Central America is riven by tension from without and within. The independence of Namibia is still being withheld. In South Africa, people are discriminated against because of their colour. There will be no rest for the Middle East as long as violence and not negotiations are the order of the day. Without an undertaking to refrain from the use of force, without the realization by the Palestinian people of their right to self-determination, without recognition of the right of all States, including Israel, of their right to exist, there will never be a lasting and just peace in the Middle East.
35.	We must strengthen the peace-making influence of the United Nations. The Secretary General has rightly pointed out that there should be less talk about the inefficiency of the United Nations and more about a lack of willingness on the part of States to tap its potential. To this end, the principle of universality must remain inviolate. Despite all our differences, we must always so conduct the dialogue as to make its continuation seem desirable to all participants. We all know how difficult it is to settle or even to restrict conflicts once they have broken out. That is why conflicts must be nipped in the bud. For this purpose we need an effective early warning system permitting the Security Council and the Secretary General to act swiftly. We support the proposals made by the Secretary General on this matter.
36.	In the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization, the Federal Republic of Germany, along with other delegations, has submitted proposals on the prevention of international conflicts.
37.	Our refugee initiative, aimed at reducing the horrendous flow of refugees through political cooperation, also serves the purpose of stifling potential conflicts.
38.	Observance of the prohibition of the use of force is the first step that must be taken. An undertaking not to use force does not mean renouncing convictions, values and interests. It focuses on the form and the means used by States to settle their differences. The undertaking to refrain from the use of force is one of the fundamental and indispensable principles for ordering the peaceful coexistence of States. The policy of the Federal Republic of Germany is a policy for peace, embedded in the commitment to refrain from using force. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization, to which we belong, is built on this foundation. In their Bonn Declaration of 10 June 1982, the allies stated:
"Our purpose is to prevent war and, while safeguarding democracy, to build the foundations of lasting peace. None of our weapons will ever be used except in response to attack."
39.	We know that military strength alone cannot guarantee a peaceful future. Disarmament and arms control are therefore integral parts of our security policy. In Europe, East and West face each other with huge arsenals; throughout the world, enormous resources, which could otherwise help us and the developing countries shape our future, are spent on arms. The prevalent distrust can be measured by reference to world arms expenditure figures. Confidence-building and disarmament are demands addressed to the entire international community, to East and West, to North and South alike.
40.	Today, no region of the world can find peace and security on its own. Arms control in Europe strengthens peace and stability in the world. The worldwide and regional dialogue on disarmament and arms control has not been interrupted. Pessimism and resignation must not doom our efforts, which must be guided by the will to utilize the available instruments to pursue an active policy. That means, above all, that negotiations must take place. This principle must apply everywhere and in respect of all weapons. No weapons system must be excepted. No one may consider only his own security interests; the legitimate interests of others must also be acknowledged. No one may seek security at the expense of others.
41.	We welcome the fact that President Reagan, speaking from this rostrum [4th meeting], proposed to the Soviet Union a comprehensive disarmament dialogue. That dialogue is in the interest of all peoples. The United States and the Soviet Union bear a particular responsibility on account of their nuclear potential and their obligations deriving from the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
42.	Like the President of the United States, we favour the resumption of nuclear arms negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union without preconditions. We support the American desire for drastic reductions in the field of intercontinental strategic weapons. As hitherto, we want global renunciation of land based intermediate range missiles by the United States and the Soviet Union. We support every balanced agreement made to this end.
43.	We call for arms control with regard to outer space while there is still time.
44.	At the Vienna Talks on Mutual Reduction of Forces, Armaments and Associated Measures in Central Europe, we want to achieve parity in conventional forces in Central Europe by means of mutual troop reductions.
45.	We urge the participants in the Conference on Confidence and Security building Measures and Disarmament in Europe, meeting at Stockholm, to agree to concrete, militarily significant and verifiable measures for security and confidence-building. Such measures must apply to the whole of Europe.
46.	We advocate that the undertaking to refrain from the threat or use of force be made concrete and be reaffirmed within the mandate given to the Stockholm Conference. It must apply among all States within the alliance systems and to the actions of participating States throughout the world.
47.	We call for a fresh initiative in the process of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe. The Finnish proposal that the tenth anniversary of the Helsinki Final Act be marked by a conference at a political level merits support.
48.	We appeal to all Members of the United Nations to enter into the process of confidence building in all parts of the world in a practical and serious manner, thereby improving worldwide the conditions for disarmament and arms control.
49.	It remains important, in view of the universal increase in military expenditure, to publish military budgets and make them comparable. We call for a United Nations register providing information on arms exports and imports throughout the world.
50.	We want a worldwide, comprehensive and verifiable ban on chemical weapons. It is not sufficient to ban chemical weapons in Europe only, thereby preserving the option of using them in other parts of the world.
51.	The commitments entered into as a result of disarmament negotiations must be verifiable. The Federal Republic of Germany will contribute its share to achieving success in disarmament negotiations.
52.	Europe has experienced the horrors of two world wars. The European Community was born of these experiences. We seek European Union. The peoples joined in that union will develop their strengths and capabilities in such a way that Europe can take its rightful place in the world.
53.	Franco German friendship is an example of how the lessons of history can be taken to heart. The joint commemoration by the Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany and the President of the French Republic of the war dead at the Verdun military graves is a symbol of reconciliation and friendship.
54.	The States of the European Community want to master the future together. But Europe is more than the 10 States—soon to be 12—of the European Community. We seek cooperation with all the States of Europe. We Germans are aware of the responsibility deriving from the history of our country and from our situation at the heart of Europe. The Federal Republic of Germany has linked its fate firmly to that of Europe. Our policy is a policy for peace in Europe. With the other States participating in the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, we want to create, on the basis of the Helsinki Final Act a rueful order in Europe in which cooperation can develop freely between States, irrespective of the differences in their systems. We seek a peaceful order in which, as envisaged in the Helsinki Final Act, nations, can determine their own fate and live free from the fear of violence, threats and restriction of their liberty and in which people can enjoy the exercise of their lawful rights and the fruits of peaceful international exchanges.
55.	It is a policy for peace in Europe too when we declare, as stated in the letter on German unity, that our political aim is to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will regain its unity through free self-determination.
56.	The treaties concluded between my country and our Eastern neighbours in the 1970s cleared the way for the Helsinki Final Act. We stand by every word of those treaties. The Federal Republic of Germany respects the territorial integrity of all States within their present boundaries. It proceeds from the existing situation in Europe. It makes no territorial claims on anyone and will not do so in the future either. The Federal Republic of Germany considers the borders of all States to be inviolable and will continue to do so. We call upon all States to educate their young people in peace and in respect for other nations and other opinions. Education in hatred jeopardizes peace; polemics against the peaceful intentions of other nations poison the political atmosphere.
57.	The Federal Republic of Germany wishes to breathe life into the treaties concluded with its Eastern neighbours. We want the Helsinki Final Act to be implemented in all its parts. We want to continue the process of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe. That process has improved the situation in Europe; it has stood up under severe strains in the international climate. The contribution of all participants in the Conference, large States as well as small, will remain indispensable to security and cooperation in Europe. We want cooperation with all the States adherents to the Warsaw Pact. We want cooperation—political, economic, technological and environmental. We want close cultural exchanges.
58.	We shall resolutely and patiently pursue our charted course towards compromise and understanding. We shall not let ourselves be disheartened or confounded. We shall consistently pursue with the Soviet Union the dialogue and cooperation based on the Treaty of Moscow—and continued even during difficult times. That Treaty, like the long-term economic agreement, opens up great vistas that must be exploited.
59.	The desire for German Polish understanding and reconciliation determines our thinking and action towards the Polish nation. The Treaty of Warsaw, concluded on 7 December 1970, breached once and for all the vicious circle of injustice and retaliation. It was one of the most important milestones in German and European post-war politics.
60.	Our cooperation with the German Democratic Republic, even at times of East West tension, is an expression of the historically rooted responsibility of both German States for peace in Europe. This responsibility must also prove its worth in the joint solution of human and technical problems. People must be able to experience personally the benefits of detente. In this respect we have made progress. It is our wish that both German States should continue along the route marked out by the Basic Treaty normalizing relations and the Helsinki Final Act. It is our wish that they should set an example by meeting their obligations under the Final Act. In this way we shall live up to the requirement inherent in the recognition of our joint responsibility.
61.	An improved relationship between the United States and the Soviet Union is vitally important to East West relations and to world peace. Contemplation of the principles of equality and mutual consideration embodied in the United States Soviet declaration of 1972 could smooth the way for such a development. President Reagan, in his statement to the Assembly [4th meeting], expressed the determination of his country to cooperate with the Soviet Union in securing world peace. That ought to meet with a favourable response from the Soviet Union. We can offer no substitute for dialogue between the United States and the Soviet Union, but we, like other medium and small sized States, make our contribution to improving East West relations, and it is no mean contribution.
62.	Europe, so often afflicted by wars and the source of many wars in other parts of the world, must today serve as the starting point for initiatives aimed at peace and cooperation in all parts of the world. For this reason, as a member of the European Community, the Federal Republic of Germany also relies in its relations with the third world countries on a policy that seeks, as stated in the second Lome Convention, "to reinforce, on the basis of complete equality between partners and in their mutual interest, close and continuing cooperation in a spirit of international solidarity".
63.	We seek friendship and partnership on an equal basis with the countries of the South. We support the principle of genuine nonalignment because it preserves independence and provides protection from foreign hegemonic aspirations. The Movement of Nonaligned Countries is increasingly becoming a stabilizing factor in international politics.
64.	The most populous country in the world, the People's Republic of China, is of great importance to world stability. We are gratified to note that China is opening its doors to Asia and to the world at large and is exercising its co-responsibility for international peace and cooperation.
65.	The regional groupings offer small and medium sized States the opportunity to pool their resources and together to maintain their independence. The European Community cooperates closely with the States members of ASEAN and the Andean Pact within the framework of cooperation agreements. We advocate close cooperation between the members of the European Community and the States of the Gulf Cooperation Council. We are playing our part to ensure that the Euro Arab dialogue will be further intensified.
66.	In a few days the Foreign Ministers of the States members of the European Community, together with Spain and Portugal, will be meeting at San Jose with their counterparts from the countries of Central America and the Contadora Group to launch a political dialogue and to lay the foundations for economic cooperation between the European Community and Central America.
67.	North and South must talk to one another, negotiate with one another and find joint solutions to the present and future problems of humanity. The North South dialogue will be successful only if it is conducted in awareness of the equal dignity of all the world's cultures. The subject of cultural exchanges between North and South must not be banished to the fringe of talks; it must be at the very heart of such talks. Our world is full of cultural prejudices that are often rooted in ignorance. We all have more to learn from one another. The North may be richer than the South, but it is not thereby wiser, more human or more cultivated. The cultures of North and South must each recognize the equality of the other in its own cultural dignity. It is a matter of the mental attitude with which we encounter other peoples.
68.	How often has arrogance towards other peoples arisen from contempt for their cultural identity and achievements. To understand a country, one must understand its culture. Experience of the equivalence of cultures is not inbred in peoples. It requires intensive cultural exchanges. We are prepared to give; we are prepared to take. Cultural exchanges contribute to the establishment of a peaceful international order.
69.	During these days the nations of the world have turned to United Nations Headquarters in New York in hope and anxiety. They are uneasy. It is not merely the presence of tensions that worries them, it is the apparent increase in those tensions, and they wonder what will happen if the tensions continue to increase.
70.	The problems confronting us are serious and difficult. No one expects us during these days to discover a magic formula that will solve them all at once. But the nations are right to expect one thing, namely, that we should give signs of hope, signs that the Governments of the world have recognized the danger, signs that they can halt the rising tensions. The nations do not want to hear us repeating long familiar, irreconcilable positions or apportioning blame. They want to know what specifically we intend to do in order to serve the common cause of peace. We must not disappoint them.
71.	I have explained how my country fulfils its responsibility. The Federal Republic of Germany faces the challenge of peace with the confidence of a country whose citizens can freely develop and freely help to build a humanitarian and just world. This great aim of a just and humanitarian world should guide us as we celebrate the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations in 1985 and as we observe in 1986 the International Year of Peace.

﻿First of all, I should like to pay a tribute to you, Sir, as President of the General Assembly. Your farsighted opening address matches our own concerns and positions on many points. Through you I should also like to salute the country you represent here, Zambia, and its President, Kenneth Kaunda, a tireless advocate of peaceful evolution in southern Africa.
117.	It is an honour for me to lead, for the fifth time, the French delegation to a session of the General Assembly. This session, which welcomes the admission of the 159th Member of the United Nations, Brunei Darussalam, is a noteworthy opportunity also for me to affirm from this rostrum, as did the President of the French Republic at the thirty eighth session and the Prime Minister at the thirty-seventh session the importance France attaches to the building of an international order defined in terms of law and watched over and nurtured by the organs of the United Nations family: the  Security Council, which enjoys permanent decision-making power, as defined in the Charter of the United Nations; the General Assembly, which gives each State the right of political expression; and the specialized agencies, including those of Bretton Woods, whose spheres of jurisdiction have been and will continue to be specified and enlarged as necessity dictates.
118.	The duty of the international community, of the United Nations, is to provide a framework, a means of expressing the aspirations of our peoples to justice, security and independence and to try to find answers to the problems that arise among our nations. If the United Nations fails in this task, current conflicts will worsen and others will be added to them; whole regions of the world will become arenas of confrontation. This we know. We also know—and I will return to this point later—that the whole of economic life is threatened by potentially explosive situations that might be catastrophic for some and would spare none.
119.	This is another way of saying that my Government once again this year endorses the Secretary General's report on the work of the Organization [A/39/1] and wishes to be associated with that veritable manifesto for the multilateralism and universality of the United Nations. We also note the frankness and clear-sightedness of the criticisms that he has deemed it necessary to express of the work of the United Nations itself: his condemnation, for example, of the proliferation of resolutions that go unapplied, or his concern at the ever-growing politicization of a great many technical and economic problems.
120.	These preliminary remarks are especially important in view of the fact, which we should have the honesty to recognize, that these past 12 months have not brought much satisfaction to most of the world's peoples. The train of poverty has lengthened as a result of economic deterioration and the contraction of world trade. Natural disasters have at times assumed catastrophic proportions. In another forum—the Development Committee of the World Bank—my colleague, the Minister of Cooperation and Development, has described the tragedies of Africa. Think of the legions of refugees driven from their villages, and sometimes their countries, by hunger, fear and the threat of annihilation. Think of the famine and the encroaching desert. It is essential to recognize forthwith that the problems of that continent are priority problems and to underscore the importance of meetings on this subject, from the Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa, held at Geneva from 9 to 11 July 1984, to the debate on the World Bank's interesting special report on Africa.
121.	Poverty and decline, which seem to many irremediable, are affecting other parts of the third world also. All too often, and almost everywhere, hope of improvement is fading, expectation of a new development is waning, resignation is setting in, despair is becoming more widespread.
122.	In short, I repeat, negative trends seem to me to have cast dark shadows the last few months. At best, there has been stagnation; in general, ground has been lost and the overriding feeling is not optimistic among the weak and the poor, which is to say the vast majority of the world.
123.	Things are scarcely better on the political level. There is the impression that nothing is being resolved between East and West. For months the superpowers have refused to talk with each other. One of them sought to make the resumption of the negotiations which were broken off for more than a year subject to preconditions that prejudged the outcome. Advice was given to the closest allies to put their contacts on hold as well. Admittedly, a ray of hope has filtered through at this session—the encouraging news that meetings have finally been scheduled.
124.	Elsewhere, wars and the threats of war persist. The bloody conflict between Iran and Iraq continues; the Israeli Arab confrontation shows no sign of abating; the integrity of Lebanon has not been restored; the independence of Namibia is being continually postponed; Cyprus is torn apart; foreign forces in Afghanistan and Cambodia have not been withdrawn; insecurity and the fear of outside intervention still dominate the scene in Central America. The single bright spot is the decision on the immediate withdrawal of all foreign forces from Chad, a move that should enable the people of that country to shoulder their responsibility fully and to regain their unity, on the initiative of their Head of State.
125.	How can we fail to remember, above and beyond the violations of the rights of peoples and States that I have just cited, the increasing attacks on human rights? A id we hear growing and swelling the demand of ever larger numbers of people for justice, freedom and equality. Yes, these past 12 months have been sad and discouraging.
126.	In the face of such a situation, which has deteriorated over the years—and I am referring particularly to the world economic disorder, which I shall refer to again—the international community has no right to remain silent. Still less has it the right to remain inactive if it does not wish to dash the hopes of the peoples of the industrialized world, born in the aftermath of the massacres of the Second World War, and the hopes of the developing countries, born in the wake of the great wave of independence.
127.	I should now like to review the various items.
128.	In the East West confrontation, no one will deny that primary responsibility in the normal course of events belongs to the two superpowers. Therefore, we expect those Powers to re-establish contacts and dialogue.
129.	The first objective has to be, as the President of the United States said the day before yesterday, to reverse the arms build-up, particularly the build-up of nuclear weapons, to avoid unleashing a new arms race triggered by the portentous announcement of imminent progress in new technologies—I am thinking in particular of space technology—and to revitalize and actively pursue the process of bringing about balanced and controlled arms limitation.
130.	Concerned members of the international community can and must contribute actively to such progress. France, for its part, attaches great importance to the Conference on Confidence and Security building Measures and Disarmament in Europe, meeting at Stockholm, which should make it possible to restore a certain level of confidence among the countries of Europe, from the Atlantic to the Urals, in the field of conventional forces. In any case, my country will be active in the quest for a balance of forces, which is a prerequisite for peace. Its own military nuclear effort will remain exclusively on the level of defensive deterrents. Last year, at the thirty eighth session, speaking from this rostrum, President Mitterrand outlined our position on the various discussions on this subject, namely, the strategic arms reduction talks and the negotiations on intermediate range nuclear forces, which we hope will be resumed at an early date, and our participation in possible nuclear disarmament negotiations, once existing arsenals have been reduced to quite different and less unreasonable proportions and once other conditions have been met. Our position has not changed since then.
131.	France also intends to participate actively in international efforts to prevent, under effective monitoring, particularly serious developments—I would remind members of our active participation in the discussions on chemical weapons—and in the efforts to control the new alarming and destabilizing progress in the most disturbing areas of future technology. That is the reason for the initiative taken by France at the recent meetings of the Conference on Disarmament, at Geneva, regarding the use of space for antimissile and anti-satellite activities. It is also the reason for our considerable interest in any initiative on this matter. 
132.	France, a loyal partner in the Atlantic Alliance—need I reaffirm this?—nevertheless retains its freedom of judgement and action. Together with its close partners, it will encourage closer relations among the peoples of Europe, whom history united for centuries and then divided over the course of the last 40 years.
133.	The peoples of Europe themselves have indeed the desire, the right and the possibility of contributing decisively to the easing of tensions. Let the right of each to express his own identity and freely to choose his future be recognized and we shall see new ties developing among European countries of different and even opposing ideologies and alliances, because our peoples want to know one another better, to rediscover together the old elements of their common past, to expand economic and cultural ties and to seek occasions for meetings and direct contact among individuals.
134.	It is important, moreover, that the differences between the superpowers, the rivalry between East and West, do not prevent the rest of the world from living its life. We are convinced of the importance of nonalignment when it is in keeping with the national will. True nonalignment can and should strengthen international stability. We are determined to help this. My President underscored this point a year ago when he actively took part in the Meeting of Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Heads of Delegation of the Nonaligned Countries held in New York from 4 to 7 October 1983 and organized by the President of the Movement of Nonaligned Countries, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, Prime Minister of India. Members will have noted that relations between my country and the nonaligned countries have increased and gained in trust and depth over the past few years.
135.	The desire to affirm the identity of each quite naturally includes systematically encouraging the expansion of relations among neighbours, thus furthering regional cooperation. France, which has known so many wars with its neighbours over the centuries, has rediscovered the close friendship that is only fitting with its great German neighbour. It has embarked irreversibly on the construction of the European Community in all areas—commercial, economic and political It has found in that entity a greater strength and a better potential for hearing what is happening in the world and for being heard in it. In this way, France confirms and strengthens its capacity for independence.
136.	What France wishes and accomplishes for itself and its neighbours it also wishes for all others in the world. Every time a possibility of regional organization appears, my country will support it, regardless of the location. Members should not be surprised, therefore, at our commitment to the Organization of African Unity [OAU], the League of Arab States and also, farther from Europe, ASEAN, the Andean Pact countries, and others.
137 Quite naturally also, cooperation among regions should be encouraged. This is one way to advance relations between neighbouring countries while still preserving the real independence of all, even the weakest among them and those experiencing a period of difficulty or needing external aid at this time. Members must not think that the second Lome Convention linking the 10 member States of the European Community to 65 African, Caribbean and Pacific countries is the result of mere chance, any more than is the meeting to be held at San Jose the day after tomorrow which is to bring together the 10 member States of the European Community, the two candidates for admission—Spain and Portugal—and the five countries of Central America in the presence of the four countries that are members of the Contadora Group—and I could give many other examples. This is a well-thought-out policy.
138.	In the global context, it is possible to trace the main lines of the action that my Government finds desirable in the face of today's major issues.
139.	First of all, I should like to refer to the subject of warfare, and above all where there has been the greatest bloodshed in the past two years—I mean, between Iran and Iraq. The repeated appeals of the United Nations, and particularly the resolutions of the Security Council, must be heeded by the two belligerents and not just by one of them.
140.	The use of inhumane weapons should be renounced so as to spare the civilian populations. A tribute should be paid to the Secretary General for his efforts and the initial results he has obtained. Everything possible must be done to bring about a return to the customary freedoms in that region, particularly freedom of navigation. In this way, progress will be made towards ending this terrible connect, which will cease to have a raison d'etre once the parties return to the borders recognized by the international community and once the issues in dispute can, for the most part, be dealt with at the negotiating table.
141.	Elsewhere, there are grave tensions that could lead to war: I am referring to Cyprus, for example, whose sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity cannot be called into question. We are encouraging the Secretary General in his noteworthy efforts.
142.	I am also thinking of Central America. The Central American countries should be encouraged to settle their mutual disagreements through a series of discussions and arrangements among themselves, in accordance with the principles set forth in the revised Contadora Act on Peace and Cooperation in Central America, with all interference in internal affairs and all outside intervention rejected. The political forces should thus be able to voice their own opinions and the republics of Central America should be helped finally to overcome economic and social situations that are a legacy of the past. Threats and aggression are no longer acceptable.
143.	I am also referring to peoples that have been divided, the heroic people of Korea, for example. Over the centuries they have asserted their identity and unity only to find themselves subsequently drawn by war into an intolerable division, while in fact they have a right to unity. We hope the Koreans will soon sit among us as other peoples do.
144.	Then, there are places where human rights are violated by outside intervention or constraints, by the unwanted occupation of foreign troops: in Afghanistan, where armed intervention by foreign forces increases as resistance by the people increases; in the Middle East, where the Palestinian people are suffering and despair of seeing their rights recognized, of knowing at long last the homeland which will be theirs; where the State of Israel, for lack of guaranteed security—which is its inalienable right— within the borders that have been recognized by the international community, pursues a policy incompatible with the indispensable recognition of the rights 
of the other peoples of the region; where Lebanon, which has already suffered so much, is unable to secure respect for the Security Council resolutions concerning the southern part of its territory and to obtain an end to all foreign presence; in southern Africa, where Council resolution 435 (1978), on Namibian independence, continues to be disregarded, even defied, while the war continues in Angola, with the presence and participation on that territory of South Africa's army; in Western Sahara, whose people have a right to self-determination; in Cambodia, that country of a great and ancient civilization, bled white by appalling genocide and now occupied by its neighbours to the east.
145.	What horrors these clear violations of the rights of peoples and States have entailed! And all too often these violations go hand in hand with scorn for human rights, with the negation of fundamental values that should be the basis of any society, as the Charter of the United Nations has recognized and affirmed.
146.	France will speak out, will voice its condemnation, will take action wherever the lives and dignity of individuals are threatened, wherever people are held in constraint and deprived of their basic freedoms. It will continue to express its reprobation everywhere, with the same words and the same conviction. This pledge holds true for Governments and countries that are very different from one another—from the countries that signed the Helsinki Finn Act to the countries east and south of Africa and on the South American shores of the Pacific. Everywhere we shall strive to alleviate suffering and obtain the freedom of those who are unjustly imprisoned, those whose names are known and stand as symbols, from Shcharansky to Mandela and the countless others who are anonymous expiatory victims.
147.	The United Nations deserves support and a tribute on this level: the Commission on Human Rights; conventions that are constantly being refined and improved on; resolutions condemning racism and discrimination. It is also beginning—and I welcome this—to stress the global nature of the problem, by opening debate on economic and social rights and thereby moving, in conditions that France finds right and opportune, towards an enlargement of the definition of fundamental human rights. Such progress of law at the world level deserves constant encouragement.
148.	But there are other serious threats to fundamental human rights that have to be considered. We must ask ourselves why the current world economic crisis is so serious and our market economy system powerless to contend with that crisis and resolve the economic disorder that has prevailed in the world for a number of years now.
149.	After 1945, a certain economic order governed the industrialized world. There was monetary order, agreed upon at Bretton Woods; although it was, of course, threatened when the dollar left the gold standard, order nevertheless persisted and exchange parities were relatively stable. There was budgetary order; the industrialized countries made every effort to balance their budgets. There was a degree of predictability in the prices of raw materials. There was order in trade—admittedly, largely fuelled by the needs of reconstruction after the massive destruction of the war and the population growth that immediately followed it. All these elements of order opened the door to a category of society that in the nineteenth century was called the proletariat—in other words, the most underprivileged in the industrialized countries—and, since then, the developing countries.
150.	It seemed that growth was assure and would go on forever. Countries that had untapped or inadequately developed resources in the world decided—quite rightly—to equip themselves to exploit their wealth. They invested in people. Hundreds of thousands of young persons were sent off to receive higher education; infrastructures were developed; business capital was increased.
151.	In all our countries in Europe and in the third world, a larger production apparatus emerged, accompanied by more onerous administrative, economic and social structures. This was achieved at the price of a high level of indebtedness—a level justified, however, in a period of seemingly assured growth and when borrowing was carried out in predictable and reasonable conditions. At the same time, especially in countries that were still largely rural, a trend towards urbanization led to the migration of hundreds of thousands of peasants, who settled in urban communities where the future seemed to lie in industrial production and the service sector. All this seemed rational and reasonable.
152.	Then, suddenly, the game changed: the markets of the industrialized countries, having reached the saturation point, closed up. There was no longer any expansion. Countries, including France and others in the industrialized world, which had had a labour shortage for a number of years suddenly had an excess labour force and unemployment.
153.	At the same time, disorder had set in: monetary disorder, with its corollary of sizeable fluctuations in exchange rates; budgetary disorder, with huge deficits forcing States to turn to the financial markets; and the dizzying climb of interest rates. The Bretton Woods system had disappeared, and quite naturally the most economically powerful country irresistibly attracted the world's liquidities; its currency, the dollar, soared while its interest rates increased under the effect of the budget deficit.
154.	The market economy world became chaotic and unpredictable. A, the same time, growth ceased everywhere. The effects of the current remarkable recovery in the United States have still not changed the direction of this development. Markets saturated elsewhere are no longer able to absorb additional purchases; indeed, many markets are actually deteriorating from year to year.
155.	For the third world, this development has been—and I shall not mince words—catastrophic: the more a country's economy advanced, the mere serious the phenomenon. Such countries had counted on economic growth; they were thus deprived of the whole apparatus needed for amortization, at a time when nothing was generating the necessary resources for his. The surpluses of the oil producing countries have disappeared. In other developing countries, debt has climbed to its current levels: $700 billion for the third world as a whole, $350 billion for Latin America.
156.	Debt servicing had become intolerable burden, since there was no longer any growth in revenue. Higher interest rates only exacerbated the situation. Since 1982 in every country in Latin America, debt servicing, had it been undertaken without any adjustment, would have far exceeded the total liquidity accumulated in the reserves. At that point, a reversal set in. The gross domestic product fell. Imports declined drastically, by 60 per cent in some countries in the space of three years. Consequently, the industrial countries were themselves affected, especially those that depend very much on their relations with the third world, as is the case of France. The negative growth in the third world has thus been an important factor in the increase of unemployment in the industrialized countries. The purchasing power of our countries declined abruptly as a result. The vicious circle of depression and deflation was complete.
157.	What, then, have been the responses?
158.	International organizations have found palliatives—that is, means of responding immediately to immediate problems, and they deserve great praise for this. They have found answers even as the major international banks have been endangered, with the total of precarious debt far exceeding their capital.
159.	answers have been found for the short term, and, more rarely, for the medium term. The Paris Club has examined the cases of 25 countries in 18 months. The quid pro quo of this rescheduling had to be the adoption of strict and rigorous policies, which the IMF has defined with the remarkable professionalism that is characteristic of it. It has dealt with 45 countries.
160.	The third world countries concerned accepted the measures imposed with great courage. For the most part, they indicated their determination to go ahead with monetary adjustments, to accept realistic pricing for services and foodstuffs, to freeze wages, to increase taxes, to fight capital outflows. In short, they accepted tremendous suffering for their peoples in acknowledgement of pledges that had been made and were to be respected. Shall we recognize sufficiently the courage it took in each country and in meetings such as those at Cartagena in June and at Mar del Plata this month?
161.	What has been the price of this? First of all, the creation of a disinflationary phenomenon which reduces singularly an essential element of world growth; secondly, the imposition of the sacrifice of ambitions and the abandonment of policies that leaders considered and presented as the way to ensure greater justice; and, lastly, an increase in the number of the jobless.
162.	But the hundreds of thousands of men and women who migrated to towns lost the protection of the rural world without finding a new system of security in exchange. Without jobs, what will become of these uprooted people? Does this not spell hopelessness for generations of young people? It was reasonable to bank on growth and development; yet now this wager has generated trouble, doubt and danger.
163.	This approach has settled nothing, for without development why should the future be any improvement on the present? Postponing the due date of a debt in the hope that tomorrow the debtor country will be in a better position to service it is meaningless unless between today and tomorrow there is growth, development, increased income and an improved repayment capacity.
164.	But the evolution over the past two years has tended to discourage investment: interest rates are high, exchange rates are unstable, the banks that provided most of the financing have lost confidence. In 1983, for the first time, the net flow of capital towards the South was negative. No further comment is necessary.
165.	Meanwhile, the international meetings that have followed one on the heels of another have at best succeeded in providing a timid analysis of the phenomenon—the sixth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, held at Belgrade in 1983; the Fourth General Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, held at Vienna last August. International assistance funds are declining in real value: the replenishment of aid is inadequate; UNDP has had to cut back on its commitments. France stands out as an exception because we have increased official development assistance over the past three years; we are alone or almost alone in this.
166.	I know that the description is a bleak one and perhaps it will be considered exaggerated. However, we must look to the future. For the past two years, a favourable line of thought has been emerging; in all the industrialized countries and in all the countries of the third world, the same analysis has appeared.
167.	Whatever sets off the concern or the criticism—interest rates, indebtedness, budget deficit, monetary instability, lack of liquidity, difficulties for the banks—the reasoning is global. We know it must encompass all subjects, for they are linked, and it concerns all countries—interdependence is complete. We also know, however—and this was underscored at the London Economic Summit of the seven industrialized countries, held in London last June— that each country, each case, has its own specific characteristics. Thus, a global analysis is coupled with specific ways of utilizing the means. There is now a remarkable community of views as far as the analyses and reasoning are concerned. This should give us a chance to activate and mobilize powerful economic forces.
168.	What should be done? Obviously, I shall not give a simple answer. The problem is too serious and too complex for a single answer. Action is called for in several areas.
169.	We must first try to replace the current disorder by a more stable and predictable situation, particularly in the areas of currency and raw materials. We must rebuild an international economic order.
170.	In the monetary field, as my colleague, the Minister of the Economy and Finance, pointed out once again in Washington a few days ago, we must be able to act on interest rates. This is asserted by everyone in every part of the world. Their level is a major obstacle to recovery. Real interest rates have never been so high; they must return to reasonable levels. Therefore, we must attack the root cause, namely, the excessive deficit in Government spending, which leads to a destabilizing public drain on the financial markets.
171.	Actions over a longer term are also called for in order to lay the foundations of genuine international monetary reform, as the President of my country emphasized at length at the 1983 meeting of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development in Paris. This does not mean going back to the Bretton Woods agreements, which reflected another period, but greater stability and reasonable predictability of exchange rates must be ensured. The European Community has largely succeeded in achieving this with the European Monetary System, and we believe that it is also possible within a triad of the dollar, the yen and the European currency unit [ECU].
172.	I shall not dwell on the subject of raw materials, although it is an essential one. It is true that prices have experienced a certain upward movement but they remain erratic, and the lack of predictability has awesome consequences for the rationalizing of the supply demand relationship and for the ability of the producer country to forecast the pace of its development through self-financing. So we must continue to organize these markets by drawing up new agreements in instances where these are economically feasible; by renewing existing agreements and making them more effective; and, lastly, by establishing the Common Fund for Commodities already agreed to by more than 75 countries.
173.	Once some order has been re-established, efforts will have to be made to consolidate the financial recovery of the most heavily indebted developing countries, which are also often those with the most promising future, otherwise they would not have found a lender.
174.	The emergency solutions so effectively implemented by the IMF must be complemented by and coordinated with more far-reaching action. The London Economic Summit of the industrialized countries, like the meeting of Cartagena of Latin American countries, emphasized—correctly, in our view—the need for better integration of debt rescheduling plans in the medium term. This means defining plans for adjustment over a reasonably long period and coordinating them with rescheduling operations over a period of several years. It also means strengthening joint action by the IMF and the World Bank in order to ensure a better relationship between adjustment and development. In this way, austerity and growth will be linked. The economic effects of action of this kind will be coupled with the psychological effects of renewed hope among those bearing the unavoidable burden of the disciplines adjustment imposes.
175.	Of course, these organizational efforts will be really valuable only if sufficient resources are channelled to the developing countries to finance economically sound projects and developments, thus giving a new stimulus to growth. This means making use of all sources of financing.
176.	Concerning official development assistance, bilateral and multilateral assistance must at last reach the level the United Nations has called for, of which I have already spoken. The funds provided by the international community should approach the volume recommended by those responsible in this area. It is heart-breaking that the seventh replenishment of the IDA is limited to $9 billion, while the big contributors were almost unanimous in accepting $ 12 billion. The IFAD and the other programmes of the United Nations and its family must be funded, as must the regional development banks, whose activities are worthy of attention. The special fund for Africa, already mentioned, should have priority in this respect. France pledges a special contribution once this fund has been set up.
177.	The adoption of such policies by Governments and by the international community should help restore confidence and revive the potential for action by the banking sector. In fact, anything that can encourage public and private investment in the third world is a step in the right direction, it being understood that the recipient countries are entitled to set the main guidelines for such investment.
178.	Concerning shorter-term flows, in particular capital from commercial banks, the private sector must be encouraged to maintain and consolidate these flows. This is in their own interest and they must be convinced of this. No pressure, no outside incentive can replace confidence. Private flows will be permanently ensured and consolidated only if confidence is re-established in the determination to build sound bases and in the prospects for debtor country stability and development. The agreements recently signed with some countries testify to this.
179.	Such confidence should also be easier to rebuild if international and governmental public financing institutions, in particular the IMF and the World Bank, are able to assist. In this respect, we must extend and develop co-financing that associates private funds and funds from international organizations. In this way, the international structure can act as a catalyst to mobilize capital brought together by the banking circuit. Private and public funds are closely associated.
180.	Let it be quite clear that these arguments are presented—and I say this unashamedly—in the interest of all. Some time ago I spoke of a planetary "New Deal." What was President Roosevelt's gamble when he came to power? He put his money on a recovery stimulated by the weakest elements of society, through the resulting expansion of the market. Time proved him right. Of course, it is always hard, not to say deceptive, to make a transposition when two situations are so different. However: the problem facing us today is similar to the one that faced him. We must inject new hope, or discipline will be painful; we must find means of stimulating recovery that will not condemn the weakest but that will, rather, make use of their capacities for progress. Is a worldwide "New Deal" possible? I want to believe it is.
181.	I owed it to representatives here present to provide this very broad overview, for I am standing at the rostrum of an assembly whose responsibility is global, covering the whole world, from north to south and from east to west, dealing with all aspects of human activity—political, economic and social. I have thus outlined some of the principles that guide my country's policy. We have reaffirmed them on many occasions; we will continue to do so with the calm and the confidence that arise from our convictions.
182.	France's foreign policy is guided by a few simple underlying principles. It serves essential values, values that since the appearance of the first individual have put mankind at the centre of the efforts of every civilized society and every society aspiring to be civilized, values that consequently acknowledge the rights of peoples and thus the rights of nations, values, lastly, that cry out that peace is possible through the balance of forces in a climate of free expression and through a search for progress for all.
183.	France intends to uphold these principles in close cooperation—indeed, in conjunction—with its partners in the European Community, for we believe that the consolidation of that Community is an important element for our part of the world, a factor in the prosperity and peace of the world as a whole.
184.	This hope will have a genuine chance only if, all over the earth, individuals respect each other's diversity, if they examine their difficulties together, if they try to build international order together and, to that end, together adopt appropriate rules of law. Thus, I close as I began, by reaffirming our commitment to the United Nations, our Organization, and by thanking you, Mr. President, and you, Mr. Secretary General, for the orientations you have given us from the very beginning.
﻿First, may I add my voice to the voices of those who have already congratulated you, Sir, on your election to the presidency of the thirty-ninth session of the General Assembly.  I wish you every success in conducting its affairs in the months ahead. To the outgoing President, Mr. Illueca, I extend my thanks for the conscientious way in which he discharged his duties. And it is with great pleasure, and some pride, that I congratulate Brunei Darussalam on becoming, on 21 September, the 159th Member of the United Nations.
38.	Let me also, at the outset, pay a warm tribute to the Secretary General. His unceasing efforts to bring about the solution of the world's problems continue to win our highest esteem and support.
39.	Two years ago, the Secretary General, in his first report on the work of the Organization,' pointed to a crisis of multilateralism. He suggested that the world was "perilously near to a new international anarchy". His report this year shows, with customary perceptiveness and honesty, how little progress we have made towards the objectives he set two years ago. The Secretary General has told us frankly what we, the Member States, can do—indeed, have to do—to overcome the obstacles that have so far prevented our achieving the vision of a better world which inspired those who drew up the Charter of the United Nations now almost 40 years ago.
40.	At Fulton, Missouri, only a year after the birth of the United Nations, Winston Churchill spoke of the political will needed to tum the fledgling Organization into a practical force for peace. He said:
"We must make sure that its work is fruitful, that it is a reality and not a sham, that it is a force for action, and not merely a frothing of words, that it is a true temple of peace . . . and not merely a cockpit in a tower of Babel."
41.	Winston Churchill would certainly have endorsed the profoundly practical instinct that is so evident in the Secretary General’s reports. And 1, too, strongly support the Secretary General’s latest call for us to "ask ourselves what useful steps can be taken in a given situation rather than starting by thinking of all the extraneous reasons why they cannot be taken".
42.	For Churchill's insight is as relevant as ever. Effective international cooperation to tackle the world's problems needs more than polished speeches and well drafted resolutions. It needs courage and imagination; above all, it needs a steadfast commitment on the basis of universality to take practical action in pursuit of realistic objectives.
43.	Nowhere is that more necessary than in our approach to the problems of the world economy. The annual economic summit of the seven major industrialized countries is a good example of the kind of pragmatic approach to problem-solving I have in mind. Last June the United Kingdom hosted in London the tenth such meeting. We were able to reach a large measure of agreement on the essentials for world recovery. At the same time, we took real account of the difficulties which many countries still face. Despite those difficulties, the past 12 months have brought substantial improvements. Two years ago, world trade actually fell. Last year, it grew only 2 per cent. This year, the IMF has forecast growth in world trade of 8.5 per cent.
44.	This recovery has not been confined to the industrialized world. For many developing countries, too, the outlook has improved and is improving further. The current account deficit of the nonoil developing countries is this year expected to be less than half its level in 1981. And this year the growth rate for developing countries should reach 3.7 per cent. This significant improvement has not been achieved without hardship.
45.	I pay a tribute to the success adjustment policies pursued by many developing countries, often in the face of real social and political difficulties. These policies need to be sustained and more widely adopted if we are to manage and diminish the problem of international indebtedness, and they need the full support of the industrialized countries. This point has been rightly stressed by the Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund, Mr. de Larosiere. In his words:
"The efforts of developing countries need to be supported by the industrial countries, who have it in their power to create a more robust and dynamic world economy, as well as by concerted action to ensure adequate international financing flows and open trading conditions."
46.	A major cause of the problems of developing countries is the high level of international interest rates. The United States economy has shown how real new employment can be created in a society that is open and willing to face the need for change. But the current size of the United States budget deficit and the high interest rates that go with it still pose a threat to world recovery. We welcome the United States Administration's recognition of the need to tackle the problem. We hope that it will be sustained and carried into action. Lower world interest rates would benefit us all. They would ease the burden of debt repayment. That in turn would allow many countries to increase their imports, and a general increase in trade is in everybody's interest.
47.	The world's economic problems can only be solved through cooperation in this spirit of interdependence. Certainly my country is determined to work in close cooperation with debtor nations, case by case, to achieve mutually acceptable solutions to their difficulties. The challenge is to implement practical measures which stand a real chance of success.
48.	The British Government has put forward a number of proposals. We discussed them at the London Economic Summit in June. My colleague, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr. Lawson, described them at the IMF meeting in Washington yesterday. He made proposals for the use of multiyear rescheduling, for an enhanced role for the World Bank and its associates, for more private investment in debtor countries and for more stable long-term finance. If carried into practice, these proposals would do much to help the debtor countries. But, without doubt, the greatest contribution would come from sustained and widening recovery
49.	The industrialized countries have a special responsibility for helping to spread this recovery beyond their own frontiers. We must be in earnest in our fight to resist and to reduce protectionism. World trade must be revived through open markets. Here too, given the crucial importance of the dollar exchange rate and so of interest rates, the United States has a unique part to play.
50.	We have been disappointed that the resources available to the IDA have not been increased as we hoped. This makes it all the more important to undertake a special effort to help the poorest countries, above all in Africa. We cannot ignore the special conditions that have afflicted much of Africa or the Secretary-general’s plea for support. Special measures are needed for special conditions.
51.	The truth is that there are no instant solutions. The need is for common determination to work for solid, often unspectacular, progress on all fronts. Solutions to the economic problems I have described need to be rooted firmly in political reality if they are to endure. I am encouraged by the fact that Governments have been willing to identify practical steps that they can and will take together. That is the main reason why prospects for the world economy are better now than they were a year or two ago.
52.	The approach that is working in the economic field applies equally to political relations between States. Here too, there is a need for practical measures to solve real problems. Nowhere is that need more urgent than in East West relations—not because of what is happening but because of what is not happening, because in this area there has not been anything like the same meeting of minds over the way forward as there has been on economic questions. In his report the Secretary General speaks of "great Power tension accentuated by a lack of progress in disarmament and arms limitation". I share his analysis. That is why we need to make a fresh start. President Reagan this week put forward a series of proposals that could lead us in that direction. We must all reject the temptation to identify difficulties with that approach and instead identify the ideas with which we can agree.
53.	In the past year, Mr. Gromyko and I have met on no less than four occasions. On each of those occasions, I have been struck not so much by the differences between us—although these are real and substantial—as by the similarity of what we say are the basic aims of our peoples. This similarity of underlying approach is reflected in the desire of both sides to break the spiral of the arms race, in our shared aim of better relations between East and West, and often in apparently similar words and phrases. I found myself in complete agreement with the statement of the high level Economic Conference of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance, held in Moscow in June,that "no world problems—and that includes the historic dispute between socialism and capitalism—can be solved by force of arms". So what separates us is not so much the words we use as the meaning we attach to them. Our task must be to bridge that gap, to reconcile, in a spirit of mutual understanding, our differing purposes with our underlying interest in our common safety and security.
54.	Each side has proclaimed its desire for a more comprehensive dialogue. I refuse to believe that that cannot be achieved. I believe we can find a common way of resolving such issues of supreme importance to us all. In that same speech in Missouri, Churchill called for greater mutual confidence. He said:
"There is deep sympathy and goodwill in Britain—and I doubt not here also—towards the peoples of all the Russias and a resolve to persevere through many differences and rebuffs in establishing lasting friendships ..."
Forty years later that remains our hope.
55.	During 1984 the West has made far-reaching but practical proposals in every arms control negotiation. At Stockholm we have submitted specific measures which would enhance confidence and security throughout Europe. At Vienna we have made I major new proposal to resolve the long-standing disagreement over the level of Eastern forces. At Geneva, Britain has taken two initiatives on verification of a chemical weapons ban, while the United States has submitted a new draft treaty.
56.	Against that background I deeply regret the Soviet suspension of the nuclear arms talks. Of all subjects on the East West agenda, the control and reduction of nuclear weapons is by common consent the most important. And yet it is the one aspect of arms control which is not at present the subject of negotiation. The United States has offered to resume these talks, anywhere, at any time, without preconditions. The whole world would applaud a positive Soviet response.
57.	So, too, on the question of arms control in outer space. On 29 June, the Soviet Government proposed that talks should begin in Vienna in September. It asked for a prompt response. The Americans gave it, constructively and seriously. But so far the Russians seem to have been unable to take "yes" for an answer. Dialogue cannot be a one-way process—still less, negotiations. No one can converse with an empty chair. I hope the Soviet Union will find the political will to take its place at the table. When it does, it will find the West ready and willing to talk.
58.	The negotiations on the future of Hong Kong which the British and Chinese Governments have been conducting since 1982 are an excellent illustration of the way in which difficult issues may be resolved. Earlier today, in Beijing, the two Governments initialled a draft; agreement on the future of Hong Kong. It is a triumph of good sense. It shows how, in the search for solutions to international problems, agreement is only possible with courage, imagination and political will on all sides. Chairman Deng Xiaoping's idea of "one country, two systems" is an example of such a positive approach. The people of Hong Kong will wish to judge for themselves the outcome of these negotiations. But already I am confident that we have achieved a historic agreement.
59.	Britain also has a special relationship with, and a close interest in, the island of Cyprus. I hope that there, too, we may see early progress in the continuing search for a solution. The Secretary General’s current efforts to bring about a resumption of the intercommunal talks must not be allowed to fail. Only thus will a settlement of the wider problem be possible. That is why the British Government supports the Secretary General in his task. We stand ready to do all we can to assist him.
60.	I turn now to three troubled regions of the world where failure to resolve the disputes which divide the parties could have grave consequences.
61.	In the Middle East, it is deeply disappointing that once again this year we are no nearer a solution of the Arab Israel dispute, but with the arrival of a new Israeli Government there is now an opportunity to turn a new page. The outlines of a just settlement have been clear for many years. It must reconcile Israel's right to exist within secure and recognized borders and the Palestinians' right to self-determination. But plans or statements of principle from the international community are in themselves of limited value unless the parties to the dispute have the political courage to take the bold steps necessary for peace.
62.	Such steps are possible now without anyone's security being endangered. The new Israeli Government could halt the policy of installing illegal settlements in occupied territory. The Arab countries and the Palestinians could formulate a realistic and a common negotiating stand before it is too late. The United States has a unique position of influence with parties on both sides of the dispute. Its role is indispensable. President Reagan reaffirmed on Monday his commitment to his country's search for a just and lasting peace. I very much welcome that. As the President of the Council of Ministers of the European Community made clear yesterday fusing], we and our European partners stand ready to help and to use our influence to work for the peace which has eluded us all so long.
63.	In Lebanon, the efforts of the Lebanese Government to bring peace to that country which has suffered so long deserve the support of all of us. The 10 member countries of the European Community have called consistently for the early withdrawal, in agreement with the Lebanese Government, of all foreign forces. The presidency statement yesterday reiterated that plea. In our view, national reconciliation and withdrawal of those forces should go ahead together. UNIFIL has continued to perform a useful role in southern Lebanon, a role which—as the Secretary General said in April—could with advantage be enlarged.
64.	In the Gulf, we shall continue to support any initiatives which offer hope of an end to the long and tragic conflict between Iran and Iraq. We welcomed the decision to send a United Nations team to investigate allegations that chemical weapons had been used. The British Government condemns unequivocally the use of chemical weapons by anyone. We are encouraged that both sides continue to support the Secretary General’s appeal to avoid attacks on civilian centres of population. We hope that they will take further steps to limit the scope of the conflict and that this will prepare the way for an honourable settlement of the dispute.
65.	Southern Africa is another area where failure to make progress towards solving disputes could have consequences far beyond the region itself. The events of the past few weeks have amply demonstrated the wider dangers of the present policies of the South African Government. They underline the urgent need for real progress towards a system of government supported by all South Africans. This can be achieved only by dialogue within South Africa and between South Africa and the world at large.
66.	Even so, there has been some progress towards reducing tension in the region. In particular, I welcome the wide-ranging contacts between Mozambique and South Africa following the Agreement on Nonaggression and Good Neighbourliness, signed at Nkomati on 16 March 1984. We have also welcomed the agreement between Angola and South Africa, reached at Lusaka on 16 February 1984, on the withdrawal of South African forces from southern Angola. We shall continue to work for further steps towards an early settlement of the Namibian question.
67.	In Central America, too, there is a need for concerted action if we are to check the trend towards instability and foster social and political development. The roots of the conflict and political turmoil racking the region are indigenous, but the problems have been exploited and exacerbated by those who care little for regional stability and democratic evolution, preferring to pursue their own political objectives.
68.	That is why we were encouraged by the democratic elections in El Salvador this year and why we like our partners in the European Community strongly support the Contadora initiative. I much look forward to the meeting at San Jose next weekend between the Foreign Ministers of the 10 member countries of the Community and Spain and Portugal, and of the Central American and Contadora countries. This will be an important opportunity for us to underline our active interest in promoting and encouraging peace. Our purpose is to make a practical contribution to democracy and development in the region.
69.	I must now turn to the relationship between my country and Argentina, whose newly elected President addressed the Assembly on Monday [5th meeting]. Let me stress again that we welcome wholeheartedly Argentina's return to democratic government. We are ready, from that new basis, to try to work towards more normal relations between us after the tragic events of two years ago. We firmly believe that this would be in the interests of Britain, of Argentina, of all our friends in Latin America and of the Falkland Islanders themselves.
70.	Of course Britain and Argentina have different—and deeply held—positions on the question of sovereignty over the Falkland Islands. No one should forget that we were negotiating on that very subject in 1982 when Argentina launched its brutal invasion of the islands. The present Argentine Government was not responsible for that disastrous action, but its consequences cannot just be brushed aside.
71.	As I have said, we attach great importance to improving our relations with Argentina, and we have made a genuine and sustained effort to reach agreement with the Argentine Government on a basis for direct talks. It was clear that, if those talks were not to founder at the outset on the very issue that divides us, the question of sovereignty could not be addressed. We therefore needed to find a way of meeting the legitimate requirements of both sides. With the help of the Swiss and Brazilian Governments as protecting Powers and after a great deal of detailed work, a clear and satisfactory basis for talks was achieved and agreed by all.
72.	When the talks began at Berne in July, Argentina took a position at variance with this agreed basis. Their representatives insisted that no progress could be made towards normalization without the certainty that a mechanism would be established to permit negotiations over sovereignty. This overturned the very basis on which talks between us had been agreed. The talks therefore came to an end. This was an important opportunity missed. I think that many people will have been disappointed, as I was, that President Alfonsin, in his speech to the Assembly two days ago, presented the same position once again explicitly as a precondition of any talks between us.
73.	Let me also underline that there is a further fundamental principle involved in this dispute which cannot be overlooked—the principle of self-determination. It is a principle which is jealously guarded by the people of Great Britain and, indeed, by every Member of the United Nations. The Falkland Islanders, like any other people, have the right to self-determination. We had hoped that the new Argentine Government, with its attachment to democracy and human rights, would be ready to recognize this fundamental human right of the Falkland Islanders.
74.	Those who call on us to negotiate on the sovereignty of the islands should think what exactly it is that they are asking us to do. For Argentina, such negotiations could only have one outcome: the transfer of sovereignty over the islands irrespective of the wishes of the Falkland Islanders. To ask us to do that is to ask us to overturn the principle of self-determination enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
75.	We shall continue with the economic and constitutional development of the Falkland Islands. We shall maintain the minimum level of forces required to defend the islands. Let me emphasize those words, "defend the islands". Our military dispositions are designed solely for that purpose.
76.	We have sought ways of improving relations with Argentina by tackling practical issues where real progress is possible to the benefit of both sides. It is still my profound belief that, in the difficult circumstances I have described, the only way forward is to find a way of taking such practical steps as will enable confidence to be re-established between our two peoples.
77.	The right of peoples to choose their own Government is also at issue in Afghanistan and Cambodia. The outside world has little idea of the suffering which the Afghan people endure. We cannot ignore the harsh realities of the problem, which my Irish colleague, Mr. Barry, has already described [6th meeting]. We give our full support to the efforts of the Secretary General, which are seeking to ensure that the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and successive United Nations resolutions shall be applied to restore an independent and nonaligned Afghanistan. This cannot happen until Soviet forces are withdrawn.
78.	In Cambodia, the Vietnamese occupying force remains, despite the resolutions passed by an overwhelming majority in recent years calling for a complete withdrawal. The British Government continues to support the Cambodian people's right to determine their own destiny, free from outside interference.
79.	The continued division of the Korean peninsula has been a matter of concern much longer than the occupation of Afghanistan and of Cambodia. My visit to Panmunjom earlier this year reminded me of this sad fact. The British Government remains convinced that the suggestions put forward by the Republic of Korea for direct talks between the two sides represent the best prospect for a peaceful solution.
80.	There is one final region of the world I should mention, although it is not one much visited by Foreign Ministers. This year is the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Antarctic Treaty/ The Treaty is a remarkable example of political foresight. It provides an excellent model of practical cooperation achieved through international agreement. The fact that a further four States have acceded to the Treaty in this anniversary year shows its continuing value. The British Government would not wish to see any development that would undermine this important Treaty.
81.	We discuss many global and regional political issues in this Hall. But when we do so it is easy to forget the fundamental reality of the freedom and wellbeing of the individual. The architects of the Charter of the United Nations were quite clear about this. They set down, as a major purpose of the Organization, to achieve cooperation "in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language, or religion". The gulf between this intention and the gross abuses of human rights which still occur in so many parts of the world appals me. These abuses are sometimes carried out in the name of political, social or religious ideologies, and indeed by some of the leading signatories of the Helsinki Final Act/ Sometimes such abuses result from conditions of anarchy and chaos. My Government deplores them all, wherever they occur and whatever the reason with which their perpetrators may attempt to justify them.
82.	A particularly gross form of abuse of the most fundamental human rights of all—the rights to life and liberty—is terrorism. The horrifying events in Beirut last week served as a grim reminder of this growing evil. Terrorist acts may often be the work of small groups of crazed fanatics. But more and more they have had the material backing of a few misguided Governments. As the Secretary General’s report [A139/1] makes clear, there has been a steady increase in politically motivated violence in all its baleful forms. Few areas of the world have been spared. As so often, it is innocent men and women who pay the price for this assault on the basic values of civilized society. Indiscriminate murder for the furtherance of political ends is wholly unacceptable. We must resist it with every legitimate means available to the international community.
83.	The growing involvement in terrorism by Governments and their representatives abroad has brought to light another urgent problem: the abuse of diplomatic immunity. This is something which must deeply concern us all. Many representatives know that my Government is reviewing the working of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations. We are seeking ways to tighten control of unacceptable activities by members of diplomatic missions. The Convention has, generally speaking, performed useful service for over 20 years. Its underlying principles have for centuries stood the test of application between sovereign States of widely differing character. What is lacking is determination on the part of signatory States to apply rigorously enough the safeguards and sanctions it contains. The Declaration on International Terrorism, issued at the London Economic Summit, held from 7 to 9 June 1984 and the measures agreed by the European Community a6 Dublin earlier this month are evidence of how, given the political will, States can swiftly take practical action to deal with international problems.
84.	Let me in conclusion return to the theme with which I began. In speaking today of all the global and regional problems which confront us, I have many times referred to the need for realistic solutions and for a practical approach. I do so out of profound personal conviction, a conviction that is continually reinforced by my experience in political life in my own country and in international affairs. Put simply, it is this. None of the disputes and disagreements before us is of its essence insoluble. In many cases, we can already envisage the outline of a solution. In almost every case, what is needed, and what is missing, is political will—above all, the political will to work for practical agreement, to have the courage, imagination and dogged determination to negotiate in a rational and realistic fashion. Often, perhaps in most cases, that will mean the pursuit of limited, but attainable, objectives. Such an approach is a gradual one, demanding the steady creation of confidence between the parties. It will imply the breaking down of issues into manageable proportions, and it will require a spirit of understanding which takes account of the political and economic realities on both sides of the argument.
85.	Such an approach puts a discount on ringing declarations of intent and on uncompromising statements of minimum objectives. But it places a premium on steady, perhaps unspectacular, negotiation, often in private, and when it pays dividends, it pays handsomely. I said earlier that the British and Chinese Governments had initialled a historic agreement on the future of Hong Kong. But it is more than that. The agreement itself and, perhaps even more, the process by which it was achieved are powerful symbols of the way in which seemingly intractable problems can indeed be susceptible to treatment. And that, Mr. President, is the prescription which I end by offering you this afternoon.
﻿Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your unanimous election to the presidency of the thirty-ninth session of the General Assembly. We are particularly gratified to see you, a distinguished son of Africa and an eminent representative of a country with which India has traditionally close and cordial relations, preside over the proceedings of this Assembly. We are confident that under your able stewardship we shall be able to deal effectively with the many important questions on our agenda.
186.	I should like to take this opportunity also to place on record our appreciation of the effective and statesmanlike leadership provided to the Assembly's thirty-eighth session by your distinguished predecessor, Mr. Illueca, of Panama.
187.	I wish to pay a tribute to the Secretary-General for the indefatigable energy and quiet competence he has displayed in his stewardship of the United Nations during the past year. His patience and perseverance are characteristic of a style of functioning that has added much prestige and honour to the office of the Secretary-General. He has won our admiration for his skilful handling of several crisis situations. We wish him every success in the future.
188.	We welcome to the United Nations family its newest member, Brunei Darussalam. Its admission as the 159th Member is a reaffirmation of the principle of universality of membership of the Organization. We look forward to working in close co-operation with that country's delegation in the United Nations.
189.	We are at the threshold of the fifth decade of the United Nations. As the United Nations approaches its fortieth anniversary it is but appropriate that we pause to review the historic role the Organization has been playing. This is also a time for introspection and reflection so that we can improve our own performance and make the Organization more effective.
190.	In November 1948, the first Prime Minister of India, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, addressing the General Assembly'" on behalf of newly independent India, stated that the Charter of the United Nations, in noble language, had laid down the principles and purposes of that great Organization, and he thought it would not be possible to improve upon that language. The objectives were clear, he said, and yet it had often happened that the main objectives had been lost sight of amid matters of secondary importance. He further stated that he was convinced that the best of objectives could not be reached if men's eyes were bloodshot and men's minds clouded with passion. The lesson of history, he noted, and more especially the lesson of the last two great wars, which had devastated humanity, was that out of hatred and violence could come only hatred and violence. The Assembly was in the midst of a cycle of hatred and violence, he said, and it was obvious that if that cycle persisted and war, which the Assembly was specially intended to prevent, broke out, not only would there be tremendous devastation all over the world, but no individual Power or group of Powers would achieve its objective.
191.	The words of Jawaharlal Nehru are valid even today. The optimism that was generated in the early years of the United Nations has in recent years been sadly dissipated. We are facing not only an acute and troubled international situation but, more important, a period when faith in the world Organization appears to be weakening. There is today in some quarters a cynical disregard of the role and contribution of the United Nations, as, indeed, a profound suspicion of all multilateral approaches where these do not coincide with or directly promote the interests of these countries. We are facing the danger of a retreat from multilateralism which can only adversely affect the prospects of international peace and security and undermine the very foundations of this unique Organization. India and other non-aligned countries are determined to reverse this trend. As India did at the outset of the establishment of the United Nations, I would like now once again to reaffirm, on behalf of the Government and people of India, our undiminished faith in the United Nations and our continued commitment to the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter.
192.	In his thought-provoking report on the work of the Organization [A/39/1], the Secretary-General has reiterated the need to preserve and strengthen the Organization for harmonizing the actions of nations and to enhance the concept of multilateralism, which is a basic premise of our activity in the United Nations. He has rightly asserted that the realization of the full potential of the United Nations depends upon a willingness to take active steps to experiment with new approaches on the assumption that our common and agreed objective is human survival in reasonably decent conditions. We need to ponder over this issue. The fortieth anniversary of the United Nations should provide us with a unique opportunity for rededication, but also for a reassessment, some soul-searching and, above all, concrete remedial action. Our commitment to the multilateral approach is important and must be strengthened if we want the vision of the founding fathers to be realized.
193.	Throughout the years of our freedom struggle, India's leaders viewed independence not merely in national terms but as a part of the struggle of oppressed peoples everywhere for justice—political, economic and social. In the course of its transformation, India has built up a vast industrial infrastructure which has enabled it to keep pace with the scientific and technological advancements taking place in the world. Our democratic institutions, evolved over the years, have given the people of India a deep sense of participation and commitment in determining the nation's economic, social and political priorities. India's economy envisages a predominant role for the public sector in areas of basic industry as well as a flourishing private sector consistent with our socio-economic philosophy, which aims at prosperity and growth with social justice. The planning process adopted by India as an indispensable instrument for the development of all sectors of our economy involves the full participation of our people.
194.	In our international relationships, adherence to the policy of non-alignment has been both instinctive and inevitable. Even before the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries held its first summit in 1961, the essential principles of non-alignment had become the basis for the conduct of our foreign policy.
195.	Today the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, with its membership of 101 countries, constitutes the vast majority of the membership of the United Nations. It is an indication of the intrinsic appeal and relevance of this Movement, as well as its significance and its achievements to date, that almost every newly independent nation seeks membership.
196.	As Prime Minister Indira Gandhi said in her address to the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi from 7 to 12 March 1983:
"Its significance is not to be measured by the number of divisions or the megatons of destructive power we command, but by the intensity with which we desire peace and freedom, development and international justice.
"Other Governments may have conflicting opinions on right and wrong. We the non-aligned have chosen peace, which surely is the right and inevitable choice. We have sought and continue to seek friendship with all, except Governments which are racist or threaten the hard-earned freedom of others. Non-alignment is not vague, not negative, not neutral.
"Non-alignment is national independence and freedom. It stands for peace and the avoidance of confrontation. It aims at keeping away from military alliances. It means equality among nations and the democratization of international relations, economic and political. It wants global co-operation for development on the basis of mutual benefit. It is a strategy for the recognition and preservation of the world's diversity."
197.	The question of disarmament has always remained a basic concern of India and other countries of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. Governments and peoples all over the world are becoming increasingly aware of the grave threat posed to the very survival of mankind by the development, accumulation and deployment of nuclear weapons and their delivery systems. Two special sessions of the General Assembly have been devoted exclusively to this question. Yet new weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems are continuously being researched, tested, produced and deployed. A new arms race has begun in the chemical weapons field. New technologies are being developed which would make space, which has hitherto remained largely peaceful, a dangerous arena of military confrontation. Striking advances are also being made in conventional weaponry, giving it a versatility and lethal quality unknown in previous years.
198.	The escalating arms race, the rise in international tensions and the absence of willingness for constructive dialogue among the major nuclear- weapon Powers have increased the risks of the outbreak of a nuclear war. Clearly, the dangers of the total annihilation of mankind, indeed, of any life on this planet, are so great and increasing with such inexorable rapidity that we cannot permit ourselves the luxury of either indifference or despair. Dangerous doctrines, such as those of nuclear deterrence and of limited nuclear warfare, are being propounded. No country will remain unaffected by the horror of nuclear conflict once it is unleashed. By the same token, none of us can remain indifferent to the need to speed up disarmament negotiations. It is ironical that the principal justification for adding new and costly weapon systems to the arsenals of the great Powers has been that it provides better negotiating positions for those countries in any arms limitation talks. The logic of this position is that disarmament can commence only after countries have armed themselves fully. Such bizarre logic cannot be expected to serve as a basis for any serious arms limitation exercise.
199.	A fresh and concerted world-wide effort must therefore be made to halt the arms race. Nuclear- weapon States bear the greatest responsibility and must adopt urgent, practical measures to prevent a nuclear war. Specific proposals have been made by India and other non-aligned countries for a convention under United Nations aegis prohibiting the use of nuclear weapons under any circumstances. The idea of a freeze on the production and deployment of nuclear weapons is gaining popular support and needs to be given a practical shape in order to break the present impasse in arms negotiations. Efforts for a comprehensive nuclear-weapons-test-ban treaty must be expedited. Existing arms limitation agreements must be observed and new ones negotiated. At the same time, a concerted effort ought to be made to prevent a new and potentially more dangerous and destabilizing round of the arms race in the area of space-based systems. Diplomats and experts engaged in arms limitation and disarmament negotiations must now take due note of the mass popular upsurge in the world against nuclear weapons.
200.	A major peace initiative in this regard was taken recently by the Prime Minister of India, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, together with the Heads of State or Government of Argentina, Greece, Mexico, Sweden and the United Republic of Tanzania. This five- continent initiative, launched on 22 May 1984, states, inter alia, in the Joint Declaration [A/39/277]:
"As leaders of nations, States Members of the United Nations, we have a commitment to take constructive action towards halting and reversing the nuclear-arms race. The people we represent are no less threatened by nuclear war than the citizens of the nuclear-weapons States. It is primarily the responsibility of the nuclear-weapons States to prevent a nuclear catastrophe, but this problem is too important to be left to those States alone." 
201.	The Joint Declaration urges, as a necessary first step, the five nuclear-weapon States to halt all testing, production and deployment of nuclear weapons and their delivery systems, to be immediately followed by a substantial reduction in nuclear forces. This first step must be followed by a continuing programme of arms reduction leading to general and complete disarmament, accompanied by measures to strengthen the United Nations system and to ensure an urgently needed transfer of substantial resources from the arms race into social and economic development. The essential goal must be to reduce and then eliminate the risk of war between nations. The six- Power peace appeal has received the overwhelming support of the international community. People all over the world have an overriding interest in collective security and the avoidance of nuclear war. The appeal represents a significant step in mobilizing wider world support for the objectives of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries on disarmament, as set out by the New Delhi Conference.
202.	Non-aligned and like-minded nations must now think of other forms of action. The bulk of the global military expenditure of $1 trillion a year is accounted for by a handful of industrialized countries. A significant reduction in this enormously wasteful expenditure would not only help ease tensions the world over but also contribute to recovery and growth in the world economy and could be used to augment the currently decreasing levels of assistance to developing nations. The proposal for a world conference on disarmament and development de-serves to be taken up seriously by Member States.
203.	India attaches great importance to general and complete disarmament, particularly nuclear disarmament, and the prevention of nuclear war. A number of proposals submitted by my delegation to begin a serious nuclear disarmament programme are already before the General Assembly. It is our earnest hope that during this session our proposals, as well as others in this field, will be considered in all seriousness and that meaningful decisions will be taken.
204.	In our own neighbourhood, the Indian Ocean continues to be an area of competitive attention and mounting great-Power military presence, posing a direct threat to the security and integrity of the littoral and hinterland States. The increasing militarization of the Indian Ocean and its use as an arena for strategic power-play is a matter of immense concern to us. The establishment of new command structures has been accompanied by the introduction of sophisticated weaponry into the area. The 1971 Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace remains unimplemented.
205.	Ever since the expansion of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Indian Ocean in 1979, it has been the earnest hope of the littoral and hinterland States that the permanent members of the Security Council and the major maritime users of the Indian Ocean would contribute towards the early convening of the Conference on the Indian Ocean and to the early realization of the objectives of the 1971 Declaration. The evidence of the last few years has belied this expectation. On the contrary, efforts are afoot to distort the fundamental structure and elements of the 1971 Declaration. We believe that the Conference, to be held at Colombo, should be convened urgently to begin the process of elimination of great-Power military presence from the Indian Ocean in realization of the objectives of the Declaration. During the current year, the non-aligned countries have made serious efforts to complete necessary preparatory work for the Conference and have submitted a framework for its agenda. We hope all members of the	Ad hoc Committee will display the necessary political will and address themselves to this question in a constructive manner.
206.	The countries of South Asia are currently engaged in an active search for regional co-operation on the basis of mutual benefit. This is in consonance with our own policies over the years of reinforcing the fabric of understanding and co-operation among the countries of the region. At the South Asian Regional Co-operation Meeting of Foreign Ministers, held at Male on 10 and 11 July of this year, a detailed review of the implementation of programmes was undertaken. We recognize that this will be a long process and will call for much patience and perseverance. Even now the induction of sophisticated arms in our neighbourhood serves external strategic interests and is complicating the task of peaceful co-operation in our region. Notwithstanding that, we have no doubt that the process of regional co-operation will continue to gain strength in the months and years ahead and will not only assist the economic and social development of the countries of South Asia but also ultimately promote good-neighbourliness and harmony in the whole area.
207.	While on the subject of South Asia, it is with considerable regret that I find it necessary to refer to recent developments in Sri Lanka which have taken a turn for the worse, have caused us deep anguish and have aroused global concern. There has been a recrudescence of indiscriminate violence and killing by the armed forces on a scale which recalls the tragedy of July 1983. Reports indicate that the armed forces in that country have conducted large-scale operations in areas where the Tamils constitute the overwhelming majority of the population, resulting in heavy loss of life and property of the innocent Tamil population. If the spate of violence in the northern province continues, it is bound to have serious repercussions in other parts of Sri Lanka and precipitate an influx of refugees into our country. We already have 40,000 Sri Lankan refugees in Tamil Nadu.
208.	The ethnic problem in Sri Lanka cannot be solved by military action. It is a political problem involving the just rights of the Tamil minority, md only the determined pursuit of the political process of consultation and mutual accommodation can lead to a constructive way out.
209.	After the communal violence of 1983, the Prime Minister of India offered her good offices to help find a political solution to the problem. President Jayawardene of Sri Lanka accepted that offer, and the efforts of our special envoy to promote the process of dialogue have been undertaken with the full concurrence of the Government of Sri Lanka. While talks within the framework of the All Party Conference are continuing, innuendos and insinuations are repeatedly being made against India.
210.	We have reaffirmed our stand in favour of Sri Lanka's integrity and unity and have expressed opposition to all forms of violence and separatism. Because of the large number of Tamil refugees from Sri Lanka in the Indian state of Tamil Nadu and because of the many age-old links between the Tamil populations of the two countries, the repression and denial of human and political rights of the Tamils in Sri Lanka give rise to repercussions in our country with which we are trying to deal as best we can. But it is a travesty of facts to suggest that we are in any way responsible for Sri Lanka's problems. The problem exists right there in Sri Lanka and it has to be resolved there. For our part, we do not and will not permit any activities directed against Sri Lanka from our soil. It is therefore regrettable that leaders of Sri Lanka continue to make baseless allegations against India that it is providing sanctuary and support to Tamil militants. India is doing no such thing. I should like to reiterate that such false and unfounded allegations can only create unnecessary and avoidable difficulties and misunderstanding in the relations between the two countries.
211.	The Prime Minister of India has categorically stated that India does not intervene in the internal affairs of Sri Lanka or, indeed, of any other country. India does not support any separatist movement; it does not support or condone resort to violence of any kind. It is our sincere hope that, through consultations, a viable political solution will soon be found assuring the safety and legitimate rights of the Tamils as full and equal citizens, so that the people of Sri Lanka can live together in peace and harmony.
212.	I cannot over-emphasize the necessity for the utmost restraint on the part of all concerned and a determined pursuit of the political process to find a viable and acceptable solution in which the fundamental human and civic rights of the Tamil population of Sri Lanka will be safeguarded.
213.	The efforts for a political settlement in Afghanistan are continuing, though progress has been slow. While there is universal reaffirmation of the inadmissibility of interference in the internal affairs of States, as also of the induction of foreign troops in any country, there is no doubt that the situation in South-West Asia can be resolved only through an overall political settlement based on principles set out in the Political Declaration adopted at the New Delhi Conference.' The efforts of the Personal Representative of the Secretary-General in past months have sought to impart momentum to this process and deserve our support.
214.	Of equal concern to us are the continuing difficulties that have come in the way of peace in South-East Asia. The events of the past year have made us only more conscious of the opportunities, as well as the pitfalls, that lie in the search for a solution of the problems afflicting that region. India is convinced that there can be no military solution to this question. What is needed is a balanced approach that takes into account the security and other considerations of all the countries in the region and eliminates outside interference. We are hopeful that the new processes of dialogue opening up between the countries of Indo-China and ASEAN will yield positive results in coming months and make for a much-needed sense of trust and reconciliation among the countries of the region.
215.	The futility of war as a means of settling disputes has been highlighted in the tragic fratricidal conflict between Iran and Iraq. The continuing war has involved great sacrifices by both sides, resulting in enormous losses not only of material wealth but also of precious and irreplaceable human lives. The critical situation in the region threatens not only the security of the Gulf but also the safety and economic well-being of much of the world. As Chairman of the Movement of the Non-Aligned Countries, India has remained in touch with both sides to bring an end to this conflict which weakens the Movement's unity and solidarity. We are heartened that the Secretary- General's call for a halt to bombings in the civilian areas has met with a positive response from both sides. We hope that the two sides will continue to show restraint and see the inevitability of getting down to negotiations for the settlement of their differences. We are convinced that there can be no victor or vanquished in a conflict of this nature. Its continuation will only weaken the ability of the two countries to meet the challenges that face them as developing countries.
216.	The events in West Asia continue to arouse our anguish and indignation. The continued denial to the Palestinian people of their basic and inherent right to self-determination and nationhood, Israel's arrogant defiance of the will of the international community, the critical situation in Lebanon, the consolidation by Israel of its stranglehold over the occupied territories, including its settlements policy—all constitute sordid chapters in a seemingly endless tragedy.
217.	The turmoil in West Asia remains a most serious threat to world peace today. Recent months have witnessed deterioration in the situation, resulting in further acts of aggression and intimidation by Israel against the Palestinian and Lebanese peoples. We remain firm in our support for the brave homeless and harassed Palestinian people, led by the Palestinian Liberation Organization, their sole authentic representative. Occupation of the territory of neighbouring States will not guarantee Israel security; it can if anything, only have the opposite effect. A comprehensive solution comprising the total and unconditional withdrawal of Israel from all Arab territories occupied since 1967, the exercise by the Palestinian people of their inalienable national and human rights, including the right to establish an independent State in their homeland, and mutual guarantees of security among States of the region must be achieved.
218.	We support the convening of an international peace conference on the Middle East under United Nations auspices for finding a comprehensive, just and lasting solution in accordance with well-established principles laid down in United Nations resolutions. The situation in the region does not brook any delay, and urgent preparatory measures should be undertaken so that the conference can be convened at the earliest possible time. In this context, India is appreciative of the efforts being made by the Secretary-General towards the convening of the conference and the process of consultations initiated by him with the parties concerned to find a comprehensive solution. We stand ready to extend our full support and co-operation in this connection.
219.	It is now a century since Namibia fell prey to colonialism at the Berlin Conference of 1884-1885. For the larger part of the period and up to the present day, this Territory and this valiant people have suffered a particularly brutal and repressive colonial presence, an extension of the abhorrent system of eighteen years of direct United Nations jurisdiction over Namibia have brought the Territory closer to independence only in theory, as the United Nations plan for Namibian independence remains unimplemented in spite of its universal acceptance as the basis for a peaceful settlement. Sadly, the question of Namibia has become embroiled in the web of East-West tensions, with entirely irrelevant and extraneous considerations being introduced into what is, and must essentially remain, a question of decolonization. The South West Africa People's Organization	the sole and authentic representative of the Namibian people, has shown admirable restraint, flexibility and statesmanship. South Africa's answer has always been characterized by arrogance, defiance of world opinion, and prevarication. The non-aligned believe that only sanctions can force Pretoria to pay heed.
220.	We believe that Security Council resolution 435 (1978) remains the only basis for a peaceful settlement of the Namibian question. India, along with other non-aligned countries, rejects any kind of linkage or parallelism in regard to the implementation of this resolution. The Security Council must consider more resolute action in the exercise of United Nations responsibility over Namibia to ensure the implementation of its own resolutions. Meanwhile, we remain steadfast in our support for the Namibian people under the leadership of SWAPO, their sole and authentic representative, and in our resolve to assist them in all possible ways in their valiant struggle for liberation.
221.	We are being increasingly confronted with the proposition that racist South Africa is moving towards reform of its policy of apartheid. Mr. Botha found platforms to proclaim this to the world during his visits to several Western European countries, visits that should never have been permitted to take place and have had the effect of undermining the international campaign to isolate Pretoria. The charade of elections on the basis of a "new dispensation" was organized in an attempt to confirm this impression. A country known for its indiscriminate and repeated acts of aggression against neighbouring independent States is projecting itself as a votary of peaceful coexistence. This propaganda, which emanates from Pretoria and finds an echo in capitals of some of South Africa's powerful friends and allies, will deceive no one. South Africa's attempts to hoodwink the world will not succeed.
222.	The root cause of all the problems in southern Africa is the policy and practice of apartheid. The international community must not let flag its vigilance against apartheid or its efforts to counter it by every possible means. In this context, we are happy to note the clear-sightedness shown by the Coloured and Asian communities in rejecting, despite pressures of all kinds, the so-called constitutional reforms mooted by the racist regime. As the Prime Minister of India, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, stated in a recent message: cannot be reformed; it must be ended."
223.	The front-line States of southern Africa have long been a bastion of resistance against racist South Africa, though it has meant great suffering and sacrifice on the part of the peoples of those countries. The world must take urgent and resolute action to fortify the front-line States and strengthen the Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference so that those States could better withstand Pretoria's repeated acts of aggression and destabilization and its threats and blandishments.
224.	The adoption of a resolution on Central America by consensus in the Assembly last year [resolution 38/10] augured well for peace and reconciliation in that troubled region. So also have the untiring endeavours of the Contadora Group of nations. The non-aligned countries have pledged full support to the Contadora exercise. We commend the Contadora countries for their perseverance and dedication and for the progress so far achieved.
225.	Nevertheless, the situation in Central America remains tense and delicate, capable of explosion at the next spark. Again this year, Nicaragua felt compelled to take recourse to the Security Council following continuing hostile acts directed against it, in particular the mining of its ports and harbours. We would like to see the endemic problem of the region resolved by its own peoples without meddling from outside quarters. We hope that accord will be achieved before long on a comprehensive agreement along the lines contained in the draft Contadora Act on Peace and Co-operation in Central America.
226.	Efforts to resolve the vexed question of Cyprus have received a serious set-back in the last year following the proclamation of a so-called Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus and subsequent steps taken with a view to consolidating that unilateral declaration of independence. The Government and people of India have deplored the unilateral declaration of independence and firmly support the unity, territorial integrity, sovereignty, independence and non-alignment of Cyprus, a country with which we have traditionally had friendly and co-operative relations. We believe that the unilateral declaration of independence must be rescinded and intercommunal talks resumed under the auspices of the Secretary- General with a view to arriving at a lasting settlement, taking due account of the rights and aspirations of both the Greek and the Turkish Cypriot communities. In this context, we welcome the steps recently taken by the Secretary-General aimed at a resumption of the intercommunal dialogue as well as the positive response of both sides to the call of the Secretary-General.
227.	The international economic situation continues to cause great concern. When we met here in 1983 there were claims that respite from the severest recession in post-war history was in sight. The industrialized countries may be experiencing some recovery, but it remains uneven in its spread and there are doubts about its durability. The vast majority of the developing countries have not experienced any improvement. As a group, their gross national product has remained stagnant and many of them have experienced declining growth rates. Falling commodity prices, adverse terms of trade, rising debt burdens, barriers to trade and declining financial flows continue to affect them adversely.
228.	These conditions have resulted in sharp reductions in imports and postponement of investment in projects and human resources development programmes which may have set back their growth prospects for years to come. Austerity measures compelled by circumstances over which they have had little control have precipitated social disruption and political instability in a number of countries. The net effect of these measures has been to attract a transfer of resources from these countries to the financial institutions of the developed countries. The appalling costs in terms of human misery and destitution that these measures have implied are not brought out in the adjustment figures put out by international agencies. These adjustments, as the Committee for Development Planning has put it, have taken place "at the margin of life and death".
229.	The gravity of the economic situation in Africa is a cause of particular concern to the international community. The critical conditions there have been further aggravated by adverse climatic factors leading to widespread hunger and malnutrition. In the clearest sense, this represents a test of the will and ability of the international community to meet this challenge through international co-operative endeavour and to make it a part of the overall struggle of developing countries against hunger and poverty.
230.	It is common wisdom to say today that, in an interdependent world, the progress of the rich cannot be achieved at the cost of the poor. This interdependence was again acknowledged and emphasized at the London Economic Summit of the industrialized countries in June this year.
231.	The test of the faith in interdependence lies in the willingness to take co-operative action. As a group, developing countries are larger markets of the European Economic Community, the United States and Japan than each of these three is for the other two. When import volumes have had to be reduced by as much as 50 per cent in many developing countries, its dampening effect on recovery in some industrialized countries should be evident. Sustained economic recovery of the developed countries is dependent on the reactivation of the economic development of the developing countries. But the actual policies pursued by many developed countries seem frequently to reflect a rejection of the concept of interdependence and the policy measures that this would entail.
232.	At a time when financial resources for development are needed by developing countries, net private flows of resources to them have in several cases become negative. Official development assistance has declined in real terms, as is evident from the fact that, in the case of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries, aid as a share of their gross national product has fallen from an average of 0.38 per cent to 0.36 per cent in 1983. Multilateral financial institutions are facing the worst crisis of resources since they were created. A case in point is the IDA, which is of paramount importance to the poorest countries. The level at which it has been possible to agree on its seventh replenishment is 20 per cent less m nominal terms and 40 per cent lower in real terms over that of its sixth replenishment.
233.	Protectionism is steadily on the increase. The United Nations World Economic Survey 1984 estimates that over half of world trade is now subject to some form of non-tariff barrier. The practical effect of protectionist measures is particularly intense in sectors like textiles, in which developing countries are the most efficient producers. We are thus blamed for our alleged inefficiency and penalized when we are efficient.
234.	We cannot but express our disappointment at the attitude demonstrated by some developed countries during meetings of the Economic and Social Council and at the Fourth General Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, held at Vienna from 2 to 19 August 1984, in their approach both to substantive issues and to the conduct of negotiations. It is difficult to avoid the impression that this was part of the systematic and persistent efforts by certain countries to make the United Nations system the scapegoat for their lack of political will. We strongly urge the developed countries to reconsider their positions and to work to restore the norms and consensus on the basis of which the United Nations system can continue to play its rightful role as a central forum for joint action for mutual benefit.
235.	It is legitimate to expect that now that recovery in developed countries has started, even though in an uneven and limited way, Governments in developed countries will deal in a more comprehensive and co-operative manner with the deeper structural problems of the world economy. It is necessary to adopt and implement a comprehensive set of measures for reactivating growth in developing countries. We must recognize the realities of the situation and work towards the establishment of a real dialogue between the North and the South. Policies which are recognized to stand in the way of the resumption of the development momentum in the developing countries need to be rectified. The ultimate objective of any good policy must be the contribution it can make towards the removal of existing inequalities and in achieving better growth rates for all.
236.	Deliberate measures have to be taken now to attain more normal levels of growth. This cannot be achieved merely by the trickle-down effect. The agenda for global economic recovery and development suggested in the Economic Declaration of the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries" provides a balanced set of actions. Intensive consultations have taken place on the two-phase approach towards global negotiations put forward by the non-aligned and developing countries, but agreement on its launching has been impossible to obtain. While this matter is being pursued, we propose in the meantime that at this session of the General Assembly serious negotiations take place to provide action-oriented content to the Programme of Immediate Measures contained in the Declaration. Particular attention would have to be given to an improvement in the terms of trade of the developing countries and to a roll-back of protectionism. We have to tackle the crushing debt burden of developing countries in its global context and in a comprehensive manner, dealing with both the financial and the developmental aspects. Agreement needs to be reached for a substantial increase in the net flow of financial resources, particularly official development assistance, to developing countries. The resource position of multilateral development institutions would need to be considerably strengthened to meet the growing needs of developing countries.
237.	This session of the General Assembly has several other important tasks ahead of it. In its most fundamental sense, development has to be achieved in human terms. The prevailing imbalance in which 47 per cent of the world's population has only 5 per cent of the world's share of resources has grave implications for the future of humanity. The close link between population policies and economic and social development has been long recognized. The International Conference on Population, held at Mexico City from 6 to 14 August 1984, adopted useful recommendations for the further implementation of the World Population Plan of Action. My delegation attaches great importance to its quick and effective implementation, and we urge the international community to give full support to the national efforts of the countries in attaining its objectives. Similarly, in a related field, we welcome the support extended by the child survival and development strategy of UNICEF to national efforts, including those of my own country.
238.	Access and acquisition of modern scientific and technological knowledge is essential to carry out the economic and social transformation of developing countries. Because of our colonial past, many of our countries missed out on the industrial revolution. We have no intention of being left out of the technological revolution. We think that the area of science and technology is particularly suitable to devise new and imaginative mechanisms of international co-operation for mutual benefit. In this respect, we attach great importance to the establishment of the long-term financing system for science and technology for development. My own country is fully prepared to meet its responsibilities in this regard, and we urge all other countries, particularly the developed countries, urgently to finalize the financial arrangements which would enable the launching of the United Nations Financing System for Science and Technology for Development.
239.	It is more than a year and a half since the Heads of State or Government of the non-aligned countries, at their New Delhi Conference, called for the convening of an international conference on money and finance for development. Since then, the idea has gathered further momentum and gained w\der support. It has been pursued in a number of forums both within and outside the United Nations system, such as the Economic and Social Council; the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its sixth session, held at Belgrade from 6 June to 2 July 1983; the General Assembly; the Conference of the Heads of Government of Commonwealth Countries, held at New Delhi in November 1983; and the Williamsburg and London Economic Summit Conferences of the major industrial countries, held in May 1983 and June 1984. Recently, a group of five eminent experts appointed by the Chairman of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, the Prime Minister of India, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, completed a detailed study of the substantive and procedural issues that would arise in the context of convening such a conference. This report has been made available to the member Governments of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, as well as those of other countries. The need for improvement in the system, whether it be described as evolution or adaptation, reform or restructuring, is now widely recognized. It is now time to set in motion the preparatory process, with the participation of all interested parties, for moving towards serious negotiations on the subject. We sincerely hope that a consensus in this direction will soon evolve. It would be in keeping with the urgency of the situation and the international community's commitment to the multilateral process for these consultations to conclude in a preparatory process to coincide with the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations.
240.	India's commitment to the purposes and principles of the United Nations is firmly grounded in the traditions of our foreign policy. As the Prime Minister of India said at the thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly on behalf of the non-aligned countries: "Firm faith in the United Nations is central to the non-aligned". The observance of the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations next year should provide us all with an opportunity for rededication to the ideals that have animated the founders of this Organization.
241.	The non-aligned countries will be in the fore-front of preparations for the commemoration of that anniversary. It would be fitting if participation in the commemorative session by Member States was at the highest level, in order to enhance the significance of the occasion.
242.	The non-aligned countries also suggested at the New Delhi Conference that 1985 should be observed as the Year of the United Nations. Such an anniversary should not become an occasion for mere celebration. Member countries and their peoples need to consider carefully the contribution of the United Nations system over the past four decades, its continuing relevance in the current international situation, and the ways and means by which the Organization can be strengthened in order to meet more effectively the challenges facing contemporary society. Its procedures and methods of work should be improved in order to enhance its overall performance.
243.	Human institutions may and do face temporary set-backs. Rather than give way to despair and allow things to drift, we should make relentless efforts to reinvigorate the United Nations. In this endeavour, the abiding faith in it of the peoples of the world remains its strongest support, and we should do all we can to mobilize it.
244.	The year 1985 will also mark the silver .jubilee of the historic Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, enshrined in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV). That the membership of the United Nations has grown so impressively in recent decades is due in no small measure to the endeavours of the Organization in the field of decolonization. We hope that the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration will be appropriately observed. As a country with a deep and abiding commitment to decolonization, India looks forward to participating in that exercise.
245.	The year 1985 will also be observed as International Youth Year. Youth, which constitutes a crucial segment of the population, can make a valuable contribution to the development process and to the promotion of international understanding, co-operation and peace. It is therefore imperative that the younger generation be provided with all the necessary conditions for participating in national development activities and in the study and resolution of major national, regional and international problems. The observance in 1985 of International Youth Year is indeed timely, as it will serve to draw attention to the specific needs and aspirations of the future generation.
246.	In her address to the General Assembly last year, at its thirty-eighth session, Prime Minister Indira Gandhi referred to a new order struggling to be born amidst the upheavals of the present-day world:
"For us, the non-aligned, and for all who are deeply concerned with the future of humanity, the question is whether we help the birth of this new creation or throttle it before it can draw breath. The matter is not simple, because history has proved time and again that ideas and movements can be obstructed, but not stopped. How long can a few pockets of affluence continue to exert influence on the large populations, the natural resources, the cultural strength of the others? How long can allies and supporters, who may not have a base in their own countries and who are not in tune with the changing times, be perpetuated? You cannot kill an idea by killing its adherents. The new-born will not die; the birth can be delayed but the cost will be much higher and the affluent will have to pay. When peaceful change is thwarted, violent upheaval occurs. Previously, the end of a civilization brought destruction and trauma in its trail. If we keep to past trends, we too will be engulfed by circumstances. But today we have the opportunity, which may well be the first in human history, for humankind to bridge the transition from the old to the new in a conscious way, to build a new era, to move together to a new future."
﻿It gives me pleasure, Mr. President, to associate myself with the warm congratulations offered to you from this rostrum. They are a tribute to your country and to yourself, as well as to a continent which is playing such a prominent role in the United Nations. I hope and trust that, under your leadership and guidance, the deliberations of this session of the General Assembly will be constructive, positive and responsive to the grave problems that face us.
101.	It is gratifying to observe the family of nations grow from year to year, reinforced with new partners in our common endeavours. The United Nations will either stand or fall on the principle of universality. The only attitude we should disavow is the promotion of narrow, selfish interests which run counter to our common international efforts.
102.	Every session of the General Assembly must set out in a spirit of hope that, despite the disappointments of the past, we can and should renew our efforts and work for a better world. Forty years ago, the founders of the United Nations looked back on a tragic past and undertook to forge instruments that would ensure a better future for humanity. So do we, in accordance with ancient Jewish tradition, look back year after year upon the disappointments of the past with firm belief in a better future, buoyed by an unflagging hope in the triumph of that human spirit which never deserts us.
103.	The fortieth anniversary of the end of the Second World War will occur in 1985, as has already been noted from this rostrum. This was a landmark in history and even more so in the annals of my people. Israel and the Jewish people, who still carry so many scars of that terrible war, will commemorate the occasion appropriately. The event will undoubtedly be marked by all nations, as was indeed recommended by the thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly, which invited States Members "to adopt . . . measures declaring punishable by law any dissemination of ideas based on racial superiority or hatred . . . including Nazi, Fascist and neo- Fascist ideologies". The Assembly also appealed to all States to accede to the Convention on the Non-Applicability of Statutory Limitations to War Crimes and Crimes against Humanity. There are still a few pockets of neo-Nazism that continue to linger, and they should be dealt with firmly, but the true heirs to this inhuman creed are those organizations and Governments that continue to this day to deny the right of existence of another State and strive for its outright destruction. There should be no room in civilized society for such doctrines or for those who promote them.
104.	The United Nations concept embraces the whole of mankind. Its raison d'etre is the welfare, present and future, of humanity, with special attention accorded to the underprivileged, the disabled and the oppressed. Our special attention should be focused on the problems of children and of youth and on their appropriate education and training. This should be our central task in building up our nations and societies.
105.	The coming year will be marked by the conclusion of the United Nations Decade for Women, with the World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the Decade to be held at Nairobi. Our hope is that that Conference will become a high point in women's struggle for equality and will not be exploited for narrow and barren political interests.
106.	Technological progress holds the promise of providing solutions to some of the most pressing problems of developing nations, but nowhere is it more sorely needed than in the field of agriculture and food production. It is now widely recognized that the international development effort has failed to meet its most important challenge, the production of food for the fast-growing population of our world. Agriculture is the key to the present challenge, but its development and that of the rural society that sustains it have been sadly neglected.
107.	Great strides have been made world-wide in industry, in the development of infrastructure, transportation, education and health, but food production has remained deficient. It is a terribly sad comment on our society that in this modern age millions go hungry and die of famine; hundreds of millions, mainly children, suffer malnutrition, their future as productive members of their society endangered. Per capita food production in Africa, for instance, has in fact dropped 15 per cent in the last decade. Countries in other continents have required emergency food supplies. Nations that were once self-sufficient have become importers of food and, as a result of their economic difficulties stemming from the increase in the cost of energy, their true independence has become endangered.
108.	Catastrophe awaits many nations if we do not find the way to assure adequate food for our world's growing population. World security and stability begin with the assurance of basic human needs. A change of direction is thus urgently needed in the goals of international development. That is the challenge of this decade. This goal can be reached despite the scarcity of arable land and water and despite the meagre resources that are available in various countries. In fact, Israel has emerged in only one generation from severe austerity and food rationing to self-reliance; we have increased our food production twelvefold and have become a net exporter of food.
109.	Israel recently marked the twenty-fifth anniversary of its programme for international development co-operation. This programme had its beginning in the late 1950s and early 1960s with the emergence of newly independent nations that sought rapid development. Imbued with a pioneering spirit that thrived on successful adaptation and innovation in the development of their own country, the people of Israel considered it a duty to share the knowledge acquired through their own rapid development experience with the peoples of other emerging nations.
110.	Israel calls upon all Governments to set aside political differences and narrow economic interests to join forces in the campaign against hunger. Israel will continue to co-operate with other nations in technology and development and stands ready to join other Governments, international agencies and non-governmental organizations in working to meet this great challenge to humanity.
111.	Israel is the fulfilment of an age-old dream and prayer for the re-establishment of the Jewish State in the Land of Israel. It is the home of all Jews who wish to make it their home, and it is the defender and protector of all Jews who are oppressed or persecuted because they belong to the Jewish people. These principles are enshrined in Israel's Declaration of Independence, in its laws and in the conscience of its people.
112.	We are aghast at the fact that, 40 years after the eradication of Nazism, rampant anti-Semitism and racial discrimination still exist in a number of countries. The situation of Soviet Jewry has recently taken a definite turn for the worse. From this rostrum I call upon the Government of the Soviet Union to remove the harsh limitations and restrictions imposed upon Jews who seek repatriation and reunion with their brethren in Israel. The continued harassment of Soviet Jews has become one of the most pressing humanitarian problems of the day, a violation of the most basic human rights as expressed in the Helsinki accords. Hundreds of thousands of Jews are being systematically denied their rights and many are forced to live as outcasts, deprived of their livelihood, harassed or imprisoned in gaols and labour camps under inhuman conditions.
113.	Soviet Jews are deprived of access to Jewish culture. A systematic campaign is waged against those Soviet Jews teaching and studying the Hebrew language. Ill-concealed under the cloak of anti-zionism, officially inspired anti-Semitism is being increasingly manifested in the Soviet media.
114.	We call upon the Soviet Government to change its policy, which is unjustifiable. The Soviet Jews are not involved in any anti-Soviet activity, nor are they violating Soviet laws or working against Soviet interests. Their only wish is to study their ancient culture and their national language and to live as Jews in their historic homeland. It should be recalled that in front of this very Assembly official representatives of the Soviet Union have declared that the Jewish people have a right to a State of their own. Soviet Jewry demands nothing more than to exercise this right.
115.	In our own part of the world, the Middle East, the Jews of Syria continue to suffer under a harsh regime that holds them hostage and refuses to grant them basic human rights, the most important of which is the right to emigrate and join their brethren. Periodic killings of Jews, either sanctioned or tolerated by the authorities, maintain a climate of terror among the Jews of Syria.
116.	In Ethiopia, an ancient Jewish community struggles to maintain its heritage, culture and integrity under dire hardship. We acknowledge the gesture of the Ethiopian Government, which has recently enabled Jews and non-Jews from all over the world to visit that community, and we express our sincere hope that it will take all necessary steps to protect and respect their religious and cultural rights and enable those who so desire to be reunited with their families in their ancient homeland.
117.	On 13 September 1984, a Government of national unity, encompassing the overwhelming majority of political parties in Israel, was established. Its creation is a reflection of the wide consensus that unites the people of Israel on the main issues on the Government's agenda in the economic, defence and political domains.
118.	In its foreign relations, Israel is dedicated, as always, to the goal of peace and accommodation with all its neighbours. In the north, we stand ready to reach an understanding with Lebanon which will guarantee the security of our common border and thus make possible the withdrawal of all forces from southern Lebanon. Syria remains dogmatically opposed to the idea of peace with Israel. Nevertheless, we are adamant in our conviction that there can be no solution other than peace. In the east, we have repeatedly called on the Government of Jordan to join us in negotiations for peace. In the south, of course, we have peace with Egypt, but we are convinced that peaceful relations should be deepened and strengthened in the face of so much rejectionist pressure against peace.
119.	The chances of progress towards further peace and stability between Israel and its neighbours must be appraised, however, in the context of the realities of the region.
120.	The Middle East continues to be beset by violence, bitter conflicts and wars. In a few weeks of bloodshed along the Iran-Iraq border, more men and children die than in all the Arab-Israel wars. Thousands die every year in domestic strife and hostilities entirely unconnected with the Arab-Israel conflict. Yet, as everyone in this Hall knows full well, a disproportionate amount of the time of the General Assembly is devoted year after year to a contrived and counter-productive review of the Arab-Israel conflict, the main purpose of which seems to be only to slander Israel.
121.	In the last two decades, the violence and oppression that characterize so many regimes in the Middle East have erupted on the international scene in waves of terrorism, hijacking and assassination. When in 1972 the Secretary-General proposed that the United Nations promote measures to counter international terrorism, we were among the first to welcome that initiative. Regrettably, it has been thwarted by States that sponsor and support terrorism. Middle Eastern terrorism, sanctioned by these Governments, has been thus allowed, through neglect and indifference, to expand to more and more countries. Today the cancer of terrorism has spread to all continents. The latest form of terrorism and international piracy is the mines that threaten shipping and the freedom of navigation in the Red Sea. Recently, we were again horrified by the murderous bombing of the United States Embassy at Beirut, a calculated and deliberate act of terrorism.
122.	Terror is a malignant disease that will spread everywhere if not contained. But at least in one instance concerted international effort has produced results. When terrorism first raised its ugly head in the mid-1960s, its prime target was international civil aviation. Planes were hijacked almost daily, aircraft bombed, passengers terrorized and murdered. The proper functioning of civil aviation today is a result of powerful measures taken jointly by many nations to ensure the safety of passengers and aircraft and to combat the threat of hijackings. But such successful international co-operation remains an exception. Terrorism is still an item on the Assembly's agenda, but it is debated ineffectively, shunted aside by vested interests which offer its representatives support, sustenance and even quasi- recognition. As long as the family of nations continues to evade its responsibilities, to appease rather than punish, to pardon terrorists rather than prosecute or extradite them, to afford terrorists diplomatic immunity, the disease will spread and claim yet more victims in our homes and communities.
123.	Whenever a particularly outrageous terrorist attack takes place, as for example the recent bombing of the United States Embassy at Beirut, a wave of outrage sweeps public opinion in all parts of the civilized world. People naturally demand instant retaliation against such despicable acts and a fitting punishment for the criminal perpetrators.
124.	While punishment has its necessary place in any system of justice, the overriding problem here is not whom to punish and how punishment should be delivered. Rather, it is how to prevent terrorism and root it out from the international arena. There is only one way to deal with this problem. Those countries which agree that terrorism must be eradicated should join forces and wage a permanent war on the terrorist organizations. This is the only way to expose, pre-empt, weaken and finally destroy them. This is a war of self-defence in its true sense, a campaign that the free world should undertake on behalf of its peoples and of the entire human race.
125.	For its part, Israel has been waging an unrelenting war on Arab terrorism and has dealt it a number of crippling blows. The so-called PLO, which had established its own mini-terrorist State in Lebanon, from which it carried out and assisted terrorist acts in five continents, was expelled from that country. But Israel cannot be expected to shoulder alone the burden of fighting international terrorism. Since we are all potential victims of terror, we must fight it together. If we do not, terrorism will endanger our basic freedoms and all the standards of civilized behaviour for which the United Nations stands.
126.	The attitude underpinning Arab terrorist attacks against Israel is the continued denial by Arab States of Israel's right to exist. Translated into wanton attacks on civilians, the ideology is cruel and inhuman. But it has produced the very opposite result to that intended. Israel has taken the necessary measures to protect its people and enable them to live and prosper alongside their Arab neighbours throughout the Land of Israel. We have to state with regret that any sign of ostensible moderation in the attitude of Arab Governments towards Israel is negated by their sustenance and support of terrorist organizations committed to Israel's destruction and by their continued attempts to expel Israel from United Nations bodies and other international organizations. We will welcome a change in the Arab stance if it is given concrete expression, such as a clear-cut disengagement from the so-called PLO and other terrorist organizations and a straightforward statement of readiness to make peace with Israel.
127.	Sadly, such a breakthrough for peace was set back by the General Assembly's rejection of the Camp David accords and the Israel-Egypt peace treaty, for no other reason than that certain Arab States reject the idea of peace with Israel. Camp David has been the only ray of light in an otherwise dismal and dark picture of hostility. It will continue to serve as a beacon of hope until its message is finally accepted by the peoples and Governments of our region.
128.	The United Nations can contribute to peace in the Middle East by a change of direction. It should embrace the idea of peace between Israel and its neighbours condemn the blatant attacks on Israel and reject outright the attempts to expel it from international forums. Recently, an attempt to expel Israel from the UPU was properly rejected by an overwhelming majority. It is now time for the United Nations as a whole to muster the courage to condemn such behaviour. It will mark an important milestone in rehabilitating the image of the United Nations and its standing in the world community.
129.	Recently, the idea of convening an international conference on the Middle East was resurrected. It was advanced by a State that has no diplomatic relations with Israel and that recommends the participation of representatives of terrorist groups. The Arab-Israel dispute is not in need of another international forum. There have been more than enough such gatherings and proposals, and they have all proved futile. They served as a stage for propaganda and for competition between Arab States in the politics of public confrontation with Israel. A conference such as the one being proposed would strike a blow at the principle of direct negotiations, which has proved to be the only means of producing agreements between Israel and its neighbours, from the time of the General Armistice Agreements in 1949 through the Camp David accords in 1978.
130.	We therefore call on Member States that have the interest of peace at heart to bring their influence to bear on our Arab neighbours to the east and north to adopt the only successful and tested path to peace—direct negotiations with Israel.
131.	Such negotiations produced the agreement with Lebanon which was signed on 17 May 1983. That agreement provided for security arrangements against terrorism and an agreed basis for normal relations between our two countries across the recognized international boundaries. It was approved by the legislatures of Israel and Lebanon, but Syria and those that cannot tolerate the idea of peace with Israel destroyed it by the application of sheer, brutal force. The agreement was designed to lead to the withdrawal of all foreign forces from Lebanon, the restoration of Lebanese independence and the establishment of security measures along the Lebanon- Israel border.
132.	Today, some 40,000 Syrian troops occupy 65 per cent of Lebanon and show no sign of any intention to leave. The Lebanese Government is dominated by Syria and is not capable of conducting free negotiations that would resolve its problems with Israel. Obviously, Israel will ensure its legitimate security needs and make the necessary arrangements in southern Lebanon to protect the people of northern Israel against any repetition of the terrorist attacks of recent years. I reiterate our readiness to withdraw all our forces from Lebanon, subject to the above-mentioned arrangements.
133.	By now it should be clear to everyone, including the Arab States in our area, that Israel has no interest in maintaining any military presence in Lebanon. But we have to make certain that after the last Israeli soldier leaves Lebanon, the terrorists will not return to attack us.
134.	Let me repeat: anyone, any people or State that is interested in the evacuation of the Israel army from Lebanon must see to it that the terrorist organizations expelled from Lebanon by Israel do not return to our borders to renew their attacks. This is an essential condition for peace. Israel is ready to cooperate in any serious effort towards a fair solution to this problem.
135.	Since the conclusion of the Camp David accords, Israel has repeatedly called on Jordan, Egypt and the Palestinian Arabs to join in negotiations for an agreement on autonomy. Unfortunately, Egypt has discontinued its participation in the talks, while Jordan and the Palestinian Arabs have refused to join them. Arab rejectionism and extremism continue to have a stranglehold on those who may have been willing to embark on the path of moderation and peace.
136.	From this rostrum, I turn yet again to our neighbours with the same call. Let us move forward together on a new path. Let us talk to one another. Let us engage in a common effort to resolve our conflicts, rather than perpetuate the negative attitudes which find frequent expression in this building.
137.	Until this call is heeded, Israel will continue to strive for an end to Arab rejectionist attitudes and aspire to mutual acceptance, tolerance, understanding and dialogue, which are consonant with the most basic goals of the United Nations.
138.	Israel is aware of the substantial contribution which the peaceful uses of nuclear energy can make to the well-being of the world and of the right of all countries to benefit from such uses. We support those international arrangements that would ensure the status and inviolability of nuclear facilities dedicated to peaceful purposes.
139.	Israel has long been concerned by the dangers posed by nuclear armaments and has therefore consistently supported the objective of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons.
140.	We believe that the most credible barrier to proliferation in such a sensitive area as the Middle East is a freely negotiated nuclear-weapon-free zone. In this belief, we are encouraged by the Latin American experience and the recent progress towards establishing the South Pacific as a nuclear-weapon- free zone.
141.	In the vital field of disarmament, we are impelled by a permanent moral imperative. Progress in this field is indispensable if we are to remove the nuclear threat. It may be a commonplace to say that time is running out, but it is nevertheless true. A very recent experience demonstrates that weapons, once they exist, are used. During the current terrible Iran- Iraq war, new non-conventional weapons, such as gas, have been used. This latest addition to the arsenal of fighting armies, against established international conventions and basic decency, cannot but arouse the deepest anxiety. It should be opposed vigorously by anyone concerned for the future of our civilization. All of us are aware that a moderation of the armament spiral, both conventional and non- conventional, will free huge resources needed for the welfare of mankind, in particular that of the developing countries.
142.	In conclusion, our mission is twofold. Our first task is the improvement of the quality of life in this world, especially for those who are suffering or who lack the means of sustenance; the hungry millions are waiting for us to do our duty. Our second task is to concert our efforts to eradicate from our midst terrorism and all other violations of civilized norms. We must dedicate equal effort to achieving both goals. We cannot accomplish our humanitarian task unless we overcome the dangers that threaten our society. Both objectives can be achieved provided we muster the courage and the will to do so. Our reward will be true peace. There can be no greater goal for the United Nations.
143.	The vision of our ancient prophets of universal peace was intended for a distant, Utopian future. But, if we succeed in removing these two formidable obstacles—hunger and terrorism—from our path, the march of humanity towards the fulfilment of that vision will be immeasurably advanced, our stride quickened and our hearts uplifted with the promise of better days.
﻿Mr. President, I congratulate you on your election. When Africa's problems are looming so large, it is appropriate that an African should once again preside over the General Assembly. We are confident that your presidency will help make this session a fruitful one. New Zealand will do all it can to assist you.
3.	We welcome the newest Member of the United Nations, Brunei Darussalam, a country of our own part of the world, with which we have long-standing ties. New Zealand has long believed that the membership of the Organization should be universal. We welcome every step in that direction. We would not want to see the principle of universality compromised in any way.
4.	I would not adequately reflect the views of most New Zealanders if I did not, right at the beginning of my first address to the General Assembly, talk about an issue that has become very prominent in public debate in our country. New Zealanders—not just a few of them, but people from all sectors of the community—have become gravely concerned about nuclear weapons and the continuing and deadly competition in their production, their refinement and their deployment.
5.	New Zealand is a small and remote country, perhaps a little distant from the mainstream of world affairs. We are fortunate enough to live in a region that constitutes a pocket of tranquillity in a deeply divided and troubled world. Like many members of the international community, New Zealand faces serious economic problems and some social ones as well; but we are at least able to come to grips with these problems without having our attention diverted by those immediate worries out security that are all too familiar for many Members of the United Nations. We are not occupied; we are nobody's client; we have excellent relations with all our neighbours; in 1984 no other country has New Zealand in its sights. For our longer-term protection we rely on our membership of the Western Alliance. That membership is formally expressed in a security treaty with the United States and Australia which for 33 years has been a central feature of the foreign and defence policies of successive New Zealand Governments, including my own.
6.	Against this background, why is it that New Zealanders are becoming increasingly worried about a contest that is centred in two capitals half a world away? With no more immodesty than many others, New Zealanders like to think of themselves as practical and sensible people. They are simply alarmed at the continuing build-up of nuclear arsenals, because they can see no sense in it. How does it make sense continually to augment and refine an existing capacity to make the rubble bounce and bounce and bounce again? New Zealanders have felt deepening frustration at the inability of the States that hold nuclear weapons, in particular the two super-Powers, to agree on practical measures to halt and reverse the process of building more and "better" nuclear weapons. If ordinary people everywhere can see the irrationality of that race, they ask, why cannot the super-Powers see it also? And, if they can see it, why do they not do something about it?
7.	Quite recently, another dimension has been added to these concerns. Our people, like others round the world, have known for a long time that the possibility of nuclear war is a terrible and frightening one. They have known for very many years that if the countries that have these weapons eventually descend to hurling them at each other, then those countries and their peoples will be destroyed. They have also recognized that other countries, including New Zealand, would suffer very severely indeed. But New Zealanders had not previously supposed that the direct physical consequences for them could be overwhelming. If common humanity and concern for others dictated anxiety about nuclear war, it was thought, perhaps we could afford to be slightly less anxious than others.
8.	Within the last year or so, New Zealanders have been told that even that last tattered shred of reassurance is probably no longer available. Reputable scientists from east and west have told us that the global, climatic and long-term biological consequences of a nuclear war would be much more severe than had been previously thought. What is more, that would be the case if even a relatively small part of existing nuclear arsenals was used or if the weapons were used only against so-called counter-force or military targets. The scientists have also told us that nuclear war in the north may generate a nuclear winter in the south as well. They have gone further and advised us that there is a possibility of the self- inflicted extinction of the human species. That, we are told, is what could flow from the deliberate, if irrational, act, the mistake, the miscalculation or the accident.
9.	To New Zealanders this is a truly appalling state of affairs. Refinements or modifications of the predictions which the scientists have made about the consequences of nuclear war may be made as a result of further work, but they will concern only the exact range of utter disaster.
10.	What the scientists have already made entirely plain to all of us—plainer than ever before—is that the nuclear weapons that may have helped to maintain an uneasy peace between two great countries for more than three decades have become a threat to the security and survival of countries and peoples everywhere. The situation we are facing is quite unlike any other with which the international community has had to grapple before. It is one from which, unpalatable though it may be to think about, no country— and, for that matter, no individual—can back away. We shall not escape from it if the traditional prescriptions of great-Power politics are applied.
11.	What the scientists have not demonstrated, of course, is that nuclear war will occur or that it is more likely now than it was in the past. But the question how close we may be to falling into the abyss does not take account of the essential point. The fact is that a nuclear war is possible, whether it is half a year or 100 years away or whether, as we all hope, it never occurs.
12.	None of the nuclear-weapon States can tell us that it will not occur, that they will never do what they have in their power to do. The results of the use of nuclear weapons would be so grave that it is absolutely incumbent upon the nuclear-weapon States to do everything possible to avoid their use. And that would remain the case even if the consequences of nuclear war should be shown later to be only half or a quarter as bad as the scientists have predicted.
13.	My Government can find no encouragement in the recent response of the nuclear-weapon States to this situation. The refinement and deployment of nuclear weapons continues apace. There are disquieting indications that the military competition between the super-Powers may, in the coming years, move to the new environment of outer space. Multilateral arms control negotiations are stalled and, in some cases, in danger of being discredited. I would ask the Soviet Union to respond positively to the United States invitation to resume key bilateral arms control talks in order to get a dialogue under way again.
14.	My Government hopes that the two super-Powers will take a long hard look at the course of developments in the nuclear arms race. It is clearly in their own interests and in the interests of all of us to make a new and very much more determined attempt to reach agreements that will enable them to change direction. None of us underestimates the complexities involved in reaching agreements that will permit a mutual, balanced, verifiable—and very large—reduction in existing levels of nuclear weapons. We are aware that it will not be easy to manage safely the transition to a more secure world where, as a stage in the road to their elimination, the number of nuclear weapons is drastically reduced and where innovations in weaponry, if they are to occur at all, are not of a kind that cause instability. That process will require trust and good will. It is also likely to require the taking of risks. But the most dangerous risk of all is to do nothing: to allow compulsive competitiveness to continue indefinitely.
15.	We ask, in addition, of the Soviet Union that it reflect on the fact that many countries, of which New Zealand is one, have the greatest difficulty in under-standing its current reluctance to take part in bilateral arms control negotiations with the United States. The events that occurred between 1939 and 1945 gave the Soviet Union every reason to be concerned about preserving the peace. It will advance that cause by returning to the bargaining table and looking at ways and means of beginning the process of de-escalation.
16.	Countries such as my own have to recognize that the contribution we can make to assist this process is limited; but we are bound to continue to try. There are several things we want to emphasize. The most urgent of these is the need for massive reductions in strategic nuclear arms. There are other things as well. New Zealand has, for many years, argued the case for the conclusion of a comprehensive test-ban treaty.
17.	It needs to be understood that our advocacy of that measure is not prompted solely by the fact that one of the nuclear-weapon States continues, despite repeated pleas from all the countries in the region, to test its weapons in the South Pacific. We see a prohibition of the testing of nuclear weapons by any country in any environment as a critical first step in halting and then turning back the arms race. We have been disappointed at the lack of progress made in securing such a prohibition. My delegation will again at this session of the General Assembly sponsor a draft resolution which seeks to encourage and speed up that work.
18.	A comprehensive test ban will also be of the greatest importance in preventing the further spread of nuclear weapons. Everything possible must be done to stop that from happening. My Government will want to take an active part in the Third Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons next year. We see that Treaty as fundamental to world security.
19.	There are, of course, other techniques of modern warfare which are not much less unpleasant than nuclear weapons. Biological weapons have already been outlawed. The need for a comprehensive agreement to outlaw the manufacture and use of all chemical weapons is another matter of concern to New Zealand. During the past year there appears to have been some prospect of progress in that direction. We urge the Conference on Disarmament to get on with the task.
20.	If the international community is to chart a way out of the current impasse on nuclear weapons, this will be done through global measures in which the nuclear-weapon States will play the major role. But regional initiatives can also make a contribution. My Government regards the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco) as a significant regional advance. We are also fully committed to, and will vigorously defend, the Antarctic Treaty, which demilitarized a whole continent to the south of New Zealand and prohibited the basing or testing of nuclear weapons and which, for more than 20 years, has effectively guaranteed the stability of that region.
21.	Very recently, a new initiative has been taken in our part of the world. On the proposal of Australia and with the full support of my Government, the heads of Government of the 11 countries that make up the South Pacific Forum agreed on 28 August of this year, at a meeting in Tuvalu, on the desirability of establishing a South Pacific nuclear-free zone at the earliest opportunity. The heads of Government spelt out the principles that will be applied in the construction of such a zone. It was agreed that there should be no use, testing or stationing of nuclear devices in the South Pacific; that no South Pacific country would develop or manufacture or receive from others or acquire or test any nuclear explosive device; and that nuclear activities in the South Pacific would be conducted in accordance with applicable international principles and treaties, notably the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. The meeting acknowledged the need for a South Pacific nuclear-free zone to respect the principles of freedom of navigation and overflight. It was accepted that South Pacific countries would retain their unqualified sovereign right to decide for themselves, consistent with the objectives of the zone, on their security arrangements and on such questions as the access to their ports and airfields by vessels and aircraft of other countries. It was agreed that in the course of the next year a draft of a treaty to establish the zone should be prepared.
22.	This initiative represents, I believe, a major advance for the region. It would net, we know, spare us from the consequences of nuclear war but, when in place, it would significantly strengthen the existing measures, both global and regional, to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons. It would also, I believe, convey a clear signal that the South Pacific countries do not want their region to become an arena for rivalry involving nuclear weapons.
23.	New Zealand would hope to be in a position to report to the General Assembly next year and, before that, to the Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons that good progress has been made in creating a South Pacific nuclear-free zone. New Zealand and the other countries of our region naturally expect that, when the necessary work has been done within the region, all the nuclear-weapon States will co-operate with us to ensure that the zone becomes a reality.
24.	The recent meeting of the South Pacific Forum turned its attention also to the evolving situation in New Caledonia.
25.	The question is not really where that Territory is going. Rather, it is how it gets there, and at what pace. The French Government has, I believe, made a clear and irreversible commitment to self-determination for the peoples of New Caledonia. There is a particular mix of interests and problems that must be resolved carefully and by the people most directly concerned, that is to say, by all the ethnic groups that have a legitimate stake in the future of New Caledonia.
26.	All members of the Forum agreed that the changes that are to come in New Caledonia—and they must and will come—should be made speedily and peacefully, that is to say, without violence and without external interference. It is up to all parties concerned to exercise moderation. They must work together to achieve the kind of political future that satisfies the demands of a truly democratic and harmonious multi-ethnic society in New Caledonia.
27.	A significant amount of progress has been made. A lot remains to be done. That was recognized at the Forum. There we were agreed that the process of decolonization would be advanced by a public statement from France about its commitment to independence for New Caledonia. We gave it as our view that the referendum planned for 1989 should be brought forward; 1989 was, we felt, too distant a date. And we suggested some intensification of preparation for the country's eventual independence to ensure the full and active participation of the Kanak people in the country's educational, vocational and administrative life.
28.	We called too, at that Forum, on the Independence Front to play its part in the early and peaceful evolution of New Caledonia to independence by recognizing the need for independence to reflect fully the multiracial nature of New Caledonia.
29.	What we stressed above all was the crucial role of dialogue—that those involved should keep talking to each other. That was the message which the Tuvalu Forum sought to convey to France and to the Independence Front. I am hopeful that an initiative taken by the Forum to foster the process of dialogue will soon get under way and that a group of Ministers from Forum countries—including New Zealand— will be able to talk to the leaders of the Independence Front and to the French Government to tell each of them about the concern of the countries in our part of the world that New Caledonia should move through conference and dialogue, not through confrontation and dispute, to independence. We in the South Pacific have always found solutions to problems through dialogue, discussion, consensus; and it is through dialogue and consensus that we wish to see New Caledonia take its rightful place soon in the community of the nations of the South Pacific.
30.	Neither we nor our South Pacific partners want to see unwelcome external influences intrude upon events of New Caledonia, nor to see the transition to independence marred by an outcome that is not in accordance with the wishes of all those in New Caledonia who have made that country their permanent home. Our part of the world has been fortunate in that it has been free from the conflict and violence that have so often accompanied decolonization elsewhere. We do not want that record to be blemished. I am confident that it will not be.
31.	If it is important to all of us living in the South Pacific that our region remain free from conflict, we are equally concerned to ensure that our backyard, the Antarctic, does not become an area of international rivalry and discord. I have already noted that the Antarctic Treaty demilitarized Antarctica. What is even more important, the Treaty provides the only possible guarantee that the region will continue to be free from international rivalry and conflict. The study on the question of Antarctica, submitted by the Secretary-General should help countries more remote from the region to understand the contribution the Treaty has made and continues to make to the achievement of the purposes of the United Nations. I hope it will convince them that the Treaty system, which is open to all Members of the United Nations, must be preserved and strengthened.
32.	I referred a moment ago to a conviction that there has been an irrevocable commitment to self- determination for the people of New Caledonia. I wish I could say the same about the situation in southern Africa. Namibia continues to be unlawfully occupied by South Africa. The United Nations has had no choice but itself to accept a special responsibility for the Territory. It has guaranteed to its people that they will be able to exercise their right of self- determination. But that promise has been subverted by South Africa's determination to accept no settlement except on its own terms, and by the military power which reinforces the obstinacy and aggression that South Africa has also shown towards its other neighbours.
33.	I wish, too, that it could be said that the agreements South Africa has recently concluded with neighbouring States signified a new era in the region. Regrettably, they do not appear to be agreements made willingly in order to resolve difficulties and develop closer working partnerships, or agreements in which peace and justice were equally sought by both sides.
34.	Nor can it be said that the South African Government has offered justice to the people of South Africa in its new constitutional arrangements. There is not the slightest indication that it is ready to share political power with the black majority. Nor is there any sign that it is willing to dismantle the system. The essence of that system is unchanged. In recent and separate elections the Coloured and Indian communities have spurned the South African Government's attempt to draw them into an alliance and, by so doing, have confirmed their rejection of the apartheid system.
35.	New Zealand likewise rejects apartheid and all it stands for. We are committed in our country to building a multiracial society based on freedom, justice and consent. The South Africans have already learned that my Government will not compromise with a system that rejects those values.
36.	If my Government believes that there is today more reason than ever before to keep the basic issue of war and peace right at the top of the agenda of the United Nations, we also see an urgent need to move quickly and firmly to tackle the economic problems facing the world.
37.	The world economy is just beginning to emerge from the worst trial it has known for over 30 years. Investment and production have increased, inflation is down and world trade is increasing. But doubts persist. Unhappily, even now many countries have yet to benefit significantly from the recovery in some of the leading industrial economies. The international financial system has shown enough flexibility to survive the recent crisis. That is a relief. But it is hard to feel very optimistic about the future when many countries are still struggling to meet their financial obligations and in many others large numbers of people are actually facing starvation.
38.	The protracted debates in international forums during the past few years have not done much to alleviate the real problems confronting us. New Zealand would like to encourage the development of a gradual movement towards pragmatism and compromise. New Zealanders have never seen much prospect of resolving the world's economic problems through confrontation. Dialogue and consensus are the techniques that we are trying to use in our own country, and they seem to us to hold out the best chance of success on the international scene.
39.	The recent economic crisis has had at least one good result. During the past year or so, it has become widely recognized among industrialized as well as developing countries that, despite the role that international financial institutions have played in supporting the adjustment and development efforts of individual countries, the present international system is not working well. If proof is still required it can easily be found in the debt problem, on the one hand, and the problem of protectionism, on the other. More and more, international trade is escaping the multilateral rules that should safeguard the interests of all countries, including the smaller among them. The need for an overhaul is pressing. The task now is to find the right technique for the job—that is, a technique that will work. New Zealand has been active in the search for an acceptable and effective procedure for dealing with the problem. New Zealand supports a comprehensive review of the trade and payments system.
40.	Before I finish I want to reaffirm my faith and my country's in the United Nations. Nowadays there are many people who question the usefulness of the Organization for their own countries if not for the world at large. I am not one of them. I believe that the Charter of the United Nations is the foundation of the system of international relations under which we have all lived for nearly 40 years. I believe that the essential function of the United Nations under the Charter is to discourage the use of force by one State against another. I believe that the Organization has played a part in saving us all so far from the catastrophe of a third world war. I belong to a generation in my country which has never experienced at first hand the ravages of war in the sense of the amount of fear that war brings, and throughout my lifetime the United Nations has symbolized, as it has coexisted with a level of peace for which we yearn, the fact that multilateral arrangements can be of benefit to the human race. I believe that the United Nations has an important contribution to make towards bringing the nuclear arms race under control and freeing us from the fear of nuclear war. I believe that I and all New Zealanders and our children can rest more peacefully because of the work that is done within the United Nations, and I believe that that is true for all peoples on our Earth.
﻿Mr. Lusaka, I congratulate you on your election to the office of President of the thirty-ninth session of the General Assembly. Our congratulations also go to the representatives of Brunei Darussalam, a State which has become the 159th Member of the United Nations.
58.	For almost 40 years now, the words "the United Nations" have been firmly established in the world's political vocabulary. There is virtually no major international problem in connection with which those words would not be spoken in different languages, both in this Hall and outside it.
59.	The extensive involvement of the United Nations in world affairs and developments is determined by the very mission of this forum, which was brought into being in order to unite the political will and potential of States for the purpose of maintaining international peace and security.
60.	The conclusion reached by the founding Members of the United Nations was very simple indeed. It was born of the experience of the most bloody and destructive war that has ever befallen mankind. Indeed, it was precisely through united efforts that the aggressor was crushed. High was the cost of the great victory whose fortieth anniversary will be observed next year. All the peoples who fought against fascism contributed to that victory, but the Soviet Union's decisive role in it is indisputable.
61.	United efforts were and are still needed today in order to build the post-war world. For it is the main lesson of the Second World War that States must stand together in the fight against war.
62.	It is common knowledge, however, that as the war-ravaged earth was still smouldering and thousands of towns and villages were in ruins, the international atmosphere once again began to deteriorate and ultimately to become critical. This happened through the fault of those who, in their quest for world hegemony, began to behave contrary to their obligations as allies in the anti-Hitlerite coalition, oblivious to the lessons of the past.
63.	In disregard of the lofty purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, which they too had just signed, a group of States set out to escalate their military preparations by putting together a system of aggressive military blocs with the North Atlantic Alliance as its pivot. Those States pledged themselves to a policy based on a position of strength, a policy of brinkmanship. They are responsible for the advent of the cold war, which for a long time froze the normal flow of international life for which the peoples of the world yearned.
64.	As a result, in the post-war years the world has been in a state of fever. And whenever international relations were marked—as was the case during the period of detente—by budding cooperation between States with different social systems, no effort was spared to undermine those positive processes, which is exactly what happened at the whim of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization [NATO] military bloc. It is precisely this trend in world politics that is the source of the situation that characterizes the international climate today. The threat of war has grown and the foundations of world peace have become more shaky.
65.	This course, which is manifest as never before in the current policies of the United States and of those who choose to be its accomplices, is opposed by a broad front of peace-loving States and forces.
66.	The Soviet Union is in the vanguard of active champions of peace. It has been and remains faithful to its solemn pledge taken right after the criminal Fascist swastika was crushed and the Hitlerite war machine smashed. The essence of that pledge has not faded with the years; it is to fight resolutely to ensure that the flames of world war never flare up again. The fact that it has been possible for almost 40 years to ward it off is largely to the credit of the countries which pursue a policy of peace among nations and frustrate—by their international prestige and influence—aggressive and adventuristic designs wherever they originate. The Soviet Union is one of them.
67.	Together with other socialist countries, we shall continue to work in the interest of improving international relations. This is precisely the thrust of the documents of the meeting of the Political Consultative Committee of the States Parties to the Warsaw Treaty, held at Prague on 4 and 5 January 1983, and of the high-level Economic Conference of the member countries of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance, held in Moscow from 12 to 14 June 1984.
68.	The Soviet Union and the States of the socialist community are concentrating their efforts on attaining the key objective of preventing a nuclear disaster. For if the destructive potential currently amassed in the world were unleashed the human race would probably cease to exist. To prevent that from happening is a goal of overriding importance. AH States represented in the United Nations should contribute to its achievement. No one and nothing can relieve them of the responsibility they have assumed under the Charter of the United Nations for the destiny of present and succeeding generations.
69.	As was stressed recently by Mr. Chernenko, General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics: "The world has radically changed. Its problems cannot be solved by force ... it is imperative to adopt a policy of realism, reason and business-like cooperation in solving the problems that face mankind."
70.	Those who truly hold dear the interests of peace cannot confine themselves merely to stating that there exists a threat of nuclear war. It is necessary to pinpoint the source of that threat. Clarity in this regard is not merely a matter of historical fairness. An understanding of the factors that are pushing mankind towards a nuclear abyss also determines the answer to the question whether or not this calamitous process can be stopped, and how.
71.	It is of fundamental importance to compare the two political trends and the two approaches to the problem of nuclear weapons.
72.	Right after Hiroshima and Nagasaki the world witnessed the inception of a policy of ever greater stockpiles of nuclear weapons and nuclear blackmail. The Soviet Union forcefully called for the outlawing of these most deadly and destructive weapons. Indeed, as early as 1946 the Soviet Union submitted at the United Nations a draft international convention on the prohibition for all time of the production and use of nuclear weapons and on the destruction of their stockpiles. I am sure there are some present here in this Hall who witnessed the discussion of this item at that time.
73.	Yet our former allies in the struggle against fascism did not have the heart to vote for that proposal. Their reaction then was bound to make the peoples apprehensive and it did cause serious apprehension.
74.	And what is the situation today? Statements are being openly made at the highest official levels that the United States has the right to deliver a first nuclear strike, that is to say, to unleash a nuclear war.
75.	Our country sought a ban on nuclear weapons both when it did not possess them and after it developed them. Today, as before, the Soviet Union favours prompt measures to reduce and eventually eliminate nuclear weapons altogether. This is the aim of a comprehensive set of initiatives advanced by the Soviet Union.
76.	Whenever the United States side showed realism and the will to come to agreement on the basis of the principle of equality and equal security—something that did happen before—it proved possible to reach important accords. Thus, a major step forward was taken with the conclusion in 1972 by the Soviet Union and the United States of the Interim Agreement on Certain Measures with respect to the Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms and the Treaty on the Limitation of Antiballistic Missile Systems.
77.	However, in the years that followed, our attempts to reduce or at least to limit nuclear arms failed to produce concrete results. The tug of war between the groups that determine United States foreign policy has been won by the militaristically minded. They attempt to devalue the existing Soviet American accords by wrecking what was achieved earlier through long and painstaking work on both sides, as was done with the SALT II Treaty.
78.	They broke off and refuse to resume the trilateral talks between the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the United States on the complete and general prohibition of nuclear weapons tests. They stalled the ratification of the Soviet United States treaties on the limitation of underground nuclear weapons tests and on peaceful nuclear explosions that had been signed a long time ago. And what tremendous efforts were required to arrive at those treaties and agreements.
79.	Those and other similar actions are but a few examples of the policy of the United States, whose central objective is to try to secure military superiority for itself.
80.	Stories intended to mislead people are being churned out in profusion. Not that they are particularly reticent about saying that, should they eventually feel like negotiating, they would do so only from strength. To that end—they claim—the United States must first build up its military muscle.
81.	It took Washington a long time to send its team to the negotiating table at Geneva. However, at the talks the United States side followed a scenario that was not designed to lead to agreement. How else can one describe the fact that while negotiating the limitation of nuclear arms in Europe our partners did exactly the opposite? Beforehand—I repeat, beforehand—they set the date for deploying new United States medium range missiles on the territories of several Western European States. We were told to accept the United States position or else there would be no agreement. So there is no agreement.
82.	As to the Soviet proposals paving the way to agreements, they were rejected out of hand. Anything aimed at reaching agreement on the basis of equality was opposed with hostility.
83.	It was Washington's deliberate intention to wreck the negotiations on nuclear arms—both medium range and strategic. And it succeeded in this. Juggling with words ostensibly in favour of negotiations is a false propaganda ploy. Its purpose is obvious.
84.	Now they rejoice that they were able to keep the timetable and begin the deployment of their missiles in Europe, as planned. Even here in the course of the General Assembly one can meet representatives of Western European States who are rubbing their hands with pleasure over the fact that the plan for deployment is being implemented.
85.	It makes no difference whether deception is crude or cleverly packaged. A good idea is being exploited for unsavoury purposes.
86.	We have noticed that there are realistically minded politicians and statesmen in the West, including the United States, who realize that it is precisely in this way that the issue of negotiations is being used.
87.	No, the path of stockpiling of nuclear weapons is not the right path to follow. The movement must be in the opposite direction, leading to the removal of these weapons and to their subsequent elimination both in Europe and throughout the world. This is the course of our policy.
88.	The Soviet Union is in favour of serious talks. Not only are we prepared for such talks, but we are insisting on them. Our proposals on the limitation and reduction of strategic arms and on the limitation of nuclear arms in Europe remain valid. They neither offer advantages nor do any harm to either side. The United States must remove the obstacles it has put in the way of the talks. Unless these obstacles are removed, of course, these talks will not take place, and this is what the United States has in mind.
89.	It is often asked: since it is difficult for the time being to arrive at a radical solution to the problem of nuclear arms, would it not be possible to take steps that would create a favourable atmosphere for that, raise the level of trust among States and ease international tension?
90.	We are convinced that such steps are both possible and necessary. An effective measure of this kind would be the implementation of our proposal, endorsed by the United Nations, for a quantitative and qualitative freeze of nuclear weapon arsenals by all States which possess them. Thin could be done in the first place by the Soviet Union and the United States on a bilateral basis to set an example for other nuclear Powers to follow. Could we not do this? We propose to Washington: let us set such an example.
91.	For the time being it is necessary at least to suspend the nuclear arms race. The world has crossed the line beyond which any further build-up and improvement of these arms is not only dangerous but senseless.
92.	In the present circumstances it is futile and hopeless for anyone to expect to get ahead and gain military superiority. It is absolutely illusory to hope to win a nuclear war: whether global or limited, blitzkrieg or protracted—whatever the nuclear war doctrines.
93.	Such is the authoritative and unanimous conclusion of scientists and competent military and civilian experts of world renown, with the exception of those, of course, who have lost their honour and conscience or those who were not at all endowed by nature with either.
94.	What kind of people can fail to see that peace today is fragile? In spite of the obvious, they once again proclaim a policy of "peace through strength". Moreover, they are trying to elevate this policy to the level of statesmanship. All we hear is that strength, strength and, above all, strength is the guarantee of international peace. In other words—weapons, weapons and still more weapons. But does not the experience of the past—both recent and remote— show otherwise?
95.	In the face of the currently aggravated dangerous military and political confrontation it is extremely important not to miss the chance. Agreement should be reached on freezing nuclear weapons and prospects opened up for a subsequent reduction of arsenals of these weapons. 
96.	Sentiments in favour of such a solution have become widespread in the world. As is well known, the broadest sections of the population in the United States and other Western countries spontaneously come out in favour of this solution, and we fully understand their aspirations.
97.	Only ill will can guide those who spawn all kinds of insinuations that the Soviet Union all but manipulates or is behind this movement. Let them ask what it is that the people who take to the streets in mass marches of protest are fighting for. Let them ask those people themselves. Let them ask those people, not us. They will give only one answer: they are fighting for life. What kind of people can assume that the Americans or the British, the French or the Italians, the Germans or the Dutch wish to perish in the flames of nuclear war? We think that those who hope to crush the antinuclear movement by punitive measures realize it full well.
98.	In this light, what is the value of the human rights rhetoric in which they just love to indulge in their speeches, statements before various commissions and committees, in articles and voluminous reports to parliaments. In fact, the proponents of the arms race do not care a bit about these rights, including the paramount human right—the right to life.
99.	There can be no justification for any action that pushes the world to nuclear war. It is only natural that last year the General Assembly adopted—at the Soviet initiative—by an overwhelming majority of its Members resolution 38/75 condemning nuclear war as the most hideous crime that could be committed against peoples.
100.	A nuclear age requires that political thinking be consonant with its realities. Where categories such as "strength", "deterrence" and "superiority" still prevail in this thinking, they must be replaced by concepts of the non-use of force and of trust, equality and mutual regard for security interests.
101.	It would be of fundamental importance if nuclear Powers observed, in relations between themselves, certain norms that were formulated by Mr. Chernenko in his statement last March. It is proposed that these Powers: regard the prevention of nuclear war as the primary objective of their foreign policy, preclude situations fraught with the risk of nuclear conflict and, should such a risk arise, hold urgent consultations in order to prevent a nuclear conflagration; renounce the propaganda of any nuclear war scenario, whether global or limited; assume an obligation to forgo the first use of nuclear weapons; under no circumstances use nuclear weapons against nonnuclear countries which have no such weapons on their territory, respect the status of the existing nuclear free zone and encourage the establishment of new such zones in various parts of the world; prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons in any form; not transfer to any recipient whatsoever such weapons or control over them, not deploy them on the territory of countries where there are no such weapons and not extend the nuclear arms race to new environments, including outer space; seek, step by step, on the basis of the principle of equal security, the reduction of nuclear armaments up to and including the complete elimination of all types of such weapons.
102.	The Soviet Union is in favour of reaching agreement at any time with other nuclear Powers on the mutual recognition of such norms and making them binding. This would serve to reduce the risk of the outbreak of a nuclear conflict.
103.	In view of its special urgency, it is necessary to single out the question of preventing the race in nuclear and other weapons in outer space, which some want to turn into a staging area for war. We all know who is seeking this.
104.	The extension of the arms race to outer space, unless checked in time, could become an irreversible process. Effective measures are needed to keep outer space peaceful.
105.	No one country should believe that this is for others, not for it, to decide. Such an attitude would be a big mistake.
106.	A major step has been our initiative in calling for Soviet United States talks on preventing the militarization of outer space. We believe that the Soviet Union and the United States, as the leading Powers in the field of outer space exploration, should do all they can to keep outer space peaceful and in particular, with a view to accomplishing this task, to lay the foundations for multilateral agreement. This idea seems to be alive among many States. Full responsibility for the failure to hold the talks rests with the United States side. Washington is unwilling to engage in the talks.
107.	Ask any man in the street in any town in the United States, in the Soviet Union or in any other country whether he believes that nuclear weapons should be stationed in space, beyond the Earth's atmosphere, at an altitude of hundreds of kilometres, and that outer space should become a springboard for war preparations, or whether he feels that this should not be allowed to happen. There is no doubt that the answer will be unequivocal: this cannot be allowed.
108.	We urge the United States Government to recognize that the militarization of outer space threatens the whole of mankind, including the American people themselves. We express the hope that the United States will refrain from actions which would make irreversible the process of turn outer space into an arena of military rivalry and it will be willing to engage in talks with a view reaching an agreement. For its part, the Soviet Union continues to be in favour of starting such talks as soon as possible.
109.	The General Assembly would be doing a good thing if it forcefully voiced its concerted opinion that the militarization of outer space should not be allowed to take place and that outer space must be used solely for the good of peoples and not for sowing death and destruction on Earth. We hope that every member of every delegation in this Hall will give serious thought to this.
110.	In seeking to promote this goal in every possible way, the Soviet Union proposes the inclusion in the agenda of the current session of the Assembly of an important and urgent item entitled "Use of outer space exclusively for peaceful purposes for the benefit of mankind". What we are talking about is, in the first place, the banning, without delay and for all time, of the use of force in and from outer space against the Earth, as well as from the Earth against objects in outer space. In other words, agreement must be reached on the prohibition and elimination of space attack weapons of all systems, whatever their mode of basing, designed to destroy objects in space. This applies above all to States with major space capabilities. 
111. The United Nations should speak out emphatically and with all its authority in favour of achieving reliably verifiable agreements on a bilateral and a multilateral basis. The way must be opened for concerted and constructive efforts by States which could eventually lead to the creation of a world organization for the use of outer space exclusively for peaceful purposes.
112.	Among those present here there are bound to be people who in 1982 witnessed the Soviet Union solemnly assume in this Hall a unilateral obligation not to be the first to use nuclear weapons. That decision—which was not an easy one to take—is of exceptional importance.
113.	Our country continues to urge the other nuclear Powers, which have not yet done so, to assume a similar obligation. This would also be a tangible historic contribution to international confidence building. Much is said about trust and confidence, but by no means is everything done to bring it about.
114.	Surely the implementation of the proposal of the socialist countries to conclude a treaty on the mutual non-use of military force in relations between the States of the Warsaw Treaty and the North Atlantic Alliance would help to dissipate mutual apprehensions. It would be a welcome decision if an obligation not to be the first to use either nuclear or conventional weapons against one another—in other words, not to use force—were undertaken by States whether or not they belong to military alliances or have a neutral or nonaligned status.
115.	We have also submitted these and some other major proposals at the Conference on Confidence and Security building Measures and Disarmament in Europe, meeting at Stockholm. They have been submitted in combination with certain confidence building measures in the military field.
116.	Representatives of NATO countries, on the other hand, take what is actually an obstructionist position with regard to these proposals. What is proposed under the guise of military and technical measures is a programme, which they have drawn up, of poorly disguised espionage. The measures they are trying to sell do not, of course, affect a single inch of the territory of the United States—that is, the country in which the foundations of the military machine of the NATO bloc are to be found. It is on Soviet territory that they are proposing to carry out these measures.
117.	The same can be said about the prospects of the Vienna Talks on Mutual Reduction of Forces and Armaments and Associated Measures in Central Europe. The fruitless "data" discussion started by the Western participants has long been stalling those talks.
118.	The NATO countries are evading the business-like discussion of cardinal questions, above all those dealing with arms reduction, although without such discussions there can be no real strengthening of security and stability on the European continent. At the Vienna talks too, there should be no place for any of the kind of political manoeuvring in which our negotiating partners like so much to indulge.
119.	Some two years ago at Geneva the Soviet Union introduced at the Conference on Disarmament draft basic provisions for a convention on the prohibition of chemical weapons. That draft constitutes a well-balanced basis for agreement. Some of its provisions were subsequently revised and amended to accommodate the positions of the other participants in the talks.
120.	Not everyone wants to see a successful completion of those talks. Some would rather see them fail. It would seem that the ostensible interest of certain States serves to conceal their plans for a build-up of chemical weapons. Such tactics should be strongly condemned. We may presume that certain War Departments are doing this. But where are the statesmen? Where are true sobriety and farsightedness, a wide-angle look at peace and the fate of the world?
121.	The drafting of an international convention on the prohibition and elimination of chemical weapons should be speeded up, and the United Nations could contribute to this in no small measure. With time this problem will become eve:, more intractable.
122.	Our country expresses its readiness to take part in multilateral negotiations on the limitation of naval activities and naval armaments and on the extension of confidence-building measures to seas and oceans, especially to regions with the busiest sea lanes or with the highest likelihood of conflict situations. We have already put forward a proposal— and this is worth recalling—for an agreement on appropriate measures, including those applicable to particular regions, such as the Indian, Atlantic or Pacific Oceans, the Mediterranean Sea or the Persian Gulf.
123.	The convening of an international conference on the Indian Ocean is being inadmissibly delayed. The United States and some of its allies disregard the will of the littoral States that wish to see a peaceful Indian Ocean and clear skies above it. As before, the Soviet Union continues actively to advocate the turning of this ocean into a zone of peace, something that would be a major step towards preventing the militarization of the world's oceans.
124.	The arms race is seriously damaging to people even when the guns are silent, for it is increasingly consuming intellectual and material wealth and impedes the solution of global problems such as the elimination of hunger and disease, the search for new sources of energy, and the preservation of the environment.
125.	These tasks will not be accomplished either by declaratory statements or by attempts to make assistance to other countries contingent on their acceptance of a particular model of socioeconomic development. Something else is required, namely, the renunciation of all forms of exploitation and of the use of trade and economic ties as tools of political pressure, and a restructuring of international economic relations on a just and democratic basis.
126.	By pressing for the implementation of tangible measures for curbing the arms race and achieving disarmament in close connection with the solution of world economic and social development problems, we consider that reduction of military budgets in either percentage or absolute terms is a promising way to achieve such a goal. And yes, I am talking about military budgets.
127.	Together with the other States signatories of the Warsaw Treaty, the Soviet Union has submitted a proposal to the countries of the North Atlantic bloc to begin talks on the question of the mutual non increase of military expenditures and their subsequent reduction. In our view, there should be no obstacles to the participation of States that do not belong to these military and political groupings in implementing the proposed measures.
128.	However, so far there has been no response from the NATO countries, and that is no accident. If a picture were taken today using the most sophisticated modem technology to show on a planetary scale the magnitude of the worldwide military preparations by the United States and its allies, it would reveal a view that would stun any thinking person: a palisade of missiles; strategic bombers; naval armadas plying the waters of the seas and oceans; hundreds of military bases scattered all over the globe; and colossal stockpiles of weapons of every type.
129.	Some may say that the Soviet Union too has weapons on land, in the air and on and under water. Our answer is: Yes, we do have them, but not by our choice. The objective facts of post-war history irrefutably show that it was not the Soviet Union, not socialism, but rather the other side that initiated the arms race and each of its new spirals. That is where the truth lies.
130.	Forced to take countermeasures, our country did so only in response to, and to the extent commensurate with, the protection of its own security and that of its friends and allies. We have never sought, nor are we seeking, superiority. We stand for maintaining military equilibrium, and at the lowest possible level at that.
131.	We have put forward no less than 100 constructive initiatives from the rostrum of the United Nations alone. The whole world knows that it was the Soviet Union that came forward with the most radical proposal—general and complete disarmament combined with general and complete control. No one else has proposed this.
132.	Numerous proposals have been made by the Soviet Union to curb the arms race in some of its areas. We have proposed—and our proposal still stands—that agreement be reached on the complete prohibition of nuclear weapon tests and on the prohibition of the development and manufacture of new types of weapons of mass destruction and of new systems of such weapons.
133.	The Soviet Union has also been making sustained efforts to reduce conventional armaments and armed forces by proposing that this problem be solved on both a global and a regional basis.
134.	The world community welcomed the Soviet initiatives that brought forth major international treaties and agreements—the Treaty on the Non Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under Water, the Treaty on the Prohibition of the Emplacement of Nuclear Weapons and Other Weapons of Mass Destruction on the Seabed and the Ocean Floor and in the Subsoil Thereof, the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction, and so on. They continue to serve their purpose to this day and serve it well.
135.	We have voluntarily and unilaterally assumed a number of obligations ranging from no-first-use of nuclear weapons to practical steps limiting our armed forces and armaments in Central Europe.
136.	While making its own constructive contributions, the Soviet Union reacts favourably to proposals made by other countries. We support the idea of establishing nuclear free zones and zones of peace in various parts of the globe. We have responded positively to the recent initiative by Argentina, Greece, India, Mexico, Sweden and the United Republic of Tanzania, contained in their Joint Declaration, which urged all nuclear Powers to stop the build-up of nuclear weapons and begin to reduce their stockpiles.
137.	The proposals that we have made constitute an impressive list of initiatives aimed at easing international tensions and developing peaceful cooperation among States.
138.	Yet no matter what proposals or arguments we advance, our counterparts say "no"—they are not acceptable.
139.	They swear that they favour a halt in the arms race, but only through modernization of arms and through improvement and stockpiling of weapons. Is it not absurd? It is absurd, indeed, and it underlies the entire policy. They would have people believe that they favour a reduction in world tensions, but only by establishing more and more military bases, by intensifying military preparations, by militarizing outer space and by deploying new kinds of United States nuclear weapons in Europe.
140.	What is needed to prevent hunger and disease from claiming the lives of countless millions of people? According to the logic of NATO countries, this can be achieved by throwing as much money and resources as possible down the insatiable maw of the war industry.
141.	It would appear that there is no other path towards ensuring peace than war preparations. This is twisted logic, a logic of frenzied militarism.
142.	All States must have a clear understanding of why none of the important and acute international problems is being solved at present. This applies first and foremost to nuclear weapons and the arms race.
143.	They are not being solved because the NATO States do not want it. The instigator of this policy is, of course, Washington. It has firmly linked its foreign policy plans with the further stockpiling of nuclear weapons as well as other types of weapons of mass destruction. It has put up an insurmountable wall on the path to agreement.
144.	Even elementary decency is lacking in cases where representatives of the two Powers—the Soviet Union and the United States—meet to discuss one thing or another. Everything the United States side says is intended to secure unilateral advantages for the United States. Therefore, from the very outset things are doomed to failure. If there are political genes, then failure is genetically inevitable.
145.	If you read closely the documents setting out the policy of the United States Administration for the future—and there are quite a lot of them—you will see that these documents, which are imbued with the spirit of imperial ambitions and enmity towards the Soviet Union and other peace-loving States, glorify the course aimed at United States domination m the world and extol arms and strength. Thus, they set the stage for deadlocks i.e. solution of all the acute problems of today.
146.	We are convinced that each State, irrespective of its social system, whether big or small, will realize that this is a course that leads to a further aggravation of tensions in the world, to an increased risk of a nuclear catastrophe. 
147.	The Soviet delegation is authorized to state before this high forum that the Soviet Union will follow the same policy course it has pursued up to now, namely, the course aimed at peace, disarmament, limitation and subsequent elimination of nuclear armaments, and the solution of other acute problems of today.
148.	One should face the truth squarely. It is precisely the current United States policy that has made the gap between these two courses in world politics wider and deeper than ever before and has virtually blocked the paths leading to agreement.
149.	Today, many people are wondering anxiously if everything has been lost and the only thing left is to acknowledge that international relations have plunged into total darkness.
150.	We do not accept such a view of the situation in the world. A feeling of doom is alien to our world outlook. An insurmountable barrier must be erected against war. An end must be put to the stockpiling of weapons in the world.
151.	It is understandable that prevention of war is a difficult task. The flywheel of military production is revolving continuously, and influential forces— which place the interests of dominating the world above everything else—will not stop it.
152.	Examples are readily available; they are at hand—all you have to do is reach for them. In defiance of the elementary norms of international law and morality, an act of banditry was committed against tiny Grenada, which dared to assert its sovereignty. It was occupied and robbed of its independence.
153.	We are witnessing gross interference in the internal affairs of El Salvador. No effort is being spared to prop up the regime of the stooges who are committing brutal crimes against the Salvadorian people.
154.	A real siege—military, political and economic—has been mounted against Nicaragua, whose people, defending their national freedom, independence and democratic achievements, are heroically resisting in the (ace of the undeclared war organized against it by Washington. But the Nicaraguan people want just one thing: they want their independence and they want to resolve their internal affairs as they themselves see fit.
155.	The United States still cannot reconcile itself to the existence of socialist Cuba. Threats are being made against Cuba to force that country off the course to which it has been committed in both words and deeds.
156.	The situation in Central America—where a dangerous pocket of tension has been created— should be settled by peaceful means on the basis of an unconditional cessation of United States interference in the internal affairs of the countries of the region. Possibilities for such a settlement have been opened up thanks to the constructive approach of Nicaragua and Cuba and to the initiative of the States of the Contadora Group. The Soviet Union supports the efforts to reach a political settlement of the problem.
157.	Turning now to the Middle East, here again we can see what the imperialist policies mean for peoples and countries. Still fresh in our memories are the barbaric acts in Lebanon undertaken in an attempt to force upon it a capitulation agreement with Israel, and these acts are still going on today.
158.	Yet the facts show that the United States, which relies upon "strategic cooperation" with Israel, has no intention of establishing lasting peace in that region.
159.	The Soviet Union has recently put forward a proposal on the principles of a Middle East settlement. That proposal is well known and has evoked a broad response. We call upon all parties to the conflict to act with sober minded regard for each other's legitimate rights and interests, and upon all other States to facilitate the search for a just settlement in the Middle East.
160.	Provocative intrigues continue against sovereign and nonaligned Afghanistan. The foes of the Afghan people will stop at nothing and will not abandon their hope of plunging it back into medieval darkness. To this end, military incursions from outside are being organized. Is it possible to solve the foreign policy aspect of this problem? Yes, it is. The way to do that is to stop forming, arming and infiltrating into the country from outside gangs of anti-government bandits and saboteurs and not to interfere in the internal affairs of Afghanistan. There can be no doubt that Afghanistan has followed, and will continue to follow, the path it has chosen—the path of independence, freedom, social progress, peace and nonalignment.
161.	In Southeast Asia the situation is being exacerbated by the policy pursued by outside forces. Acts of provocation against Viet Nam, Laos and Kampuchea are going on unabated. Attempts are being made to pit their neighbours, the members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations against those countries. We regard the initiative of the three countries of IndoChina on turning Southeast Asia into a zone of peace, good neighbourliness and cooperation, as also their efforts to start a political dialogue among the States of the region, as constructive.
162.	The Soviet leadership has repeatedly stated its positions on the question of its relations with the People's Republic of China. Those positions are well known. The Soviet Union favours normal, good neighbourly relations between these two great States.
163.	Obstacles are being put in the way of the normalization of the situation in the Korean peninsula, thus increasing tension in the Far East. The Soviet Union has consistently affirmed its solidarity with the Korean people in their struggle for the withdrawal of foreign troops from South Korea and for the peaceful reunification of their homeland, without any outside interference. The proposals of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea provide a positive basis for a settlement of the Korean question
164.	The racist regime of Pretoria has all but been formally named a "historical ally" of the United States. In defiance of the decisions of the United Nations, that regime is trying to keep Namibia under the colonial yoke for as long as possible and is threatening—m particular by overt interventionist actions—the independence of Angola and other neighbouring African States That regime could not engage in such lawlessness were it not for the complicity of some major Powers.
165.	There can be no doubt, however, that the Namibian people will win their freedom and independence. In the present day world, the colonial policy of South Africa and its patrons is a historically doomed anomaly.
166.	The economically weak countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America are being virtually plundered by industrialized capitalist States. The Soviet Union, like other socialist countries, will continue to render assistance, to the extent of its capabilities, to the newly independent States in their efforts to develop their national economies. International economic relations should be restructured in such a way that all countries of the world can make economic and social progress.
167.	Of late, the world has been increasingly confronted with dangerous symptoms in the policy of the United States, such as claims to impunity and licence to do anything it wishes. It does not scruple to declare any criminal ways and means legitimate if these can serve the desired ends. In world affairs, it intends to follow the logic of the idea that one does whatever one's left foot desires. And so it tramples on other peoples' lands with soldiers' iron heeled boots—left, right, left, right.
168.	We are convinced that the time is ripe to take the most serious notice of the fact that certain States, living set out to achieve military superiority and to pursue the policy of terrorism in international affairs, have resorted to actions designed to undermine the socio-political systems of other States.
169.	There is a very long list of documents, decisions, resolutions and various provisions to which States have affixed their seals and which specifically provide that it is inadmissible for countries to interfere in the internal affairs of others. Even the United Nations as a whole has no right to intervene in such matters. It is only necessary to look at Article 2 of the Charter of the United Nations, which states precisely that. When that Article was discussed and adopted in the course of the discussion and adoption of the Charter, everyone solemnly and unanimously supported the idea that not even the United Nations should have the right to intervene in the internal affairs of States.
170.	Yet, flagrant violations of this international law are being committed today before the eyes of the world, while those responsible say that they are acting in such a way simply because they do not HI the social system of some State or other. This destroys the very possibility of ensuring peaceful relations and mutual trust among States and increases the threat of war. Such policies and actions flout the international rules of conduct. They cannot be tolerated and must be terminated. The United Nations, in our view, should speak out emphatically in support of the rule of law in international relations.
171.	In the light of what I have said, the Soviet Union is submitting to the General Assembly for its consideration an important and urgent item entitled "Inadmissibility of the policy of State terrorism and any actions by States aimed at undermining the socio-political system of other sovereign States".
172.	We propose that the United Nations resolutely condemn the policy and practice of State terrorism as a method of dealing with other countries and peoples. It is necessary to renounce any action aimed at changing or undermining by force the social systems of sovereign States, destabilizing and overthrowing their legitimate Governments, or initiating military action to that end on any pretext whatsoever, und to halt any such action already in progress.
173.	All States are duty bound to respect the inalienable right of the peoples of the world to decide for themselves their own destinies and to pursue independently their own political or any other kind of development.
174.	Our proposal stems from the Soviet Union's approach of principle. The adoption of this proposal would contribute greatly to preventing and eliminating international conflicts and to consolidating moral and political barriers against aggression and war.
175.	There is much truth in the statement that the international situation is directly dependent on the state of Soviet United States relations. Today, as always, our country believes in the maintenance of normal relations with the United States—and there has been much talk about this. Until the recent past, that is precisely how these relations were developing, although not without certain vicissitudes, whereas in the years of the Second World War they were relations of allies.
176.	In recent years these relations have been disrupted through the efforts of Washington. They have spared no effort to destroy all the gains accomplished together and to undermine the trust that had been built up earlier. What is more, they all but flaunt their indifference to the reputation of the United States side as a partner in international affairs. Yet, that is not something to flaunt.
177.	History does not begin on the day when a particular United States Administration comes into office. The periods when the two Powers combined their efforts to defeat fascism will stand out as the best pages in the history of Soviet United States relations; and those who determine United States policy today have a great deal to do if they wish their words and the obligations they assume to be trusted. No attempts to substitute modifications in form for the substance of a policy and for the need to move away from militarism towards a policy of peace can be meaningful. That is nothing but an empty vessel. What is required is the determination to make such a move if one is truly guided by good intentions in United States Soviet relations and is really working towards peace. That alone can carry some weight on the political scales.
178.	The Soviet Union believes that it is precisely concrete deeds, not verbal assurances that can lead to normalizing the situation in our relations with the United States. The Soviet Union will not be found wanting. Every American, every American family, should know that the Soviet Union wants peace— and only peace—with the United States.
179.	We have developed normal and, in a number of cases, good and fruitful relations with the countries of Western Europe, but we cannot disregard the fact that some of them have permitted the deployment on their territories of new United States nuclear missiles intended for use as first strike weapons.
180.	Nor can one overlook the fact that in some quarters hopes have not yet been abandoned of revising the post-war realities in Europe. Recently such revanchist sentiments have been fuelled by statements which seek to question the commitments assumed by the members of the anti-Hitler coalition. We would caution against yielding to that dangerous frenzy and we appeal for sober mindedness. No one has the right to disrupt what has not merely become a pillar of international law but was born of the innumerable sacrifices of the last world war.
181.	We regard the countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America, which make up the majority of the Movement of Nonaligned Countries—an influential force in the world today—as our fellow fighters in the struggle between those who work for peace and those who work against it. It is the intention of the Soviet Union to continue to do everything in its power to deepen and develop friendly ties with those countries.
182.	It is our firm conviction that it is possible to correct the current alarming tilt in international developments, to halt the arms race and to set it on a downward spiral, to reduce and then totally eliminate the threat of war. This requires the combined efforts of States, nuclear and nonnuclear, big and small, regardless of their social systems.
183.	As Mr. Chernenko has stressed, "the Soviet Union will cooperate fully with all States which are prewired, by practical deeds, to help to ease international tensions and to create an atmosphere of trust in the world—in other words, with all those who genuinely seek to consolidate the foundations of peace and not to prepare for war."
184.	The future of mankind is the common responsibility of all countries and all peoples, and the peoples of the world are entitled to expect that the United Nations and all its activities will be imbued with a sense of that responsibility.
﻿First of all, I wish to congratulate you, Mr. Lusaka, on your election as President of the General Assembly. I wish you every success in carrying out the responsibilities of that high international office.
3.	It is an honour to be here, and I thank you all for your gracious invitation. I would speak in support of the two great goals that led to the formation of the United Nations—the cause of peace and the cause of human dignity.
4.	The responsibility of the General Assembly—the peaceful resolution of disputes between peoples and nations—can be discharged successfully only if we recognize the great common ground upon which we all stand: our fellowship as members of the human race, our oneness as inhabitants of this planet, our place as representatives of billions of our countrymen whose fondest hope remains the end to war and to the repression of the human spirit. These are the important, central realities that bind us, that per-
us to dream of a future without the antagonisms of the past. And, just as shadows can be seen only where there is light, so, too, can we overcome what is wrong only if we remember how much is right; and we will resolve what divides us only if we remember how much more unites us. This chamber has heard enough about the problems and dangers ahead; today let us dare to speak of a future that is bright and hopeful and can be ours only if we seek it. I believe that future is far nearer than most of us would dare to hope.
5.	At the start of this decade one scholar at the Hudson Institute noted that mankind also had undergone enormous changes for the better in the past two centuries, changes which are not always readily noticed or written about.
6.	"Up until 200 years ago, there were relatively few people in the world," he wrote. "All human societies were poor. Disease and early death dominated most people's lives. People were ignorant, and largely at the mercy of forces of nature."
7.	"Now," he said, "we are somewhere near the middle of a process of economic development ... At the end of that process, almost no one will live in a country as poor as the richest country of the past. There will be many more people .. . living long, healthy lives, with immense knowledge and more to learn than anybody has time for." They will be "able to cope with the forces of nature, and almost indifferent to distance."
8.	We do live today, as that scholar suggested, in the middle of one of the most important and dramatic periods in human history—one in which all of us can serve as catalysts for an era of world peace and unimagined human freedom and dignity.
9.	Today I would like to report to you, as distinguished and influential members of the world community, on what the United States has been attempting to do to help move the world closer to this new era. On many fronts enormous progress has been made, and I think our efforts are complemented by the trend of history.
10.	If we look closely enough, I believe we can see all the world moving towards a deeper appreciation of the value of human freedom in both its political and its economic manifestations. This is partially motivated by a world-wide desire for economic growth and higher standards of living. And there is an increasing realization that economic freedom is a prelude to economic progress and growth and is intricately and inseparably linked to political freedom.
11.	Everywhere, people and Governments are beginning to recognize that the secret of a progressive new world is to take advantage of the creativity of the human spirit; to encourage innovation and individual enterprise; to reward hard work; and to reduce barriers to the free flow of trade and information.
12.	Our opposition to economic restrictions and trade barriers is consistent with our view of economic freedom and human progress. We believe such barriers pose a particularly dangerous threat to the developing nations and their chance to share in world prosperity through expanded export markets. Tomorrow, at the International Monetary Fund, I will address this question more fully, including America's desire for more open trading markets throughout the world.
13.	This desire to cut down trade barriers and our open advocacy of freedom as the engine of human progress are two of the important ways the United States and the American people hope to assist in bringing about a world where prosperity is commonplace, conflict an aberration, and human dignity and freedom a way of life.
14.	Let me place these steps more in context by briefly outlining the major goals of American foreign
A/39/PV.4 

policy and then exploring with you the practical ways we are attempting to further freedom and prevent war. By that I mean, first, how we have moved to strengthen ties with old allies and new friends; secondly, what we are doing to help avoid the regional conflicts that could contain the seeds of world conflagration; and thirdly, the status of our efforts with the Soviet Union to reduce the levels of arms.
15.	Let me begin with a word about the objectives of American foreign policy, which have been consistent since the post-war era and which fuelled the formation of the United Nations and were incorporated into the Charter of the United Nations itself.
16.	The Charter states two overriding goals: "to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime has brought untold sorrow to mankind" and "to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men and women and of nations large and small".
17.	The founders of the United Nations understood full well the relationship between these two goals. And I want you to know that the Government of the United States will continue to view this concern for human rights as the moral centre of our foreign policy. We can never look at anyone's freedom as a bargaining chip in world politics. Our hope is for a time when all the people of the world can enjoy the blessings of personal liberty.
18.	But I would like also to emphasize that our concern for protecting human rights is part of our concern for protecting the peace.
19.	The answer is for all nations to fulfil the obligations they freely assumed under the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The Declaration states that: "The will of the people shall be the basis of the authority of government; this will shall be expressed in periodic and genuine elections". The Declaration also includes the right of everyone: "to form and to join trade unions," "to own property alone as well as in association with others," "to leave any country, including his own, and to return to his country," and to enjoy "freedom of opinion and expression". Perhaps the most graphic example of the relationship between human rights and peace is the right of peace groups to exist and to promote their views. In fact, the treatment of peace groups may be a litmus test of a Government's true desire for peace.
20.	In addition to emphasizing this tie between the advocacy of human rights and the prevention of war, the United States has taken important steps, as I mentioned earlier, to prevent world conflict. The starting-point and comer-stone of our foreign policy is our alliance and partnership with our fellow democracies. For 35 years, the North Atlantic alliance has guaranteed the peace in Europe. In both Europe and Asia, our alliances have been the vehicle for a great reconciliation among nations that had fought bitter wars in decades and centuries past. And here in the western hemisphere, North and South are being lifted on the tide of freedom and are joined in a common effort to foster peaceful economic development.
21.	We are proud of our association with all those countries that share our commitment to freedom, human rights, the rule of law—and international peace. Indeed, the bulwark of security that the democratic alliance provides is essential, and remains essential, to the maintenance of world peace. Every alliance involves burdens and obligations, but these are far less than the risks and sacrifices that would result if the peace-loving nations were divided and neglectful of their common security. The people of the United States will remain faithful to their commitments.
22.	But the United States is also faithful to its alliances and friendships with scores of nations in the developed and developing worlds with differing political systems, cultures and traditions. The development of ties between the United States and China—a significant global event of the last dozen years—shows our willingness to improve relations with countries ideologically very different from ours.
23.	We are ready to be the friend of any country that is a friend to us and a friend of peace. And we respect genuine non-alignment. Our own nation was born in revolution; we helped promote the process of decolonization that brought about the independence of so many members of this body, and we are proud of that history.
24.	We are proud, too, of our role in the formation of the United Nations and our support of the Organization over the years. And let me again emphasize our unwavering commitment to a central principle of the United Nations system, the principle of universality, both here and in the United Nations technical agencies around the world. If universality is ignored, if nations are expelled illegally, then the United Nations itself cannot be expected to succeed.
25.	The United States welcomes diversity and peaceful competition; we do not fear the trends of history. We are not ideologically rigid; we do have principles and we will stand by them, but we will also seek the friendship and goodwill of all, both old friends and new.
26.	We have always sought to lend a hand to help others—from our relief efforts in Europe after the First World War to the Marshall Plan and massive foreign assistance programmes after the Second World War. Since 1946, the United States has provided over $115 billion in economic aid to developing countries, and today it provides about one third of the nearly $90 billion in financial resources, public and private, that flows to the developing world. And the United States imports about one third of the manufactured exports of the developing world.
27.	But any economic progress, as well as any movement in the direction of greater understanding between the nations of the world, is, of course, endangered by the prospect of conflict at both the global and the regional levels. In a few minutes I will turn to the menace of conflict on a world-wide scale and discuss the status of negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union. But permit me first to address the critical problem of regional conflicts, for history displays tragic evidence that it is these conflicts which can set off the sparks leading to world-wide conflagration.
28.	In a glass display case across the hall from the Oval Office at the White House there is a gold medal—the Nobel Peace Prize won by Theodore Roosevelt for his contribution in mediating the Russo-Japanese War in 1905. It was the first such prize won by an American, and it is part of a tradition of which the American people are very 
proud, a tradition that is being continued today in many regions of the globe.
29.	We are engaged, for example, in diplomacy to resolve conflicts in southern Africa, working with the front-line States and our partners in the Contact Group. Mozambique and South Africa have reached a historic accord on non-aggression and co-operation; South Africa and Angola have agreed on a disengagement of forces from Angola, and the groundwork has been laid for the independence of Namibia, with virtually all aspects of Security Council resolution 435 (1978) agreed upon. Let me add that the United States considers it a moral imperative that South Africa's racial policies evolve peacefully but decisively towards a system compatible with basic norms of justice, liberty and human dignity. I am pleased that American companies in South Africa, by providing equal employment opportunities, are contributing to the economic advancement of the black population. But clearly, much more must be done.
30.	In Central America, the United States has lent support to a diplomatic process to restore regional peace and security. We have committed substantial resources to promote economic development and social progress.
31.	The growing success of democracy in El Salvador is the best proof that the key to peace lies in a political solution. Free elections brought into office a government dedicated to democracy, reform, economic progress and regional peace. Regrettably, there are forces in the region eager to thwart democratic change, but these forces are now on the defensive. The tide is turning in the direction of freedom. We call upon Nicaragua, in particular, to abandon its policies of subversion and militarism, and to carry out the promises it made to the Organization of American States to establish democracy at home.
32.	The Middle East has known more than its share of tragedy and conflict for decades, and the United States has been actively involved in peace diplomacy for just as long. We consider ourselves a full partner in the quest for peace. The record of the 11 years since the October war shows that much can be achieved through negotiations; it also shows that the road is long and hard.
33.	Two years ago, I proposed a fresh start toward a negotiated solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict. My initiative of 1 September 1982 contains a set of positions that can serve as a basis for a just and lasting peace.' That initiative remains a realistic and workable approach, and I am committed to it as firmly as on the day I announced it. And the foundation-stone of this effort remains Security Council resolution 242 (1967), which, in turn, was incorporated in all its parts in the Camp David accords.
34.	The tragedy of Lebanon has not ended. Only last week, a despicable act of barbarism by some who are unfit to associate with humankind reminded us once again that Lebanon continues to suffer. In 1983 we helped Israel and Lebanon reach an agreement that, if implemented, could have led to the full withdrawal of Israeli forces in the context of the withdrawal of all foreign forces. This agreement was blocked, and the long agony of the Lebanese continues. Thousands of people are still kept from their homes by continued violence and are refugees in their own country. The once-flourishing economy of
Lebanon is near collapse. All of Lebanon's friends should work together to help end this nightmare.
35.	In the Gulf, the United States has supported a series of Security Council resolutions that call for an end to the war between Iran and Iraq that has meant so much death and destruction and has put the world's economic well-being at risk. Our hope is that hostilities will soon end, leaving each side with its political and territorial integrity intact, so that both may devote their energies to addressing the needs of their people and a return to relationships with other States.
36.	The lesson of experience is that negotiations work. The peace treaty between Israel and Egypt brought about the peaceful return of the Sinai, clearly showing that the negotiating process brings results when the parties commit themselves to it. The time is bound to come when the same wisdom and courage will be applied, with success, to reach peace between Israel and all of its Arab neighbours in a manner that assures security for all in the region, the recognition of Israel, and a solution to the Palestinian problem.
37.	In every part of the world, the United States is similarly engaged in peace diplomacy as an active player or a strong supporter.
38.	In South-East Asia, we have backed the efforts of the Association of South-East Asian Nations
to mobilize international support for a peaceful resolution of the Cambodian problem, which must include the withdrawal of Vietnamese forces and the election of a representative government. ASEAN's success in promoting economic and political development has made a major contribution to the peace and stability of the region.
39.	In Afghanistan, the dedicated efforts of the Secretary-General and his representatives to find a diplomatic settlement have our strong support. I assure the General Assembly that the United States will continue to do everything possible to find a negotiated outcome which provides the Afghan people with the right to determine their own destiny, allows the Afghan refugees to return to *heir own country in dignity, and protects the legitimate security interests of all neighbouring countries.
40.	On the divided and tense Korean peninsula, we have strongly backed the confidence-building measures proposed by the Republic of Korea and by the United Nations Command at Panmunjom. These are an important first step towards peaceful reunification in the long term.
41.	We take heart from progress by others in lessening tensions, notably the efforts by the Federal Republic of Germany to reduce barriers between the two German States.
42.	And the United States strongly supports the Secretary-General's efforts to assist the Cypriot parties in achieving a peaceful and reunited Cyprus.
43.	The United States has been and will always be a friend of peaceful solutions.
44.	This is no less true with respect to my country's relations with the Soviet Union.
45.	When I appeared before the General Assembly, at its thirty-eighth session. I noted that we cannot count on the instinct for survival alone to protect us against war. Deterrence is necessary but not sufficient. America has repaired its strength. We have invigorated our alliances and friendships. We are ready for constructive negotiations with the Soviet Union.
46.	We recognize that there is no sane alternative to negotiations on arms control and other issues between our two nations, which have the capacity to destroy civilization as we know it. I believe this is a view shared by virtually every country in the world and by the Soviet Union itself.
47.	I want to speak to the General Assembly today on what the United States and the Soviet Union can accomplish together in the coming years, and the concrete steps that we need to take.
48.	As I stand here and look out from this podium, there in front of me I can see the seat of the representative of the Soviet Union, and not far from that seat, just over to the side, is the seat of the representative of the United States. In this historic assembly hall it is clear there is not a great distance between us. Outside this room, while there will still be clear differences, there is every reason why we should do all that is possible to shorten that distance. That is why we are here. Is that not what the United Nations is all about?
49.	On 16 January last, I set out three objectives for United States-Soviet relations that can provide an agenda for our work over the months ahead.
50.	First, I said, we need to find ways to reduce, and eventually to eliminate, the threat and use of force in solving international disputes. Our concern over the potential for nuclear war cannot deflect us from the terrible human tragedies occurring every day in the regional conflicts I have just discussed. Together we have a particular responsibility to contribute to political solutions to these problems, rather than to exacerbate them through the provision of even more weapons.
51.	I propose that our two countries agree to embark on periodic consultations at policy level about regional problems. We will be prepared, if the Soviets agree, to make senior experts available at regular intervals for in-depth exchanges of views. I have asked Secretary of State Shultz to explore this with Foreign Minister Gromyko. Spheres of influence are a thing of the past. Differences between American and Soviet interests are not. The objectives of this political dialogue will be to help avoid miscalculation, reduce the potential risk of United States-Soviet confrontation and help the people in areas of conflict to find peaceful solutions.
52.	The United States and the Soviet Union have achieved agreements of historic importance on some regional issues. The Austrian State Treaty and the Berlin accords are notable and lasting examples. Let us resolve to achieve similar agreements in the future.
53.	Our second task must be to find ways to reduce the vast stockpiles of armaments in the world. I am committed to redoubling our negotiating efforts to achieve real results: in Geneva, a complete ban on chemical weapons; in Vienna, real reductions—to lower and equal levels—in Soviet and American, Warsaw Pact and North Atlantic Treaty Organization conventional forces; in Stockholm, concrete practical measures to enhance mutual confidence, to reduce the risk of war and to reaffirm commitments concerning non-use of force; in the field of nuclear testing, improvements in verification essential to ensure compliance with the threshold test-ban and peaceful nuclear explosions agreements; and in the field of non-proliferation, close co-operation to strengthen the international institutions and practices aimed at halting the Spread of nuclear weapons, together with redoubled efforts to meet the legitimate expectation of all nations that the Soviet Union and the United States will substantially reduce their own nuclear arsenals. We and the Soviets have agreed to upgrade our hotline communications facility, and our discussions of nuclear non-proliferation in recent years have been useful to both sides. We think there are other possibilities for improving communications in this area that deserve serious exploration.
54.	I believe the proposal of the Soviet Union for opening United States-Soviet talks at Vienna provides an important opportunity to advance these objectives. We have been prepared to discuss a wide range of issues of concern to both sides, such as the relationship between defensive and offensive forces and what has been called the militarization of space. During the talks we would consider what measures of restraint both sides might take while negotiations proceeded. However, any agreement must logically depend upon our ability to get the competition in offensive arms under control and to achieve genuine stability at substantially lower levels of nuclear arms.
55.	Our approach in all these areas will be designed to take into account concerns the Soviet Union has voiced. It will attempt to provide a basis for a historic breakthrough in arms control. I am disappointed that we were not able to open our meeting at Vienna earlier this month on the date originally proposed by the Soviet Union. I hope we can begin these talks by the end of the year or shortly thereafter.
56.	The third task I set in January was to establish a better working relationship between the Soviet Union and the United States, one marked by greater co-operation and understanding.
57.	We have made some modest progress. We have reached agreements to improve our hotline, extend our 10-year economic agreement, enhance consular co-operation and explore co-ordination of search and rescue efforts at sea.
58.	We have also offered to increase significantly the amount of United States grain for purchase by the Soviets and to provide the Soviets with a direct fishing allocation off United States coasts. But there is much more we could do together. I feel particularly strongly about breaking down the barriers between the peoples of the United States and the Soviet Union and between our political, military and other leaders.
59.	AH of these steps that I have mentioned, and especially the arms control negotiations, are extremely important to a step-by-step process towards peace. But let me also say that we need to extend the arms control process, to build a bigger umbrella under which it can operate—a road-map, as it were, showing where during the next 20 years or so these individual efforts can lead. This can greatly assist step-by-step negotiations and enable us to avoid having all our hopes or expectations ride on any single set or series of negotiations. If progress is temporarily halted at one set of talks, this newly established framework for arms control could help us take up the slack at other negotiations.
60.	Today, to the great end of lifting the dread of nuclear war from the peoples of the Earth, I invite the leaders of the world to join in a new beginning. We 
need a fresh approach to reducing international tensions. History demonstrates beyond controversy that, just as the arms competition has its roots in political suspicions and anxieties, so it can be channelled in more stabilizing directions and eventually be eliminated, if those political suspicions and anxieties are addressed as well.
61.	Towards this end I will suggest to the Soviet Union that we institutionalize regular ministerial or cabinet-level meetings between our two countries on the whole agenda of issues before us, including the problem of needless obstacles to understanding. To take but one idea for discussion, in such talks we could consider the exchange of outlines of five-year military plans for weapons development and our schedules of intended procurement. We would also welcome the exchange of observers at military exercises and locations. And I propose that we find a way for Soviet experts to come to the United States nuclear-test site, and for ours to go to theirs, to measure directly the yields of tests of nuclear weapons. We should work towards having such arrangements in place by next spring. I hope that the Soviet Union will co-operate in this undertaking and reciprocate in a manner that will enable the two countries to establish the basis for verification for effective limits on underground nuclear testing.
62.	I believe such talks could work rapidly towards developing a new climate of policy understanding, one that is essential if crises are to be avoided and real arms control is to be negotiated. Of course, summit meetings have a useful role to play. But they need to be carefully prepared, and the benefit here is that meetings at the ministerial level would provide the kind of progress that is the best preparation for higher-level talks between ourselves and the Soviet leaders.
63.	How much progress we will make, and at what pace, I cannot say, but we have a moral obligation to try and try again.
64.	Some may dismiss such proposals and my own optimism as simplistic American idealism. And they will point to the burdens of the modem world and to history. Well, yes, if we sit down and catalogue year by year, generation by generation, the famines, the plagues, the wars, the invasions mankind has endured, the list will grow so long and the assault on humanity so terrifying that it seems too much for the human spirit ^o bear.
65.	But is that not narrow and short-sighted and not at all how we think of history? Yes, the deeds of infamy or injustice are all recorded, but what shines out from the pages of history is the daring of the dreamers and the deeds of the builders and the doers. These things make up the stories we tell and pass on to our children. They comprise the most enduring and striking fact about human history: that through the heart-break and tragedy man has always dared to perceive the outline of human progress, the steady growth in not just the material well-being but the spiritual insight of mankind.
"There have been tyrants and murderers, and for a time they can seem invincible. But in the end, they always fall. Think on it—always. All through history the way of truth and love has always won."
That "as the belief and the vision of Mahatma Gandhi, and it remains today a vision that is good and true.
66.	"All is gift" is said to have been the favourite expression of another great spiritualist, a Spanish soldier who gave up the ways of war for that of love and peace. And if we are to make realities of the two great goals of the Charter of the United Nations—the dreams of peace and human dignity—we must take to heart these words of Ignatius Loyola: "We must pause long enough to contemplate the gifts received from Him who made us—the gift of life, the gift of this world, the gift of each other."
67.	And the gift of the present, for it is this present, this time, that now we must seize. I leave you with a reflection from Mahatma Gandhi spoken with those in mind who said that the disputes and conflicts of the modem world are too great to overcome. It was spoken shortly after Gandhi's quest for independence had taken him to Britain.
"I am not conscious of a single experience throughout my three months' stay in England and Europe that made me feel that after all East is East and West is West. On the contrary, I have been convinced more than ever that human nature is much the same no matter under what clime it flourishes and that, if you approach people with trust and affection, you would have tenfold trust and thousand-fold affection returned to you."
68.	For the sake of a peaceful world, a world where human dignity and freedom are respected and enshrined, let us approach each other with tenfold trust and thousand fold affection. A new future awaits us. The time is here, the moment is now.
69.	One of the founding fathers of our nation, Thomas Paine, spoke words that apply to all of us gathered here today. They apply directly to all sitting here in this Hall. He said: "We have it in our power to begin the world over again."

﻿Allow me first of all, on behalf of the delegation of the Central African Republic, to congratulate you, Sir, on your election to the presidency of the thirty-ninth session of the General Assembly. Your long experience acquired in the course of your diplomatic career and your superb knowledge of international issues bode well for the great success of the work of this session. My delegation would like to assure you at the outset of its readiness to assist you.
105.	I should also like to take this opportunity to reaffirm the support of the Central African Republic for the Secretary-General, whose work on behalf of the Organization is both dedicated and selfless.
106.	Lastly, our delegation wishes to extend a warm welcome to Brunei Darussalam whose admission is a further reflection of the universal role of the United Nations.
107.	Since the founding of the Organization, its usefulness and effectiveness have continually been called into question. The resolutions it has adopted, the solutions it has worked out, the recommendations it has made, have never really fulfilled the hopes cherished by peoples stricken by crises and conflicts; they have never completely allayed the tensions and upheavals in the world. Therefore, despite the heterogeneous nature of the Organization and its complexity, it should show a more definite spirit of consensus and return to its original objectives, namely, the noble ideals of peace and development laid down in the Charter of the United Nations.
108.	The sweeping currents of ideas, discoveries and technological innovations should lead to a change in the relations between nations; all such changes should lead to a true world balance. Unfortunately, reality is quite different. We are, in fact, witnessing a resurgence of intolerance, insecurity, selfishness and violence. Despite that gloomy picture, we shall not give in to either defeatism or scepticism. Despite numerous stumbling-blocks, the United Nations continues to be the forum in which discussions and negotiations on the fate of the world are held.
109.	In today's world, which is characterized by diversity, the right to be different should be recognized as a fundamental principle governing relations among States, a right to be different that the United Nations fosters and develops, the right of each people to flourish within the context of its own history, its own culture, its own beliefs and the political and economic system it has freely chosen. When denied to others—as is so often the case—this right to be different becomes a source of turbulence, hatred and confrontation.
110.	In Africa, in Asia, in Europe, as well as in America, evidence of such intolerance and selfishness is all too common. Often, peoples are stifled. Their legitimate struggles for their inevitable emancipation and their power to decide their lot in full exercise of their sovereignty are being thwarted by sordid personal interests.
111.	Are examples necessary? The situation prevailing in southern Africa is a very eloquent case in point. It is, of course, true that the agreements recently concluded between South Africa and some countries of the region are an encouraging step along the road towards peace. However, that remains problematical. So long as SWAPO, the sole representative of the Namibian people, is denied recognition of its national rights, peace cannot be lasting and total. It is more than ever important that Security Council resolution 435 (1978) be fully observed and implemented.
112.	The Central African Republic welcomes the recent agreements concluded between France and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to withdraw all foreign forces from Chad. It hopes, however, that the simultaneous withdrawals will be effective and complete, not just from the capital, N'djamena, and its immediate environs, but from all Chadian territory. Chad must regain possession of the whole of its original territory. That would enable the Government of that brotherly neighbouring country finally to dedicate itself fully to the task of reconciliation and national reconstruction begun by President Hissein Habre.
113.	With regard to the question of Western Sahara, our delegation believes that an excellent basis for seeking a solution can be found in the resolutions adopted at the eighteenth and nineteenth ordinary sessions of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity. In that connection, we cherish the firm hope that the next session of that Assembly will provide an opportunity to assess the efforts made by the countries involved.
114.	With regard to the question of the Middle East, everyone knows that the Palestinian problem lies at the heart of the conflict. No acceptable solution can therefore be arrived at which ignores the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination under the aegis of the Palestine Liberation Organization. In that connection, we shall continue to support any initiative in line with the spirit of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) aimed at bringing about a lasting and comprehensive settlement of the conflict.
115.	In the same context, the Central African Republic makes an urgent appeal to the international community to spare no effort to preserve and guarantee the national unity, territorial integrity, sovereignty and neutrality of Lebanon.
116.	In the name of the principle of recognizing the right to be different, Democratic Kampuchea should be enabled fully to exercise its sovereignty. To that end, we hope to see the full application of the principles laid down by the Organization.
117.	The Central African Republic also supports any initiative designed to enable Afghanistan to regain its national rights and its status as a neutral, non-aligned country.
118.	The problem of Korea remains a pressing one. The persistent tension in the Korean peninsula is of concern to the Central African Republic. Thus, as part of our contribution to the efforts being made by the international community to reduce such tension, we shall continue to urge both parties, which undeniably aspire to reunification, to pursue their dialogue on the basis of the South-North Joint Communique of 4 July 1972, which set forth the principles for such action. Free, direct dialogue, free of outside interference, would unquestionably enable the parties to establish the conditions for the restoration of the mutual confidence indispensable for the maintenance of peace in the region. Both parties could, in the meantime, plan for their simultaneous admission to membership in the United Nations.
119.	Given the situation prevailing in Central America, the Central African Republic believes that negotiation is the only appropriate means for achieving a peaceful solution and for promoting the harmonious coexistence of the States of the region,
120.	These several examples of the refusal of certain States to recognize and accept the right to differences are based on a two-pronged interest. First, there is an ideological interest, since those States which reject the right to differences are often members of an alliance bloc. A treacherous complicity does, indeed, exist on the part of part of the international community. That complicity impedes mutual understanding and confidence. And then there is strategic interest in the policies of certain States which have embarked on the arms race in order to maintain their military and economic domination.
121.	Thus, while the Central African Republic welcomes the negotiations under way on disarmament, it also deplores the fact that they are brought to stalemate at a time when the proliferation and development of arms are reaching alarming levels, thus perpetuating the vicious circle of destruction.
122.	The disarmament we so fervently wish for cannot be achieved solely through regional security and arms limitation agreements. All States must be aware of the pressing and collective task of championing international, peace and security.
123.	The Central African Republic is firmly convinced that the effective development of all the countries of our community is a condition for global balance and a guarantee of peace. Development also means the right to life and therefore it cannot be jeopardized. We call on the developed countries to contribute effectively, through bilateral or multilateral agreements, to the realistic development of the countries of the third world. For, one and indivisible, peace requires, if it is to be preserved, the universal development of all the members of the international community.
124.	The inadequacy of the present international economic system is resulting in enormous difficulties for the developing countries. Will the alarm so often sounded ever be heard?
125.	While concerned with providing a minimal decent standard of living for our peoples, our countries are rarely able to find the means to implement the economic plans and programmes which have been drawn up. Thus, we continue to suffer severely from the effects of the world economic crisis and from the shortcomings of the economic system. We deplore the attitude of certain industrialized countries which act as though the developing countries should come to terms with their poverty levels and even be content with them.
126.	The countries of the third world are struggling not only for the right to development but also Tor a more significant mobilization of the means for development. The unbreakable link between the right to development and the right to security requires, in turn, the developing countries to observe an indispensable and reasonable balance between the means allocated for security and those given over to development.
127.	Thus, it is regrettable that, after the adoption in 1974 of the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States, there is still a gap between the socio-economic development efforts of certain industrialized countries and others which are less industrialized.
128.	The international crisis seems to have disallowed any claim of the developing countries to such development, and therefore to life. The assistance which is accorded them, dwindling day by day, is clearly inadequate and the terms of trade are growing worse at a dizzying pace.
129.	Our countries are in debt and are bowed under the burden of the amounts due; these debts are worsened and inflated by the crisis of the international monetary system. At the same time, our balance of trade shows a deficit and access to development sources and new technology, which are so badly needed to maintain development projects, seems to be denied to us solely because we happen to be developing countries.
130.	We continue to be greatly disappointed, and we state this in this lofty gathering, all the more so because our hopes have faded since the work of the sixth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, held at Belgrade in 1983, and of the Fourth General Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, held at Vienna earlier this year.
131.	A joint definition of new international economic regulations by the industrialized countries and by the third world is needed today. The entire international community would benefit from the beginning of global negotiations designed to putting a halt to this crisis.
132.	The results achieved in three years by the Military Committee for National Recovery in working to restore and rebuild the Central African Republic are very encouraging and are a cause of satisfaction for us because the result first and foremost from our own efforts
133.	But such success is also due to the valuable assistance given by friendly countries and by international organizations, including the United Nations. I should like once again to pay a heartfelt tribute to the Secretary-General and his co-workers for the unceasing concern which they continue to show for the Central African Republic. The road is still long and the task an arduous one. That is why we should like to be assured of continuity and stepping up of international assistance.
134.	While observing the third anniversary of ac-cession to power of the Military Committee for National Recovery, the Head of State, General Andre Kolingba, began his speech as follows: "For three years now the Central African Republic has seen the Military Committee for National Recovery at work. These three years have been imbued, above all, with peace,"—I repeat, with peace—"a factor working for stability and a sine qua non condition for any kind of development."
135.	That equation of peace and development is the basis of the philosophy of action advocated by the Central African Republic, on both the domestic and the international level.
136.	For we have faith in the possibility of warding off those ills which loom as a serious threat over the future of the international community. The solution lies in respect by all States for the fundamental values of the right to differences and the right to development.
137.	That is the message which General Andre Kolingba, Chairman of the Military Committee for National Recovery and Head of State, deeply convinced of the ability of the Organization to resolve world problems and drawing inspiration from the well-springs of our philosophy, has entrusted us to present for the consideration of the Assembly.
138.	The entire Central African Republic joins us in wishing all possible success for the work of the Assembly.

