At the outset I should like warmly to congratulate you. Sir, on your election to the presidency of the fortieth session of the General Assembly and to wish you every success, in your highly responsible post.
I wish also to take this opportunity to express my thanks to your predecessor, Mr. Lusaka, for his contribution to the work of the last session, for which he has won the respect of all of us.
Being convened during celebrations of the fortieth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations, the present session is more significant than the previous ones. The United Nations is the outcome of victory in the world war against fascism. The United Nations Charter laid down the purposes and principles for maintaining world peace, suppressing acts of aggression, ensuring international security, promoting international co-operation, respecting the equality of nations, large and small, settling international disputes by peaceful means and refraining from interfering in the internal affairs of any State. Facts show that these purposes and principles established 40 years ago are still of great immediate significance four the just handling of the problems facing the world today. The purpose of solemnly commemorating the fortieth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations is to reaffirm the unalterable principles of the United Nations Charter and further strengthen the functions of the United Nations so that it may play a greater role in the noble cause of maintaining world peace and increasing international co-operation.
In the past 40 years tremendous changes have taken place in the international situation and the world as a whole. The vigorous movement for national independence has made colonialism a thing of the past as a system. A number of countries have taken the road of socialist development. The emergence of the third world and the numerous small and medium-sized countries on the world political arena has brought a fundamental change to the pattern of international relations. With the rapid development of modern science and technology, mankind has achieved successes beyond the imagination of the past generations in the effort to conquer nature, expand productive forces and enhance its own welfare and has broadened the vistas of a better future before it.
The changes of the post-War world are reflected in the changing United Nations. The emergence of many newly-independent countries in Asia, Africa, Latin America, and Oceania and the consequent big increase in the membership of the United Nations have strengthened the universality of the Organization. Despite the twists and turns the United Nations has gone through, we should on the whole give a positive appraisal of its efforts for peace, international co-operation and the greater well-being of mankind. We congratulate the United Nations on its achievements over the past 40 years and are ready to work with all other Member States to strengthen the role of the Organization.
Compared with the preceding year there are certain signs of relaxation in the world situation. But the root cause of tension remains. There is a universal desire for a genuine relaxation of international tension. To this end it is imperative to stop the arms race and seek fair and reasonable solutions to regional conflicts. Here, I should like to speak on those two issues.
In the past four decades of discussions on disarmament have been going on every year, both inside and outside 'he United Nations. Regrettably, the arms race has never ceased for a single moment. On the contrary, it has kept escalating. That is an undeniable historical fact. One may ask several questions: How many nuclear weapons were there in the world in 1963 when the partial nuclear-test-ban Treaty was signed? How many nuclear weapons were there in 1972 when the interim United States-Soviet agreement on strategic arms limitation was signed? And how many more nuclear weapons are there today as compared with 20 years ago? The number of strategic nuclear warheads alone has increased several times. This trend cannot but cause general concern. The arms race cannot possibly be a unilateral affair. Although both sides have claimed only to maintain parity, each is in fact bent on gaining supremacy over the other. When one side declares that it has fallen behind and must catch up, the other side will do likewise on the same excuse. This inevitably leads to an alternating escalation of their arms race. In order to change the long-standing situation in the arms race, in which each side tries to outdo the other, it is imperative for the two nuclear Powers that possess 95 per cent of the world's nuclear weapons earnestly to consider taking the lead in drastically reducing their nuclear arsenals. They will still have enough left to destroy each other even if their nuclear arsenals are cut by half, let alone by a quarter. It must be pointed out that the arms race between the super-Powers has been extended from land, sea and air to outer space. If this trend of large-scale qualitative escalation is allowed to continue unchecked, it is bound to increase the danger of war and to pose a grave threat to world peace.
We welcome the resumption of disarmament talks in Geneva between the United States and the Soviet Union. The two countries will also hold a summit meeting in the near future. It is hoped that through serious talks they will reach a practical and effective agreement without prejudice to third countries. Of course, it would be unrealistic to pin our hopes for peace on their talks only.
In view of the grave threat to world peace posed by the continued escalation of the arms race and in view of the strong desire of the people of the world for nuclear and conventional disarmament, the Chinese delegation wishes to put forward to the General Assembly the following four-point proposal:
First, in order to reduce the danger of a nuclear war and to create the conditions for the complete elimination of that danger, all nuclear States - and the two big nuclear Powers, the United States and the Soviet Union, in particular -should undertake not to be the first to use nuclear weapons in any circumstances and should unconditionally pledge not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear states or against nuclear-free zones. Proceeding on such a basis, an international convention prohibiting the use of nuclear weapons should be concluded with the participation of all nuclear States.
Secondly, in order to avert the possible escalation of a conventional war into a nuclear war in areas with a high concentration of nuclear and conventional weapons; the two military blocs - the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Warsaw Treaty organization - should reach an agreement as early as possible on the drastic reduction of their conventional weapons.
Thirdly, outer space belongs to all mankind and ought to be used for peaceful purposes for the benefit of all. The United States and the Soviet Union should immediately stop the arms race in all its forms in outer space. All countries with a space capability should refrain from developing, testing or deploying outer space weaponry. An international agreement on the complete prohibition and destruction of outer space weaponry should be concluded as soon as possible.
Fourthly, in view of the fact that the arms race in the development of chemical weapons has not been checked, the 40-nation Geneva Conference on Disarmament is called upon to complete its negotiations at an early date and to conclude a convention on the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of chemical weapons. Pending that, all countries capable of manufacturing and producing chemical weapons should stop testing, producing, transferring and deploying chemical weapons and should pledge not to use such weapons.
The aforesaid points are all reasonable measures for resolving the most pressing issues of our time. We hope that the above proposal will be considered by the General Assembly in the interest of promoting disarmament and a relaxation of international tension.
China's position on disarmament is clear and firm. We are resolutely opposed to the arms race and stand for practical and effective measures to reduce armaments. China's military expenditure has long been kept at a low level. Although there has been a fairly rapid growth in China's economy in recent years, its military expenditure has not increased correspondingly.
The few nuclear weapons China possesses and the United number of nuclear tests it has conducted are solely for the purpose of self-defense. On the very first day we came into possession of a nuclear force, we declared that China would never be the first to use nuclear weapons. China has also undertaken not to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear States or nuclear-free zones.
Not long ago, China decided to reduce the size of its military force by 1 million. Part of China's military industry is being shifted to civilian production so as to meet the increasing daily needs of our people.
We have demonstrated our desire for peace and our policy of peace with actual deeds.
The existence of hot spots is an important source of world tension and turbulence. Where there are hot spots, there is a danger of expanded conflicts and crises and they deprive large parts of the world of tranquility. How to end conflicts and remove hot spots is a concern of us all. We are in favor of political settlement, but political settlement can only be achieved through peaceful negotiations on a fair and reasonable basis. In other words, there must be full respect for the sovereignty and independence of countries and strict observance of the international principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of any other country. Professed readiness for a political settlement with the intent to impose on others a fait accompli created by aggression, expansion and interference is nothing but a fraud. The Chinese Government has always maintained that international disputes should be settled through peaceful negotiations on an equal footing, in accordance with the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, without resort to the use or threat of force.
The Kampuchean question remains a matter of concern to the international community. While expanding the war in Kampuchea and incessantly violating the borders of Thailand and China, Viet Nam has resorted to political tricks by using "political settlement" as a means to split and destroy the Kampuchean patriotic forces one by one. But this attempt cannot possible succeed. The tripartite Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea, headed by Prince Sihanouk, has closed its ranks and persevered in the struggle against the aggressors, winning extensive support from the international community.
China is firmly opposed to Viet Nam's occupation of Kampuchea and any big Power's support for such acts of aggression. In our view, the key to the solution of the Kampuchean issue is the withdrawal of all Vietnamese troops from that country. The so-called complete withdrawal of troops from Kampuchea by 1990 is a sheer hoax, the aim of which is to eliminate the resistance forces and perpetuate Viet Nam's control over Kampuchea. China sincerely hopes that Kampuchea will become an independent, peaceful, neutral and non-aligned country. We appreciate the position taken by the countries of the Association of South-Bast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in support of the Kampuchean people's struggle against Vietnamese aggression, for national salvation and in the search for a just solution to the Kampuchean question. The proposal for a Kampuchean solution put forward by the recent ASEAN Foreign Ministers' meeting is reasonable, as are the position and steps taken by Democratic Kampuchea in regard to the present situation. Viet Nam should make a positive response to all this if it really wants a solution.
The Afghan issue is in essence one of armed aggression against, intervention in and occupation of a non-aligned country by large numbers of troops dispatched by a super-Power, which have not only grossly trampled on the norms guiding international relations but also posed a grave threat to the peace and security of neighboring regions. We condemn the intensifying military suppression of the Afghan people and demand the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan. We support the efforts made by the parties concerned to bring about a just solution to the Afghan question in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations.
We resolutely support the just struggle of the Palestinian and other Arab -peoples and strongly demand Israel's withdrawal from the Arab territories it has occupied since 1967. We maintain that all countries in the Middle East are entitled to exercise the right to independence and existence. We support the Arab countries and the Palestine Liberation Organization in their efforts to strengthen their unity and to attain their national goals through political negotiation and by other means. We are in favor of holding an international conference on peace in the Middle East under the auspices of the United Nations so as to seek a just and comprehensive solution to the Middle Bast question and bring about peace in the region.
We are opposed to any outside intervention in the affairs of the Central American countries. The internal problems of Central American countries should be solved by the people of the respective countries. We support the Contadora Group in its continued efforts to arrive at a peaceful settlement of Central American problems and hope that the parties concerned will take practical steps and hold consultations on an equal footing so as to ease the tension in the region.
Recently, the situation in southern Africa has deteriorated drastically. In defiance of opposition from the international public, the South African authorities have clung stubbornly to the system of apartheid and racial discrimination, openly declaring a state of emergency in some towns and cities, in ruthless suppression of the black people.
They have set up an interim government in Namibia to obstruct its independence and intensified their acts of aggression and provocation against neighboring countries. That racism and apartheid should exist now, in the 1980s, is a disgrace to mankind. We indignantly condemn the South African authorities for their crimes perpetuating racist rule, bloody suppressing the black people in South Africa and willfully invading and threatening neighboring States.
We sternly demand that the South African authorities immediately abolish the so-called interim government they have rigged up in Namibia and terminate their illegal occupation of the country so that it may attain independence at the earliest possible date, in compliance with Security Council resolution 435 (1978). We will, as always, unswervingly support the South African people in their struggle against racism, the Namibian people in their struggle for national independence and the other peoples of southern Africa in their struggle for national security, peace and stability.
We support the proposal put forward by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea for the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea - namely, the establishment of a confederate republic with two coexistent systems and the holding of parliamentary talks between the North and the South, as well as tripartite talks. United States troops should be withdrawn from South Korea. We support dialog between the north and the south and appreciate all efforts conducive to the relaxation of tension on the Korean peninsula.
While discussing the danger of war in the current international situation, we must not lose sight of the growth and development of forces for peace.
For the sake of survival and development, the third-world countries, whose aggregate population accounts for three quarters of the world's total, resolutely oppose war and the arms race, and demand world peace.
Many member States of the East and West military blocs, having suffered the catastrophe of two world wars, are unwilling to be dragged into another war.
The many small and medium-sized countries in Asia, Oceania and Europe do not want war. They demand independent and equal participation in international affairs and oppose big-Power domination of the world.
Hundreds of millions of people in the world, including intellectuals, artists, scientists and religious leaders of different races and creeds, all hate war and desire peace. Engaging in different forms of activity against the arms race and the threat of a nuclear war. they constitute a mighty and irresistible force for peace.
In a word, the people are the motive force of history and the masters of the world. They will take their destiny into their own hands. Popular desire for peace is the general trend of the world. Whoever undermines peace by resorting to an arms race and the threat of war will be opposed by the overwhelming majority of the people. Drawing a bitter lesson from the Second World War, they are determined to take preventive measures against the possible danger and avoid the recurrence of the historical disaster. Both the nuclear super-Powers have overkill capabilities and neither of them can afford to ignore the calamitous consequences of a nuclear war for itself, therefore, so long as the people of all countries continue their efforts, persevere in struggle and develop the peace forces against war, there are good hopes for the maintenance of world peace.
Development is a major issue closely related to world peace. World economic development has been characterized by growing imbalance and instability in recent years as a result of the widening economic gap between the developed and the developing countries. At present, many countries still face grave economic difficulties. Latin America groans under a crushing debt burden. Africa is not only plagued with drought and famine but also beset by the debt problem. And Asia is suffering greatly from trade protectionism. Moreover, they are generally faced with lack of development funds, a fall in the prices of raw materials and primary products and sharp fluctuation in the money and financial markets. All this greatly hinders the growth of the developing countries.
Since achieving political independence, the developing countries have scored marked successes and accumulated valuable experience in their strenuous endeavor to develop the national economy. Facts have shown that the important point for the third-world countries is how to formulate a development strategy suited to their actual conditions so as to alleviate the current economic difficulties and ensure a steady economic growth. As an old Chinese saying has it, "Poverty gives rise to a desire for change and change will work out a way leading to success and success tends to hold out." The developing countries should be able to lift themselves out of their backwardness. They have rich natural resources and industrious people who desire development. Provided they bring into play all positive factors, tap their own potentials and take part actively in South-South co-operation, they can gradually overcome their difficulties in the course of development.
Of course, the development of the third world is not a matter of concern to the third world alone. The international community should take effective measures to create an international economic climate favorable to the economic development of the third world. In a highly interrelated world, the economic stability and growth of the developed countries cannot be based on the stagnation and poverty of the developing countries. The existing international economic order is evidently out of step with the changed world economic and political pattern. To change it into a fair and just economic order benefiting the people of all countries is the call of our time. Besides, the economic stability and development of the South are an important factor making for world peace and stability. The developed countries should be farsighted enough to proceed from the overall interests of the world and give serious attention to the question of the North-South relations. At present, it is imperative in particular to take effective measures in favor of the developing countries by alleviating their debt burden, lowering interest rates, opening markets and providing them with funds and increased economic and technological assistance.
In the international economic field, trade, money, finance and debt are interrelated. It is necessary for the international community to seek a composite solution to these pressing issues facing the world economy. The United Nations and other international organizations should step up their role of co-ordination in improving North-South relations. China supports North-South dialog and South-South co-operation in the hope that the joint efforts of North and South will lead to a stable and balanced development of the world economy.
Here we wish to mention in particular the critical state of the African economy. The 21st Summit Meeting of the Organization of African Unity, held not long ago, gave expression to the eager desire of the African countries for closer unity and co-operation and the revitaligation of the African economy. We call on the international community and especially the developed countries to do their part in helping the African countries overcome their economic difficulties and improve their economic position.
China is both a socialist country and the largest developing country in the world. We have achieved great successes in all fields since the founding of the People's Republic of China 36 years ago. However, prolonged efforts are required before we can thoroughly eliminate backwardness in China and turn our large country of 1 billion people into a modern socialist country with Chinese characteristics. We are carrying out an economic reform to invigorate the domestic economy and open the country to the outside world. This is a great experiment. Experience in our reform over the past few years gives us full confidence in its success. To attain our goal we need peace not only for the rest of this century but in the next century as well.
In international affairs, we pursue an independent foreign policy of peace namely we oppose hegemonism and maintain world peace; strengthen China's solidarity and co-operation with the rest of the third world and support the other third-world countries in their just struggles to safeguard their sovereignty and independence and develop their national economies; develop normal relations with all other countries on the basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence irrespective of the differences or similarities in their social systems as compared with that of China; do not enter into alliance or strategic relationship with any big Power or line up with one against another; make our own independent judgment on international issues; and support whatever is in the interest of world peace, international co-operation and common development and oppose whatever is not.
Proceeding from the fundamental interests of the Chinese people, China's independent foreign policy of peace is also in the fundamental interests of the people of the whole world. Fully aware of our responsibility and weight in international affairs, we are determined to do all we can to help relax tension, maintain world peace and promote international co-operation. China will never do anything detrimental to world peace. We will not interfere in the internal affairs of other countries, nor seek spheres of influence or practice hegemonism. This is, and will remain, our position. China is a factor making for peace and stability. It is our hope that, with the growth of its economy and strength, China will be able to contribute more to the cause of peace and human progress.
Peace, co-operation and development are our goals. They are also our earnest aspirations, which we wish to reaffirm to the whole world on the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations. The Chinese Government and people are determined to make sustained and joint efforts together with the peoples of other countries for the realization of these lofty aspirations.Let me offer you my congratulations. Sir, on your election to the high office of President of the fortieth session of the United Nations General Assembly, in this jubilee year your long diplomatic experience with the United Nations will be of inestimable assistance to us.
Let me offer my thanks also to Ambassador Paul Lusaka for his successful work as President of the thirty-ninth session. He helped to ensure that during the last session of the General Assembly the major problems of Africa were dealt with pragmatically, realistically and in a genuinely sympathetic spirit.
Forty years ago, in founding the United Nations, the nations learned the lessons of the Second World War. The Federal Republic of Germany, though not a founding Member of the United Nations, has always, since it was constituted, worked for the fulfillment of the United Nations mission to preserve world peace. We do this by means of our policies in pursuit of peace in Europe and throughout the world.
For 40 years Europe has lived without war. In the North Atlantic Alliance, to which the Federal Republic of Germany as a liberal democracy has firmly hitched its destiny, a community of States was established which is a model of peaceful co-operation on a basis of equality and makes a contribution to peace and stability beyond its own frontiers.
In the European Community, friendship and co-operation have taken the place of centuries of rivalry and confrontation. From the original Community of six States the present Community has developed with its 10 members, and there will soon be 12 members. The forthcoming accession of Spain and Portugal to the European Community will bring great enrichment and new strength to the liberally and democratically constituted States of Europe. We want to put closer common foreign and security policies on a contractual basis. The way to European union is signposted. We regard an active policy in pursuit of peace as a historical duty to our own continent and to the world.
Europe is more than the States of the European Community. When we speak of Europe, we mean the whole of Europe. Peace in the world is particularly dependent on the relations between West and East in Europe. Through the partition of Europe, the German nation was torn apart. Tension between West and East affects us most acutely. For us, therefore, a policy on Germany is a policy in search of peace in Europe and a policy in the spirit of the United Nations. It is not possible to secure peace in Europe without a contribution by both German States. War must never again emanate from German soil. Joint efforts for peace are imperative. That is the essence of the community of responsibility in which both German States fulfill their special mission and duty to ensure peace. Our co-operation merits the support of all States sincerely interested in stability and genuine detente at the heart of Europe.
It is encouraging that on 12 March 1985 Federal Chancellor Helmut Kohl and the Chairman of the Council of State of the German Democratic Republic, Erich Honecker, jointly recognized the opportunity for a new phase of West-East relations presented by the resumption of the arms control dialog between the United States and the Soviet Union. The Federal Republic of Germany will do everything in its power to help improve relations between West and East. The treaties concluded during the seventies by the Federal Republic of Germany with its neighbors continue to be a solid basis for such improvement. The starting point was the 1970 Treaty of
Moscow, which put relations between the Federal Republic of Germany an<5 the Soviet Union on a new footing. Through the Treaty of Moscow and the treaties with the People's Republic of Poland and the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, as well as the Treaty on the Basis of Relations with the German Democratic Republic, we opened up,
out of a national and historical responsibility for peace, new long-term prospects for relations between West and East. We stand by these treaties. Our contractual
policy is not inconsistent with the political aim of the Federal Republic of Germany to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will regain its unity through free self-determination. That is the wording of the "Letter on German Unity" handed over by the Federal Government to the Soviet side
on the occasion of the signing of the Treaty of Moscow. These treaties and the Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin cleared the way for the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE).
On 1 August 1985, at the meeting marking the tenth anniversary of the signing of the Helsinki Final Act, all participating States affirmed their determination to continue the CSCE process and to implement all parts of the Helsinki Final Act. This Final Act is a realistic and balanced document. It is not a peace treaty but sets the course towards a future peaceful order in Europe. The CSCE process is intended to combine the precepts of peaceful coexistence between States and a wide range of co-operative options, on the one hand, with respect for the fundamental rights and interests of people regarding exchanges and information, on the other. It has encouraged States to pool their resources and creative powers. Co-operation is intended to check and reduce the potential for conflict inherent in the existing clashes of interests and differences between systems of values. The opportunities offered by international co-operation will become even more important in the light of the dawning technological revolution. A robust and enduring peaceful order that takes account of the legitimate interests of all concerned must be based on efforts to build confidence and establish co-operative security, combined with the participation of all in economic, scientific and technological progress. Cultural exchanges play a particularly important role in the creation of such an order.
Free and creative contacts and exchanges among all nations and presentation of cultural achievements on a reciprocal basis impart knowledge and deepen understanding of one another. In Europe the joint cultural heritage has always remained a unifying bond in spite of horrific wars, a bond transcending ideological frontiers.
Awareness of the cultural identity of Europe is growing, as is the realization on all sides that Europe will continue in future to have a common fate. The Cultural Forum to take place shortly in Budapest within the CSCE process will give all participating States the chance to substantiate their desire for cultural co-operation and exchanges.
The network of diverse connections developed between West and East in Europe has stood up in past years to serious strains. Our aim now must be to reach more extensive, more comprehensive results than in the seventies. The sound beginnings made in those days must be exploited.
We welcome the forthcoming summit meeting between the President of the United States and the General Secretary of the Soviet Communist Party. The Federal Chancellor, Helmut Kohl, has repeatedly advocated such a summit meeting. The meeting in Geneva is intended to become the new beginning of a top-level dialog. Above all, we hope for a significant impetus to the negotiations in Geneva.
On 8 January 1985 the United States and the Soviet Union agreed to resume negotiations. They began on 12 March. The document of 8 January is of great political importance. It creates new opportunities for arms control, dialog and co-operation within the West-East relationship. Far-reaching negotiating objectives are laid down in the document: to prevent an arms race in space and to terminate it on Earth? to reach effective agreements to limit and reduce nuclear weapons, both intercontinental and intermediate-range; and to strengthen strategic stability. The Federal Government unreservedly supports those negotiating objectives. They are in the interests of all nations.
We are well aware that results take time. The subjects under negotiation are intricate and complex. Each side must heed the security interests of the other. Tension and distrust must be reduced. Success depends on the negotiating parties endeavoring seriously and flexibly to reach co-operative solutions. They must consider themselves responsible for a common task. In the relations between West and East, no side must try to achieve a level of security that means less security for the other side.
Developments in the balance of military power between West and East since the 1970s are drastic evidence of that fact. The massive arms build-up by which the West has increasingly felt threatened since the period of detente in the 1970s has brought no major advantage to its originators; on the contrary, it has promoted the search for new types of space-based defensive options. Drastic and reliably verifiable reductions in nuclear offensive potential will therefore necessarily influence the need for, and the scope of, future defensive weapons. Both questions must be considered and resolved in their natural and political interrelationship, as was agreed on 8 January 1985.
The efforts to .achieve co-operative security are a key to the development of a stable relationship between West and East, on which world peace is largely dependent. If success is to be achieved during the present negotiations, existing arms control arrangements must be adhered to. The Federal Republic of Germany welcomes the decision made by President Reagan regarding continued observance of the SALT limitations. Co-operative solutions to the central security issues require a political environment marked by a minimum of mutual trust. A particularly important factor in that trust is predictability of the long-term intentions of the other side. That is why a sound and constructive relationship between the super-Powers is indispensable. But confidence-building and arms control are not a matter for the super-Powers alone: the medium-sized and small States, too, must endeavor to establish an enduring, stable basis for West-East relations. Distrust must be reduced wherever it exists.
Not only nuclear weapons, but also the other potential weapons must be reduced. That is why the multilateral negotiating forums remain for us indispensable components of the arms-control process.
It is an encouraging sign that the Third Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons has had a successful outcome. The Non-Proliferation Treaty has proved its worth as an important element of international arms control and of the peaceful use of nuclear energy. It has shown that multilateral arms control is possible.
The mutual and balanced force reduction negotiations in Vienna and the Stockholm Conference on Confidence and Security Building Measures and Disarmament in Europe concentrate on conventional forces and are an essential complement to the nuclear negotiations in Geneva. The aims of those negotiations, too, are stability at a low level of .forces, openness, transparency, predictability and the renunciation of force by means of specific confidence-building measures. Here in New York we launched an initiative aimed at drawing up guidelines for confidence-building measures that could be applied throughout the world.
Without reliable verification, arms-control agreements would be built on shaky foundations. The attempt to establish a universal prohibition of chemical weapons is still being hampered by the outstanding verification issues, which must now be tackled with vigor. It is high time that an end was put to the scourge for mankind constituted by those chemical weapons of mass destruction that have been outlawed for decades. Partial, regional solutions do not achieve that. They would make the question of verification even more complex. However, we welcome every effort by other States to bring about reliable verifiability. In that spirit, we are studying the suggestions made to us by the German Democratic Republic and the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic. The States at the heart of Europe have every reason to help resolve the verification question, thereby ensuring that chemical weapons are banned worldwide.
We know that a state of non-war through nuclear deterrence cannot be the ultimate method of securing peace. If deterrence against attack, deterrence against war - in other words the strategy of preventing war - should ever fail, there would be inconceivable consequences. The fortieth anniversary of Hiroshima renewed our awareness of that truth. In the nuclear age security can no longer be based solely on autonomous efforts. The long-term preservation of peace, however,
requires co-operative solutions; for that reason, disarmament and arms control are integral components of our security policy. We want to avoid any type of war, including war waged without nuclear weapons.
No one must reserve the option to make the first use of conventional weapons. Given the present state of technology, a conventional war would be a thousand times more dreadful than the Second World War. In Europe, with its high levels of armaments, even a conventional war would be a catastrophe. Our Alliance has declared that it will never be the first to use arms. We do not seek superiority. We do not wish to defeat or control anyone, nor do we wish to make any side arm itself to exhaustion.
The many trouble-spots in the world, the regional conflicts, must not be seen only from a European point of view; above all, they must not be fitted into the mold of the West-East confrontation. That is why we regard genuine non-alignment of the States in the Third World as a tremendously important contribution to world peace and to the realization of the purposes of the United Nations. The great idea of equal rights and self-determination of peoples must not remain empty words. Article 1 of the Charter of the United Nations makes it clear that all nations possess the same right to determine their own national life and political actions, including the political pursuit of peace. That right entails respect for the special needs of peoples in their own regions. No State and no power bloc has the right, or can usurp the right, to decide on issues vital to other nations.
We, along with the vast majority of the United Nations, therefore demand the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan. Striving for ideological supremacy means rejecting real non-alignment. That was recognized with the utmost clarity at the summit conferences of the non-aligned countries in Havana and New Delhi and most recently at the Foreign Ministers Conference in Luanda. Real solutions to the problems of the third world must come from the regions in question.
The European Community, our regional Community, is also an attempt to solve regional problems by means of an increasingly close association of the European democracies. Together with our European partners, we support regional co-operation and associations of States in all other parts of the world too. We actively support the peaceful settlement of conflicts among neighbors. That helps to keep East-^West confrontation out of the third world.
On the basis of this concept of regional co-operation, we support the Contadora process in Central America, a process initiated in the region itself. It is the only realistic way for Central Timerica to approach the solution of its problems. In Luxembourg, on 11 and 12 November, another conference is to take place between the Foreign Ministers of the European Community, Spain and Portugal and those of the Central American States and the Contadora group. We want to continue the dialog between the two regions of Central America and Europe; we seek close co-operation between them.
We also seek structured economic and political co-operation between the European Community and the Gulf Co-operation Council. In the Middle East we support regional efforts to increase the willingness of all parties to the conflict to negotiate and bring about peace. We acknowledge the positive elements of the Fez plan. We welcome the initiative of King Hussein and hope that it will help pave the way towards negotiations. Only through negotiations and the renunciation
of force can accommodation be found between the right of Israel to exist within secure and recognized boundaries and the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination.
We support the regional efforts for peace of the countries of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN). The European Community recognized from the very beginning that the economic and political co-operation pursued by the ASEAN States was an exemplary form of regional co-operation that pointed the way ahead. The ASEAN countries' Kampuchea initiative in the United Nations can count on our vote.
We are pleased that talks have been resumed between the two parts of Korea. We support all efforts to eliminate tension on the Korean peninsula. That should also open the way for accession to the United Nations.
To work for peace in the world also means to co-operate in order to meet together the economic and social challenges faced by mankind. North and South must co-operate to bring about successful development in the third world. North and South must also co-operate to come to terms with the global structural transformation that the third industrial revolution will cause once the transition has been made to the age of information and communication technology. This new age offers great opportunities to mankind. It will enable the world to grow even closer together and will extend the scope and the need for international co-operation. It will open up new opportunities for the individual responsibility and personal development of everyone.
The one world in which we live today cannot remain a peaceful world for long if it remains divided into rich and poor nations, into technically advanced and technically backward nations. The establishment of a truly peaceful world means overcoming hunger and poverty in all regions of the world.
Our look back at 40 years of the United nations is also a look back at 40 years of development co-operation. Despite all the problems that remain unsolved, the last 40 years have been a period of unprecedented economic growth, particularly for the third world. The gross national product in Asia, Africa and Latin America grew by 5.6 per cent annually during the 30 years from 1950 to 1980; that means that it increased fivefold. Between 1960 and 1982 life expectancy rose from an average of 42 to 49 years; infant mortality was cut in half; and whereas in 1960 only 50 per cent of the children received primary education, 94 per cent receive it now.
Two central themes of this sessions of the General Assembly are the debt crisis and the situation in Africa. Since 1982 we have made progress towards overcoming the debt crisis, but the crisis is far from having been mastered. It continues to tick like a time-bomb in the world economy and jeopardizes the growth and social stability of the developing countries, as well as the health of the banking system in the industrialized countries. What can be done?
First of all, we must find methods for restoring credit flows to a normal level and for enabling adequate resources to flow into the developing countries. However, the very volume of such funds means that this task cannot be fulfilled by the international financial institutions alone, nor even principally by them. Private banks and investors must continue to play the main role. I appeal to the commercial banks not to shirk this responsibility. For their part, the debtor countries must also make every possible effort during the coming years to reform their internal economic policies and to fight inflation. Only in that way can they strengthen their international creditworthiness, create a favorable climate for investment and terminate the flight of capital. He must, however, be aware also of the fact that the debt issue is not only an economic and financial
issue; it is also a political question. It is a question of the social peace and internal stability of the debtor countries. They must not be confronted with impossible demands. The servicing of foreign debt must not be paid for in the third world with recession, unemployment and hunger, or with a threat to freedom, democracy and independence.
Secondly, if the debt crisis is to be resolved, further interest-rate reductions are required. The industrialized countries must pursue an economic and financial policy that enables interest rates to be reduced further. They must reduce their budget deficits.
Thirdly, the markets of the industrialized countries must remain open to developing countries; they must be opened even wider. Protectionism is a danger not only in economic growth in the industrialized countries; protectionism is a deadly danger to the developing countries. Free world trade is of vital importance to the developing countries. Only if the industrialized countries open up their markets to exports of finished and semi-finished products from the developing countries can the latter be more firmly integrated into the world economy, whoever denies the third world access to its markets is denying it development. The Federal Republic of Germany supports open markets, particularly with regard to the third world. The high trading surpluses on our market, particularly those of the African and Latin American countries, bear witness to that fact. So that free trade can be secured and consolidated, we advocate that the next round of negotiations in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) be commenced as soon as possible. The acute danger to international free trade stems particularly from the great trade imbalances in the world. It would however be a fateful mistake to seek to overcome them by means of trade barriers. It would mean misunderstanding the roots of the problem.
An interdependent world economy does not permit any isolationist economic policies pursued with no regard to their effects on other countries. The stronger the economy of a country, the greater its responsibility.
The call to open up markets to the third world is also addressed to the socialist industrialized countries. They still continue to take less than 5 per cent of the finished products exported by the third world. That is in no way compatible with their international economic position and the responsibility that they also bear.
The second great task facing us at this session of the General Assembly is that of aid for Africa. After the last session of the General Assembly, the international community organized assistance to combat the threat of starvation. The Federal Government helped with food, transport and medicines. Innumerable people in my country gave generous donations. Assistance for Africa must continue and, indeed, be increased. Donors and recipients are agreed that external help alone cannot bring about the breakthrough. Africa knows that it needs economic reforms and that it must make agriculture the focal point of its development efforts. Good producer prices are essential as an incentive to farmers to increase production, but the reforms in Africa can be implemented only if they are supported by adequate help from outside. Acting on a mandate from the Bonn Economic Summit, the seven industrialized States represented there prepared proposals for the fight against hunger in Africa which were approved here in New York yesterday by the seven Foreign Ministers.
The Federal Republic of Germany regards development policy as part of its policy in pursuit of peace. We want the developing countries to become economically more self-sufficient and independent. We want to strengthen the economic foundations of genuine non-alignment. The Federal Republic of Germany has not concentrated its assistance on a few selected countries; on the contrary, we
have helped wherever the need was greatest. We have remitted the debt of the world's poorest countries to an extent unequaled by any other industrialized country.
The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany considers population policy to be a necessary component of a successful development strategy. We therefore also support the United Nations Population Fund. It has performed valuable work and played a considerable part in slowing down the rate of population growth. However, further successes are needed.
Worldwide interdependence is particularly clearly illustrated in the field of environmental protection. In that field "international home affairs" are becoming an element of international policy, and in that field mankind is making collective decisions regarding its own future. Our forests are in danger. Our agricultural land is being eroded; deserts and steppes are spreading; seas, lakes and rivers are becoming increasingly polluted; animal and plant species are becoming extinct. It is vital to preserve the natural sources of life on which we all together depend on the shrinking planet Earth.
In the field of North-South co-operation it is vital to begin dealing in good time with the questions raised by the new forms of technology, microelectronics and bioengineering. These forms of technology present great opportunities, particularly for the developing countries. Gene technology offers great potential for a solution to the world food problem. The new telecommunications and radio satellites offer the opportunity to equip entire regions of the third world quickly and relatively cheaply with a communications infrastructure. However, the opportunities are accompanied by risks. For instance, the new forms of information technology in the industrialized countries are accelerating automation. This poses
the danger to the developing countries that the advantage they derive from lower labor costs will be eroded. North and South must co-operation to take the opportunities offered to the third world by these new forms of technology and to avert dangers. What seems to me to be the greatest opportunity is, that the new technological revolution will permit many developing countries, at least in some sectors, to enter the new information age at practically the same time as the industrialized nations.
The United Nations has recognized the dignity of man as the supreme principle. All States must follow this principle at home and in their foreign relations. The United Nations has created a comprehensive system of universally binding standards to protect human rights. The 1984 Convention against Torture is a document directed against humiliation, inhumanity and cruelty. I hope that the next agreement in this sphere will be a further optional protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights concerning the abolition of the death penalty. We are faced with the task of putting human rights not only into words but a.J.so into practice. For this, we need international institutions that strengthen the protection of human rights. We call for the appointment of a high commissioner for human rights and for the creation of an international court of human rights at the United Nations.
In many parts of the world human rights are still violated. One special human-rights problem that depresses us all is that of apartheid in South Africa. We seek the peaceful elimination of apartheid in the Republic of South Africa. That is consistent with the ethical basis of our constitution, with the demands of the Christian churches and with the deep conviction of the people of my country. At issue are equal rights for all South Africans, irrespective of the color of their skin. The world watches with horror and outrage the escalation of the bloody clashes in South Africa. We appeal to the responsible authorities in South Africa to release each and every political prisoner, to end forced resettlement, to put a stop to arbitrary detention without trial and to terminate the state of emergency. Only in negotiators with the authentic leaders of all groups of the population can a permanent solution be found. The form that solution will take must be decided by the people in South Africa themselves; no one outside South Africa has the right to lay down how this should be done. The South African Government has recently given indications of specific reforms. These must now be implemented quickly. Further, increasingly extensive reforms are essential, until apartheid has been fully eliminated. We hope that the responsible leaders do not miss the last opportunity given them by history.
The right of peoples to self-determination must be the basis of the solution to the question of Namibia. Security Council resolution 435 (1978) remains for us the indispensable basis for any Namibian solution. We appeal to the Government of South Africa to make the way clear at last for the internationally recognized independence of Namibia. It is free elections that must decide which Government the majority of the people wishes.
The United Nations is 40 years old. This year, we shall rededicate ourselves solemnly to the principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations. Secretary-General Perez de Cuellar has called on us to pursue a new co-operative internationalism. We support his practical proposals. We do not need a new Charter, but we do need a new spirit in the United Nations. It is here, it is in this building, that the preservation of peace must begin. The United Nations was created to reconcile differing interests. It must not be abused for propaganda and for short-term voting successes, useful as they may be for domestic political purposes and votes. To be sure, the United Nations is a political Organization, and politics means struggles over power, influence, values, programs and personalities. And yet we must not forget that the United Nations is a precious instrument in our hands. Our war-scarred fathers have created it. We still have to learn to make the best possible use of the instrument offered us by the United Nations for the preservation of peace. History will not judge us by occasionally small tactical successes; it will judge us solely by whether we succeeded in avoiding the final catastrophe and enhancing the human dignity of all mankind. The dignity of man, his inalienable and fundamental rights, must remain the yardstick against which all our actions are measured.I should like first to congratulate the President on his election. I see it as a tribute not only to him personally but also to his country which holds a distinguished place in international co-operation. Everyone knows how much Spain means to France. In the very near future, our peoples will be together in the European Community. I am pleased that a common future now stands before them.
I should also like, before beginning my address proper, to add my expressions of sympathy to those already voiced by numerous speakers before me regarding the tragic events that have just occurred in Mexico.
The international community quickly demonstrated its solidarity, and my country joined in this widespread movement. I should also like to express here the respect that France has for the courage and dignity shown by the Government and people of Mexico in the face of their terrible ordeal. The catastrophe there reminds us that the happiness of men is uncertain and their destiny precarious. May they by their actions avoid compounding the suffering caused by nature.
This session of the General Assembly marks the fortieth anniversary of our Organization. It is the age of maturity, a time for reflection and for taking stock.
Speaking on behalf of France, a Founding Member of the United Nations and permanent member of the Security Council, I should like to refer to the three main ideals of this Organization which are the reason for its existence, namely, security, freedom and development.
With respect to security, the power of the atom is the dominating factor.
Peace through deterrence has so far prevented East-West conflicts from taking the form of direct confrontations between nuclear Powers. Maintenance of the balance of forces - nuclear as well as conventional - is of vital importance. This armed peace must be maintained for the future at a verifiable level of arms at the lowest possible level.	"	,
The Soviet-American talks in Geneva on nuclear arms and space should lead the two countries directly concerned to proceed to deep cuts in their most destabilizing offensive weapons while maintaining strategic equilibrium.
France welcomed the resumption of contacts between East and West and is particularly pleased that the General-Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Mr. Mikhail Gorbachev, is to visit Paris shortly.
New technologies have led some people to think that we could be turning a page of the nuclear era in 10 or 20 years, at the end of some ill-defined transitional period. This idea, which is attractive at first sight, merely reopens an old debate which has nurtured an illusion in mankind - the illusion that security can be achieved through invulnerability. Have we realized the extent to which a would-be aggressor could turn this risky situation to his own account?
At the Geneva Conference on Disarmament in June 1984, and then again this year, France made two proposals: first, that the two super-Powers limit the military uses of space at the same time as they reduce their offensive nuclear systems; and, secondly, that multilateral negotiations strengthen the international administration of the organization of space for peaceful uses.
The use of devices in space to see, listen and communicate contributes to security; satellites already constitute guarantees for peace and could fill this function even better if the international satellite monitoring agency my country proposed more than seven years ago were established. But, on the other hand, let us acknowledge that the deployment of new types of anti-missile or anti-satellite weapons on earth or in space would lead to a new race, with its risk of destabilizing effects. We see that possession of anti-missile and anti-satellite operational devices by one of the two super-Powers is viewed as justification for the other's efforts. It is high time that the two super-Powers agreed not to continue in this direction, they should distinguish very well between research, testing and development.
During the same time, the Conference on Disarmament should in our view set forth the rules limiting anti-satellite systems. It should also establish real confidence-building measures for space, strengthen the existing system of notification of launches of objects into space, and, lastly, extend to the satellites of other countries the bilateral commitments already made by the United States and the Soviet Union concerning the immunity of their observation satellites.
Those proposals are intended to be constructive and realistic. They take into account both the destabilizing nature of certain military activities in space and the difficulty of verifying the dismantling of systems already in place.
Let us therefore define the true nature of the challenge in space so as to avert the risk of a new arms race. But, in so doing, let us not forget the main objective: the reduction of the offensive nuclear weapons systems of the two most heavily armed countries.
As far as my country is concerned, the President of the French Republic defined in this very body two years ago the conditions in which France would be ready to participate in this undertaking. Our willingness on this score has not changed; it has not diminished.
It is in the context of such a process that France judges it necessary to raise again the question of nuclear testing designed to modernize its defensive force. I know that many delegations consider this a painful problem for which a solution is long overdue. We respect their concern, but in the case of issues like this we cannot settle for fine words or an imprecise assessment. So let us examine the facts.
To date, France has carried out less than one-tenth of the total number of nuclear tests carried out by the Soviets and the Americans. As of 1974 it ceased tests in the atmosphere. It takes every precaution in carrying out its tests, and this was confirmed, in particular, by the team of international experts that went to the site last year. No other nuclear Power did this before and none has done it since. Only recently, in Mururoa, the President of the Republic renewed the invitation he had extended to the countries of the South Pacific to see for themselves, at the actual site, the harmless nature of French nuclear tests.
Though not bound by any negotiated agreement, France has reduced the power of its tests below the threshold of 150 kilotons, a figure that the Soviet Union and the United States have presented to this Assembly for the past 10 years as a step deserving of the highest praise. At every opportunity, France demonstrates its goodwill, but it will never compromise its security interests; nor will it renounce the legitimate exercise of its sovereignty, whatever the cost to it. Continuation of the tests is in fact necessary to maintain the credibility of its forces. The limitation of tests could only be understood and be meaningful in the context of an eventual deescalation by the most heavily armed Powers.
But the debate on international security is not limited to the problems of nuclear disarmament.
The Stockholm Conference on Confidence- and Security-Building Measures and Disarmament in Europe is to cur mind very important. Thirty-five States are participating and are seeking to define concrete measures to establish confidence among all.
In addition to threats of conventional conflicts, the specter of the use of chemical weapons has also resurfaced recently. I should like to repeat strongly ray country's condemnation of any violation of the Geneva Protocol of 1925, wherever it takes place. France supports and will continue to support the efforts of the international community and, in the first place, those of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, to proceed without delay to an impartial establishment of the facts where allegations of the use of these weapons have been made. France has not hesitated to speak out in favor of the work of the Conference on Disarmament toward negotiating a convention banning the manufacture of chemical weapons and providing for the destruction of existing stockpiles under international supervision.
More generally, the deterioration of the security conditions in the world is a check to development when it does not wipe it out altogether. That is why we repeat that disarmament and development must be linked. The President of the French Republic made this point in 1983 from this very rostrum. France is ready to serve as host to an international conference on this subject in Paris.
The recent work of the preparatory committee of the United Nations conference on the relationship between disarmament and development has confirmed during the course of the summer the readiness of everyone. X am therefore pleased to state again here France's offer.
I come now to the second part of my statement.
France will speak out against all attacks on liberty, on the physical and moral integrity of the individual and the dignity of the human person, and will act indefatigably wherever these values are threatened.
We recently celebrated at Helsinki the tenth anniversary of the signing of the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe.
That anniversary reminds us of the great ambitions we had at that time: to formulate for the old continent rules other than those imposed by threat, force or ideology, building not only between States but also between their citizens, new and peaceful relations based on the sovereignty and equality of each State and on the right of peoples to self-determination, with respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Let us look back at the record of the past 10 years. It is mixed. Certainly, Europe has escaped the wars that are devastating so many other parts of the world, and its borders have been respected, and that is the main thing. But economic co-operation, cultural exchanges and contacts between people have not developed as they should. Human rights are still all too often, sometimes seriously, violated or ignored. Much still remains to be done, therefore.
Governments must win the confidence of their citizens. Let us earn that confidence by guaranteeing them the exercise of all their freedoms, without which there can be no genuine democracy.
Let us reunite families. Let us allow people to move and ideas to circulate without hindrance. Let us guarantee free exchanges. Let us agree to live in the diversity of our cultures.
How can I fail to mention under this heading one of the tragedies of our time - apartheid? The origin of the conflicts that are convulsing South African society is to be sought in that system, which is based on an odious doctrine and shameful practices.
Responses to our many appeals have been announced by Pretoria; they are not enough. Only by the speedy and total elimination of apartheid will there be salvation for South Africa.
The opening of genuine dialog between all the communities and recognition of the same civil and political rights for all South Africans constitute the only possible and acceptable basis for change. The current repression and violence can only lead to an impasse.
Faced with the deteriorating situation, France felt the time had come to take concrete initiatives. As early as May 1985 the Prime Minister announced the Government's intention to take measures against Pretoria if significant progress was not made within a reasonable period of time. Because of the worsening situation resulting from the imposition of a state of emergency, France recalled its Ambassador and decided on the immediate suspension of any new investment in South Africa. It then won adoption in the Security Council of resolution 569 (1985) , which recommends that States take voluntary measures against South Africa in order to induce its Government to engage in dialog. Since yesterday all the members of the European Community are taking actions to that end.
Since we took action other countries have joined us. That is what is most important. The freedom and dignity of a people are at stake.
The intransigence of the South African Government over Namibia is not acceptable either. After the withdrawal of South African troops from Angola in April 1985 there was some ground for hope. But the establishment of a so-called interim government in Windhoek, the action of South African military forces in Angola last May and again a few days ago and the raid on the capital of Botswana have shattered those hopes and helped to block negotiations. Despite those setbacks and difficulties, the international community must continue tirelessly to repeat that only Security Council resolution 435 (1978) constitutes an acceptable basis for a definitive settlement to the question of Namibia.
Toe many conflicts are causing bloodshed in the world, bringing suffering and death in their wake. In the Middle East the United Nations is endeavoring to secure respect for the principles enshrined in its Charter.
France supports all initiatives that will help lead to progress towards a solution to the Israeli-Arab conflict through dialog and negotiation. It approves the initiative of the King of Jordan last 11 February, in agreement with the leader of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), and will continue to provide assistance and support, just as it will encourage the Head of the Government of Israel in that regard.
My Government, as it has demonstrated on many occasions, is ready to support the efforts of those who sincerely desire to work for peace, which can be based only on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). In order to be lasting, that peace must take into account two principles that are indivisible: the right of Israel to exist in security and the right of the Palestinians to self-determination, with all that that implies.
As for Lebanon, which has been so sorely tried, it, too, has the right to peace and its inhabitants have the right to security, whatever the community to which they belong. France has continually asserted that the solution to the crisis in Lebanon must be based on the respect for the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and unity of that country. That in turn presupposes a genuine national reconciliation among all the Lebanese, My Government is working ceaselessly to that end, giving assistance and support to the lawful authorities of the country.
I wish also to mention here the fate of individuals, French and others, held hostage in Lebanon. The French Government condemns categorically that odious blackmail, and solemnly appeals to all those who may be able to help secure their release.
I turn to the conflict between Iran and Iraq. The international community has often expressed its extreme concern about that endless and bloody confrontation.
It is essential that there finally be a cease-fire and that the relevant Security Council resolutions, which have lost none of their value and relevance, be accepted at last by the two belligerents and implemented in their entirety.
In order to speed up the start of the necessary negotiations, France encourages and supports international initiatives - in the first place, naturally, the action taken by our Organization.
In Afghanistan, foreign intervention has been sustaining the war for almost six years. Far from abating, the fighting is spreading and growing in intensity, exacerbating the trials of a courageous people. There as elsewhere, justice is consistent with good sense. An answer is to be found only in a political solution that will secure simultaneously the withdrawal of foreign forces, the free self-determination of the population and the stability of the region.
We know that those are the principles that guide the good offices of our Secretary-General. France supports them, without overlooking the fact that their success depends first on the intentions of the occupying Power, which alone is in a position to remove one of the major causes of international tension. Did the head of the Soviet delegation, when he spoke the day before yesterday open the door to hope?
With regard to the distressing and dangerous situation in Cambodia, France reiterates its condemnation of the occupation of that country by foreign forces. It deplores the exacerbation of suffering inflicted on civilian populations by the recent military operations on the Khmer-Thai border. It stresses the urgency of a peaceful solution based on the withdrawal of foreign troops and the national reconciliation of the Khmer people.
The division of the Korean people - a tragedy that has been with us for 40 years - still continues. In the last few months a few encouraging signs have appeared. Recently, separated families were able to meet again for a few hours. I see in that reason for hope.
At this point I should like to mention the hope that is emerging from the changes in an entire continent: I refer to South America. Happily, democracy continues to be consolidated there. France welcomes that, especially as a difficult economic situation and the burden of considerable foreign debt have imposed difficult economic policies on Governments.
In Central America, clearly the conflicts cannot be resolved by military means. The countries of that region should be encouraged to find quickly among themselves the path to negotiation. The Contadora group therefore has our support and backing.
I now come to France's third priority in external policy - development. The overriding need for solidarity between the industrialized and the developing countries derives from the conviction - which has been repeated many times by the French Head of State - that the future of the North and the South is linked and that there can be no lasting growth for the developed countries if the developing countries are excluded. For the past two years the international community has accomplished a great deal towards helping these countries - first of all, during crisis situations.
Who could deny that Governments and public opinion responded rapidly and generously to the extreme hardships of the African countries? I should like to praise the initiatives taken by the Secretary-General, Mr. Perez de Cuellar, in particular the organization last March of a donors' conference in Geneva and the creation of the United Nations Office for Emergency Operations in Africa.
This aid drive is without precedent. Almost 7 million metric tons of grain have been collected for Africa - a considerable figure commensurate with the tragedy that is taking place. The European Community and France made a substantial contribution to that effort, as the representative of the presidency has indicated from this rostrum. But the main problem is to avoid a recurrence of such a situation, thereby ensuring a resumption of the development process on a permanent basis.
It is essential to maintain the flow of official development assistance. For its part, France will contribute more than 0.55 per cent of its gross national product in 1985, a figure close to its 1988 target of 0.7 per cent.
The poorest countries deserve priority attention, for without an increased flow of financial resources it will be difficult, if not impossible, for them to face a particularly unfavorable international economic climate. The establishment of the Special Fund for Africa under the auspices of the World Bank - to which France has made a decisive contribution - constitutes an important step in that direction.
It is also with the hope of eradicating famine that France has proposed to our industrial partners a "plan for Africa", which provides among other things for increased agricultural development and a co-ordinated program to combat desertification. We are pleased that that plan has been adopted and that work currently being carried out by experts will make it possible to implement it soon.
Finally, I should like to confirm here the French President's intention to convene an international conference on forest protection in Paris next February. That conference could, in conjunction with other international organizations concerned - primarily the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the Organization of African Unity (OAU) - propose concrete answers to the concerns of countries which see their forests disappearing and with them often all forms of life.
Those efforts were a response to the most critical situations. For the rest, this past year has seen a relative improvement in the situation of the third world.
But I should like to make two remarks on this subject. First of all, this progress is related to the economic improvement in the developed countries. The relative decline in real interest rates and the value of the dollar have accentuated this trend. But these phenomena, while positive, are primarily and essentially cyclical and short-term, and therefore remain precarious. Let us hope that the decisions taken here in New York last Sunday by the finance ministers of the five most industrialized countries will help to consolidate this trend.
The second point is that we must guard against excessive optimism. Admittedly, the problem of international debt has been brought under control for the time being, thanks to the joint action of the Paris Club, banks and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and especially the extremely austere and courageous adjustment policies adopted by the debtor countries and their peoples. But let us be careful.
The improvement in external accounts has come about at the cost of lowered income for populations - a situation that cannot continue for long.
Debt-servicing, principal and interest, still absorb often considerable amounts, if not all, of annual export earnings.
The fragile nature of this improvement is therefore blatantly obvious. An entire continent of which I have already spoken, Africa, remains on the sidelines of this progress and continues to become increasingly impoverished. The same danger will beset the other continents; and unless we manage steadily to channel capital from the developed to the developing countries, whose financing needs remain structural, the situation will be aggravated.
Here, we cannot be satisfied with the trend of these past few years which have seen a slow-down in direct investment, a reduction in bank credits and repayments to multilateral financial institutions of amounts greater than withdrawals. All this has led to an inversion of North-South capital flows. The developing countries are now paying more to those in the North than they receive from them.
It is essential to improve the existing mechanisms for debt management by providing developing countries with adjusted financing. This is the objective of France's repeated appeals to increase World Bank capital, issue additional special drawing rights, and more generally increase official development assistance.
It is also to be feared that in the months to come the slow-down in the American economy - inadequately compensated for by the growth in Europe and Japan -may have serious consequences for the developing countries; or that rising protectionist pressures in the North will stifle developing countries by limiting their export possibilities and therefore their ability to repay debts.
Certainly, as I said a moment ago, increased dialog among the main industrialized countries is leading to an improved international climate. That dialog should be stepped up in all existing forums and on all occasions. The time has come for a comprehensive and serious consideration of this subject.
Let us take another example - monetary affairs. France, on several occasions in particular when the President of the Republic addressed this Assembly two years ago - has called for an international monetary conference that would seek to define new guidelines, thereby making monetary fluctuations more stable. Industrialized countries and groups of developing countries, in particular the non-aligned countries, advocate a comparable move. It is only through such discussions that we can make the progress the world needs so urgently.

France for its part is ready for dialog and action. In the monetary, financial and commercial fields, its determination remains firm.
At one time the North-South dialog inspired much hope, in particular within our Organization. However, global negotiations never took place, and meetings between experts in international forums have yielded very few concrete results. Today, approaches based on sectoral strategies, integrating emergency aid and giving priority to rural development and training, are being launched and developed. My country approves these approaches, which meet today's needs. But it remains essential that we formulate without delay reforms that will bring about deep and lasting changes in relations between States for the benefit of peoples, their individual liberties and their rights.
In reviewing the principal tasks incumbent upon the United Nations I have been forced to recognize that the present state of the world is far from satisfactory. More than ever, we need the United Nations, the forum pat excellence for meetings and discussion. During the fortieth anniversary we shall have a special opportunity to underscore the need to make negotiation prevail in conflicts and solidarity triumph over selfishness.
This unfortunately gloomy picture does, however, have its bright spots and more encouraging prospects. I wish to conclude on a positive note by mentioning an undertaking on which my country sets great store. I refer to the construction of Europe.
Forty years ago Europe was a devastated battlefield. What has it become today? It is a community without precedent in history, a force for peace and equilibrium in the world, a community that has learned its lesson from its past and that practices, among its members and vis-&-vis the rest of the world, the peaceful settlement of disputes and solidarity with the very poor.
Our colleague from Luxembourg has reviewed the main lines of our action. A few words will suffice to recapitulate: the coming expansion of membership to include Spain and Portugal; the renewal of the Lome Convention with 66 countries in Asia, the Caribbean and the Pacific; the establishment of direct relations with the countries members of the Contadora Group and also the work now in progress to improve institutions and technological capacities with the Eureka project and to move towards a Europe of citizens, a political Europe. Indeed, European construction will be one of the great ventures of the second half of this century.
In conclusion, let me say that France wishes, together with others, to pursue its work for peace. It has heeded the message that has come to us from the depths of history. To those who are distressed by the future of the world, it hopes that we may respond together in the name of the principles that, 40 years ago, were the. cornerstone of our action.
Let me first join those who have congratulated Mr. de Pinies on his election to the presidency of the General Assembly. Our affairs could not be in better or more experienced hands. It is a source of pleasure and pride to my country that we should have as President at this fortieth session the representative of a country shortly to become a full member of the European Community.
It is in the same spirit that I express our thanks to the outgoing President, Paul Lusaka, the distinguished representative of a Commonwealth country, for the impartial and skillful way in which he conducted the Assembly's affairs over the past 12 months.
I should like also to renew my tribute to our Secretary-General. I salute his dedication and persistence in seeking solutions to the world's problems. His latest report, like its predecessors, is another eloquent and persuasive testimony to the importance of this Organization. We shall continue to lend his efforts our fullest support.
In a few weeks we shall mark the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations. In doing so we shall reaffirm the insight defined by the then British Prime Minister, Clement Attlee, at the first session of the General Assembly, in London, as follows:
"the realization by all nations that without co-operation for peace there can be no security for any nation". That thought is just as valid today as when he spoke to a world then riven asunder by the second global conflict in 30 years, a world in which war had brought the international trading system almost to a halt, a world in which many of the greatest cities lay in ruins, a world in which some of today's greatest nations had yet to be born.
In the years since then the membership of this Organization has grown dramatically. Together we can take credit for much of the progress that has been achieved, we have moved away from the sharpness and the savagery of world conflict and undertaken a massive task of reconstruction. We have managed a period of unprecedented economic growth alongside an enormous population explosion. We have welcomed and fostered the emergence of over 100 new sovereign nations. We have fashioned and developed a range of effective institutions for international co-operation.
Britain is proud, too, to belong to two very different groupings which each in its own way demonstrates the growing pattern of interdependence. This year in the Bahamas, Commonwealth Heads of Government representing 49 nations from all continents and outlooks will be meeting together. By the end of this year, too, the membership of the European Community will have expanded to 12 with the
accession of Spain and Portugal. It is now substantially the world's largest trading bloc, and its role on the world stage is becoming steadily store significant. In his statement yesterday the Foreign Minister of Luxembourg gave eloquent expression to the shared values and common approach of all the members of the European Community.
Tomorrow the commemorative meeting of the Security Council will give us a chance to take stock of all that has been achieved over the past 40 years. We should at the same time acknowledge the scale and complexity of the tasks that still challenge us. We must not underestimate the efforts the international community still has to make if our actions are to achieve the goals sat by the founding fathers.
We still live in a world wracked by continuing violence and conflicts, by economic and social hardships and by famine and disease. Last week's massive natural disaster which has brought such tragic suffering to the Mexican people is a grievous reminder of man's vulnerability to his environment. We all pay a tribute to the courage with which the Mexican Government and people have responded to this catastrophe.
In the Secretary-General's own words,
"We face today a world of almost infinite premise which is also a world of
potentially terminal danger." {A/40/1, p2), As he so rightly argues, the solution lies in our own hands, in our will and determination to decide the kind of world we wish to see in the years ahead and to take the steps necessary to achieve it. So this special anniversary is an occasion on which we should not just reflect on our past but, much more important, look ahead to the questions that will face us in the future and start shaping our policies now.

The need for such foresight applies with particular force to our economic agenda. The appalling famine in sub-Saharan Africa has shown how a series of problems - some natural, some man-made - can case together to bring unimaginable suffering: long-run degradation of the environment, progressive failure of agricultural production and prolonged drought. This disaster has evoked a dramatic response from many countries. The West has led the way, The United Kingdom alone last year contributed a quarter of a billion dollars. Almost half of that came from private donations, the gifts of individual men and women. Moreover, we have not stopped providing funds. We have made sure through the provision of aircraft of the Royal Air Force that our supplies reach those most in need as quickly as local conditions will permit.
But spontaneous generosity even on this scale offers no long-term solution because we live in a world of paradoxes. Some areas of the world still face acute hunger and are unable to feed themselves. Other parts - astonishingly more and more - face mounting problems of over-production. The pattern of this development is itself remarkable. The vast populations of China and India, despite all the prophecies of doom, are now more them self-sufficient in food. Increasing reliance on the enterprise of individuals and on the incentives of the market place has in many cases provided the spur to growing efficiency. By contrast, other countries, some of them better endowed with natural resources, still face the need to import food. And in some regions natural resources are being threatened or destroyed by over-exploitation while nearby, sometimes even in the same country, they are underdeveloped and under-used.
If we are to resolve these contradictions, ensure a more balanced development of the world economy and secure a rising standard of living for all our citizens, we must create a wider understanding of the reasons for success and failure.
We must identify ways to exploit and yet preserve our resources more effectively. We must train our people more imaginatively, deploy our common technological knowledge more skilfully. We must shape our institutions and societies so that the natural forces of economic change and growth are encouraged and not stifled. As has been shown in Ethiopia, the United Nations can play a vital role in matching resources to needs.
Sustainable economic growth is essential if we are to secure a reduction in the present crippling burden of debt in many countries. Last year the world economy grew by 4.3 per cent, the fastest rate for six years. Many countries have acted courageously in meeting the economic and social pressures of adjustment. We have heard in this debate why it is necessary for this difficult match of problems to be handled sensitively. That is why there is a duty on us all, as we respond through the international institutions on a case-by-case basis, to take account of the very real problems faced by debtor countries. We must try to create the stable framework that will enable them to pursue their policies of adjustment. That is the importance of the continuing need to reduce deficits in some of the industrialized countries.
Almost three years ago I had the privilege of presiding as Chairman of the Interim Committee of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) over a substantial increase in IMF quotas. Last year, at the Economic Summit in London, we were able to encourage the introduction of multi year rescheduling agreements where appropriate. We need new to address ourselves to the level of resources available to the World Bank. Britain would like to see early agreement in principle to a general capital increase for the World Bank and stands ready to play its part.
An urgent and continuing need is for us to support and strengthen the open trading system. This is essential if we are to resist protectionism and ensure that
our trade contributes to the prosperity of all countries, particularly those in the developing world. We welcome the forthcoming meeting of the Contracting Parties to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) to discuss a new round of negotiations. Without such a new round the forces of protectionism will gain in strength. Time is running out.
We need not simply preserve the open trading system but also see that it works more openly and more widely. Open trading needs to be broadened to include the service industries and the expanding economies of those countries that are' increasing their industrial base. Greater stability in world currency markets is essential. In particular, we need stability at rates that will promote the expansion of world trade rather than increase protectionist pressures. That is the importance of the agreement reached in this city only three days ago at the meeting of Finance Ministers and central bankers of the major industrialized countries.
But the need to look ahead is not confined to economic issues. We need the same approach in tackling the complex political and security issues that face us. The Secretary-General has reminded us of the extent to which the fundamental architecture of this Organization has been flawed by what he refers to as "the lack of that unanimity of the permanent members which was to have been its main driving force". Nowhere is this more evident than in the division between East and West. Perhaps the most important question facing this Organization during its fifth decade is whether we shall be able to record positive steps that will narrow this crucial gap.
I believe we can. The last two years have seen a considerable increase in contacts between East and West. I welcome that. Since becoming Foreign Secretary I have made a point bf visiting every one of the countries in Eastern Europe and getting to know their leaders. In the same spirit we welcomed Mr. Gorbachev's important visit to Britain at the end of last year. The first meeting between
President Reagan and Mr. Gorbachev will take place this November. That will be an important opportunity for searching and substantive discussions which can lay the
foundation for greater mutual confidence between East and West. It should demonstrate that the leaders of the world's largest Powers are serious in their desire to overcome the difficulties between them.
But contact alone is not enough. The true foundations of understanding cannot be laid in an atmosphere of mistrust. Mr. Gorbachev has said "there is no fatal inevitability of conflict between the Soviet Union and the United States". In that he echoes President Reagan's belief that "the Soviet leaders have much to gain from joining the West in mutual arms reductions and expanding co-operation". The Soviet Union and its leaders need have no doubt about the sincerity of the Western commitment. The people of Britain would like nothing better than a reduction in tension and an increase in co-operation. The task for statesmanship roust be to transform common aspirations into the substance of agreement.
The world needs this most urgently in the field of arms control. We warmly welcomed the resumption of the Geneva negotiation on nuclear and space arms between the United States and the Soviet Union. We support their aim of preventing an arms race in space and terminating it on earth.
Our overriding objective must be to obtain security at the lowest level of armaments. We do not believe that either side should strive for superiority. The aim must be mutual balance, taking account of current developments. The outcome of the process should enhance and not undermine deterrence. The negotiations must be on the basis of compliance with existing obligations. These talks present a forum for hope, a chance for constructive negotiations, and a potential for real and verifiable progress. It is only at Geneva that public declarations can be transformed into agreements that are seriously intended. Megaphone diplomacy leads only to a dialog of the deaf. But a genuine wish to serve the cause of peace will meet a swift response from our side.
Recently Mr. Gorbachev told the world that his country trusts the United States no more than the latter trusts the Soviet Union. Mrs. Thatcher made much the same point when she said that neither side looks at each other through rose-tinted spectacles. Verification provides one of the essential elements in any arms control agreement. In itself, it breeds the confidence essential to the preservation of a regime of arms control. Equally, verification requires a measure of confidence on both sides in the good faith of the other.
If that objective is to be achieved it is vital that countries comply with the treaties and commitments which they have undertaken. Particularly important are those treaties between the United States and the Soviet Union which govern strategic relationships: the strategic arms limitation agreements and the Treaty on the Limitation of Anti-Ballistic Missile System. These agreements form the foundation for the present structure of mutual security.
Concern for international stability was of course a prime motivating force behind the Non-Proliferation Treaty. For that reason, we were particularly pleased with the successful outcome of the recent Review Conference and the substantive final document agreed by consensus. We share fully the Conference's conviction that the Treaty is essential to international peace and security. We support unreservedly their determination to enhance its implementation and further strengthen its authority.
There is no doubt that this result reflects the renewed commitment of the international community to use the Non-Proliferation Treaty to prevent the further spread of nuclear weapons. We call upon those who remain outside the Treaty especially those with significant unsafe-guarded nuclear facilities - to accede to the Treaty is soon as possible and so help to protect the world against the potential horrors of nuclear war.
But equally we must not overlook the importance of the Non-Proliferation Treaty in promoting the safe use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, particularly in the developing world. We have announced our intention to double, between now and 1990, the funds we contribute to developing countries party to the Treaty through the technical assistance projects administered by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). By these actions we shall continue to demonstrate our commitment to check uncontrolled nuclear proliferation.
It is right that we should concentrate our attention on the global issues that threaten all nations' security. But in this world of close interdependence, more specific regional issues also affect our interests. I think in particular of southern Africa, where the growing crisis in South Africa and the continuing threats to her neighbors cause us grave concern.
We strongly condemn the incursion into Angolan sovereign territory by South African defense forces. We have joined with the rest of the Security Council in giving force to this condemnation. Such acts can only undermine the stability of the region and damage efforts to achieve Namibian independence. South Africa should be in no doubt of our determination that Namibia must be brought quickly to independence in accordance with Security Council resolution 435 (1978)j this resolution remains the only internationally accepted basis for a Namibian settlement.
Southern Africa has seen major changes in recent years with the coming to independence of Mozambique, Angola and Zimbabwe. It is essential that all the countries of the region should be freed from the present tensions and allowed to concentrate on building a peaceful and prosperous future in harmony with their neighbors.
In South Africa itself we deeply deplore the failure of the South African authorities to lift the state of emergency, the continuing repression of peaceful protest, and the detention of citizens without trial. More fundamentally, we reject the system of apartheid - which is so contrary to the values of the United Nations Charter and which undermines much of real value in South Africa. He call upon the South African Government urgently to move beyond mere words to actions which are long overdue: to end apartheid, and to establish a system of government acceptable to the people of South Africa as a whole.
Britain is united with other countries in its determination to see fundamental changes made. We have consistently brought pressure to bear on the South African Government to achieve this. We comply fully with the United Nations arms embargoes, we do not collaborate with the South Africans in the development of their nuclear program, civil or military. Our guidelines for the disposal of North Sea oil exclude sales to South Africa. We operate controls on a wide range of sensitive exports to South Africa. We fulfill our obligations to discourage sporting contacts. We have fully applied the European code of conduct to British companies operating in South Africa to ensure that they contribute as effectively as possible to the crucial changes we wish to promote.
Where we differ from some is not in our willingness to apply pressure but in our judgment of the likely effectiveness of mandatory economic and trade boycotts. I understand the passions that prompt calls for such measures. But we are not persuaded that measures of this kind would achieve the aims of those who call for them. They would diminish rather than increase effective pressures on the South African Government to introduce fundamental changes, and would bear most heavily on the weaker sections of the population and neighboring countries. We believe that all those with longstanding political, economic and diplomatic contacts with South Africa have a responsibility to use such links to promote fundamental change.
In keeping with this approach, we have reached agreement with our European partners on a number of measures which we believe will strengthen the forces for change in South Africa. I have today announced our adoption of all the measures agreed at Luxembourg on 10 September. These measures build on the recent visit of my three Community colleagues which clearly demonstrated European concern. In recent weeks there have been signs of movement by the South African Government. These must now be translated into firm decisions to dismantle apartheid. To this end there is now an urgent need for dialog with genuine representatives of the African majority.
In the Middle East tension has too often flared into violent conflict. It is a sad reflection that in no single year since the United Nations was founded has this area been at peace. Nowhere are negotiated settlements more urgently needed.
In Lebanon there can be no peace until the communities there themselves work together to rebuild their country free from outside interference. Israel must withdraw all its forces from Lebanese territory as soon as possible. And the Lebanese themselves must put an end to the appalling cycle of violence in that country. We condemn without reservation the kidnapping of innocent hostages, including the British United Nations official, Mr. Alec Collett. His kidnappers should release him without delay. In the Gulf, we are all appalled by the tragic and wasteful conflict between Iran and Iraq which has now lasted almost as long as the Second world War. We deplore the use of chemical weapons. And we entreat both sides to refrain from attacks on civilian targets - particularly those on merchant shipping in international waters. An early initiative to end the war is desperately needed. The Secretary-General's eight-point proposals offer the best way forward. We will continue to give him our full support.
A solution of the Arab/Israel dispute has been a major goal of this Organization almost from its foundation. That in itself testifies to the exceptional difficulties in securing a balanced settlement. But I believe that this year there are signs of readiness to seek peaceful solutions to the dispute. I think in particular of the constructive moves by King Hussein of Jordan, for v. \ch Mrs. Thatcher has recently reaffirmed our active support. The world community must give firm backing to all those who eschew violence in favor of patient diplomacy. That is the way towards a just and lasting peace based on the principles long espoused by the United Nations.

Only the parties directly concerned can negotiate such a peace. But if they are to have the confidence to enter what are bound to be difficult and delicate negotiations; they will need strong encouragement and support from the entire international community so fully represented here in the United Nations. This Organization is based on confidence in the power of diplomacy, negotiation and dialog. Hy Government shares that faith. The vital necessity is for the process of dialog to get urgently under way in this area where for so long minds have failed to meet.
I am conscious that it is only too easy for speakers addressing this Assembly to call on other countries to put their house in order. I should therefore like to turn to two issues where Britain is making a direct and positive contribution.
The tragic divide in Cyprus continues. The Secretary-General has shown skill and determination in seeking to bring the two parties together after the failure of talks in January. We wish his current initiative every success, and hope that President Kyprianou and Mr. Denktash will agree to meet as soon as possible. The British Government continues to do everything it can to assist the Secretary-General. An agreement has been tantalizingly close before. All the parties have a responsibility to see that it does not evade us again.
Over the past year we have kept up our active search for ways to restore more normal relations with Argentina. Since the conflict, we have removed financial restrictions, and offered talks on a series of practical issues. On several occasions we have pressed for the reciprocal lifting of restrictions on trade. In the absence of an Argentine response we took yet another unilateral step last July - to improve trading relations by lifting our ban on Argentine imports. Argentina has failed to reciprocate.
We shall continue to look for ways of improving relations with Argentina. At the same time we shall maintain our firm commitments to the people of the Falkland Islands.
By insisting that Britain must first commit itself to negotiations on sovereignty before there can be discussion of any aspect of our bilateral relations, Argentina has blocked progress. Ours is the sure realistic approach to the re-establishment of confidence between the peoples of the United Kingdom and Argentina and the reduction of tension in the South Atlantic.
There are many areas where mutually beneficial co-operation is possible, for example, in the increasingly urgent task of conserving the South Atlantic fisheries. Informal discussions in the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) have shown that an international effort will be required to deal with this. We are ready to give our support to the FAO's constructive initiative and hope that the Argentines will be equally prepared to work with the FAO.
This international approach to the conservation of fish stocks has been seen to be effective in other contexts. We were encouraged, for example, by the progress made at the recent meeting in Hobart of the Commission set up under the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources.
Fisheries are only one aspect of the complex task of managing the resources of the continent of Antarctica. This has been successfully achieved under the Antarctic Treaty for a quarter of a century. The Treaty has preserved the continent as a zone of peace, free from nuclear explosions and dumping, militarization, or active territorial disputes. We firmly believe that an attempt to apply a common heritage regime would upset this proven system, risk destabilizing the region and jeopardize the present close international scientific collaboration in Antarctica. We shall maintain our support for the Antarctic Treaty system.
In Central America there is widespread agreement on a number of objectives: the need for greater stability, for economic progress and for the reinforcement of democracy. These objectives are clearly set forth in the Con tad or a documents. The Contadora process has our firm support. The path to peace must lie through the strengthening of democracy and the limitation of arms; above all through the ending of cross-border subversion and interference. The present tense situation calls for the greatest possible restraint on all sides. The planned meeting in Luxembourg later this autumn between the Foreign Ministers of the Ten, plus Spain and Portugal, the Central American States and the Contadora countries will be a further demonstration of our support for peace efforts.
In recent months, there have been a number of direct contacts between North and South Korea, contacts which are continuing and broadening. It is my profound hope that these may lead to a peaceful and lasting solution to the Korean problem, and that the people of Korea may shortly be represented at this forum.
Viet Nam's illegal occupation of Cambodia is a continuing affront to international law. It jeopardizes regional stability. It flies in the face of international opinion. We give our firm support to the efforts of the members of he Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) to persuade the Vietnamese Government to reach a political solution based unequivocally on the principles approved by the United Nations.
The sixth year of Soviet occupation of Afghanistan has witnessed intensified Soviet efforts to subdue the Afghan people and to put pressure on Pakistan, where some 3 million Afghan exiles have found refuge. We hear much from the Soviet Government about its support for the oppressed peoples of the world. Yet in Afghanistan they are the oppressors. Why do they not honor their principles and signal their support for the admirable effort of the Secretary-General to achieve a solution, by agreeing to withdraw their troops? Only this concrete action will satisfy the demands of the world community and bring peace to Afghanistan.
It is clear that in founding the United Nations our predecessors were as much concerned to promote the interests of individuals as to further those of their Governments. It is therefore particularly deplorable that 40 years later the rights, liberties and well-being of so many individuals should be at risk: not just from poverty, hunger and disease, but also from the policies and actions of Governments.
We must all do everything we can to give force to our fine words about human rights. I said in Helsinki last July that while the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) had lit a beacon, the future strength of its light would depend entirely on the performance of the signatory States.
That holds good in the United Nations context as well. The United Nations Commission on Human Rights and other United Nations organizations have a major role to play in making the existing human rights instruments more effective. But to achieve their targets they must have the full co-operation of the Member States.
The United Nations finds itself today deeply involved in threats to our societies undreamed of by the founding fathers. The modern problem of drug abuse continues to take on new and more horrifying forms. This is a vice that particularly threatens our young people - and hence our future societies. Britain is increasing the resources devoted to the war against drugs and introducing new measures designed to strip those involved in drug trafficking of their ill-gotten rewards. Every Member State needs to take firm national action. But national efforts are only a part of the solution. Effective international co-operation to eradicate production, trafficking and the illegal harboring of offenders is urgently required. The Venezuelan initiative for a possible United Nations convention is a useful start. But we must all make a sustained and united attack on this vicious problem.
Equally effective co-operation is required if we are to halt the spread of terrorism. Every attack on an innocent individual, every hijacking and every bomb is an attack on us all. Britain has taken steps to tighten control of unacceptable activities by members of diplomatic missions. In order to reduce the scope for aircraft hijackings Britain has also put forward specific proposals for extra international action to take sore stringent security measures at airports and in civil aviation operations. As the Secretary-General has pointed out, many of the necessary international agreements are in place. They need to be enforced. We must all sake it clear that we will not submit to blackmail, that we will not tolerate terrorist acts and that we will not harbor terrorists.

The agenda of international problems is long and complicated. But if we are to take the right measures, we need to have the right mechanisms. On the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations, we should undoubtedly look again at the way in which this Organization works: to learn from its failures and to build on its successes.
There are many ways in which this Organization can be improved. We must get better value for money throughout the united Nations systems. We must look for more effective co-ordination. We must prevent politicization of the technical bodies. We must try to streamline and make more relevant the work of the political organs. Many sensible and practical suggestions have been made. I think in particular of the recent proposals put forward by past Presidents of the Assembly on how this body can be more effective. But we must act on them.
I have today concentrated on the challenges that still remain after the efforts of 40 years and on the dangers of complacency and inaction. But I am heartened by the evidence I see of a more practical and pragmatic approach to co-operation between our peoples. The General Assembly played a part with its economic declaration of last year. This year's human suffering in Ethiopia has prompted encouraging examples of international co-operation: British and Soviet aircraft worked side by side; united Nations and voluntary agencies pooled their efforts.
Most striking of all was the moving response of our young people. The Live Aid concerts touched the hearts of millions of young men and women around the world.
Their reaction showed that idealism and energy can rise above the barriers that divide us. It showed, too, the vigor of free societies, where individual initiative can still set a standard for Governments to match and can remind us of the real brotherhood of man.
We who hold the responsibility of political leadership have to show that we are capable of rising to that challenge.
Sir, I should like to begin by congratulating you on your unanimous election to the presidency of the United Nations General Assembly at the fortieth session. You are a distinguished son and eminent representative of a country with which India has close and cordial relations, and your association with the United Nations goes back many years. We are confident that you will provide this Assembly with able stewardship.
I should also like to place on record our appreciation of the effective and statesmanlike leadership given to the Assembly at the thirty-ninth session by your predecessor, Mr. Lusaka of Zambia.
I wish also to pay a tribute to our Secretary-General for his untiring efforts in the cause of peace and for his patience, perseverance and wisdom. He has won our admiration for his skillful handling of several crisis situations. We wish him continued success and reiterate to him our support.
Before proceeding further, allow me to express cm behalf of the people and Government of India our profound grief at the heavy toll in human and material terms claimed by the earthquakes which so tragically struck Mexico last week. We express our solidarity with and support for the people and Government of Mexico in their hour of travail and in their heroic efforts to overcome this unprecedented calamity.
Mr. President, you preside today over a historic session. The United Nations has completed 40 years of its existence. These have been years not only of tribulation but also of promise and even achievement. The world is surcharged with suspicion and uncertainty, with incipient as well as overt conflict, but the ideals of the United Nations continue to instill optimism. The dawn of independence and freedom for the overwhelming majority of mankind, particularly in the erstwhile colonial and imperial domains in Asia, Africa and Latin America, has been a significant and welcome development of our times.
The generation that launched the United Nations also saw the launching of the nuclear age. While conventional attitudes towards this world Organization are still shaped by the memories of the Second world War, there is today a new specter that haunts our civilization, the specter of a nuclear catastrophe. Hostile military blocs are poised against each other with an armada of nuclear weaponry that could wipe out all life on this planet many times over. Survival in this nuclear age has become the key issue of our times.
The United Nations today is the hub of diplomatic activity for the nations of the world. Whatever their divergence in political systems, economic structures or cultural mores, they come together in almost daily contact on a variety of bilateral, multilateral and global issues. Yet this so-called democratization of international relations is only part of the story. On the other hand, the pressures and divisions that characterize contemporary international relations seriously hamper the Organization and reduce its capacity for effective action. As Jawaharlal Nehru stated at the United Nations as early as 1948:
"We have got into a cycle of hatred and violence, and not the roost brilliant debate will get you out of it, unless you look some other way and find some other means. It is obvious that if you continue in this cycle and have wars which this Assembly was specially meant to avoid and prevent, the result will be not only tremendous devastation all over the world, but the non-achievement by any individual Power or group of its objective." In his thought-provoking report on the work of the Organization, the Secretary-General has very aptly characterized the United Nations as an essential element in the historic choice before humanity - between a world of technological promise and one of potentially terminal danger. He has rightly stressed the need to strengthen the concept of international authority embodied in the United Nations as one that should serve as a substitute for "unilateral action, exclusive alliances end spheres of influence" (A/40/1, p.2). His specific suggestions deserve careful study and reasoned application.
We in India and in the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries believe that the United Nations represents, in a real sense, the best hope of mankind. As the late Prime Minister, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, stated in her address to the United Nations General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session, "Firm faith in the United Nations is central to the non-aligned" (A/38/PV.9, p.3). Our affinity for the United Nations is rooted in our world view. We cherish peace. We believe in the equality, sovereignty and independence of States. We have a fundamental conviction in the dignity and worth of the human person. The United Nations embodies in itself these lofty principles and more. It constitutes a unique international forum where nations can resolve their differences and work together for the common good of humanity.
Throughout the years of India's freedom struggle, our leaders viewed independence not in narrow national terms but as part of the struggle of oppressed peoples everywhere for justice - political, social and economic. Following India's attainment of independence in 1947, our democratic institutions have stabilized and given to our people a deep sense of participation and commitment in determining the nation's priorities in the political and economic fields, as well as in the building up of its social and cultural ethos. In our international relationships, the commitment to the policy of non-alignment has been both instinctive and inevitable. As the Prime Minister of India, Mr. Rajiv Gandhi, has stated:
"We have inherited a well-tested and consistent foreign policy which serves our national interest. We have always believed in working for peace. Our policy is to be friends with all countries on the basis of reciprocity and mutual benefit. Our commitment to non-alignment and a new world economic order based on justice means a total dedication to the twin causes of peace and development. He also believe in safeguarding the independence of States and upholding the principles of non-interference and non-intervention."
Only a few weeks ago we marked the fortieth anniversary of the dropping of the first nuclear bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Memories of that catastrophe make us even more acutely aware of the devastating potential of nuclear arsenals today. As we begin this fifth decade of the nuclear age, the attitudes of nuclear-weapon States towards the possession and use of their nuclear weapons have not undergone any basic change. There is a wide gap between public fears of a nuclear war and the calculations of statesmen and strategists of the efficacy of the nuclear balance of terror. Ever increasing expenditures are being undertaken for the qualitative development of weapons. New generations of weapon systems have come into existence and the militarization of outer space appears imminent. Indeed a whole range of new strategic concepts are being built which seek to smother any sense of moral outrage that humanity may feel over the politics of nuclear confrontation among the most powerful States of the world.
All nations stand to suffer to a greater or lesser degree from the impact of the arms race. No one can predict with certainty the devastation that would be caused by a nuclear war. When the immediate effects of the blast and fire- are combined with the long-term effects of the fall-out, the erosion of the ozone layer and the damage to all our planetary life support systems, it is clear that another world war might well bring an end to human history.
It is time for us to go the roots of our predicament. If the States most responsible for creating this threat are as yet unprepared to suggest urgent measures for preventing the outbreak of a nuclear war, others should take the lead. There is clearly today a rising tide of protest all around the world against the wasteful and dangerous arms race. The political climate generated by the spontaneous popular movements against the accretion of armaments, against the testing of nuclear weapons and against the use of science and technology for
purposes inconsistent with humanitarian principles, makes it imperative for us to take bold action now.
The tendency towards the legitimization of nuclear weapons should be reversed. The process of reduction of nuclear arsenals should be commenced as the only way to build up confidence and trust among States. A commitment by leaders of the major nuclear-weapon States to follow a path of arms limitation rather than arms build-up is the need of the hour. The evolution of healthy national societies in the world can only be ensured if the pervasive influence of an armaments culture, particularly of a nuclear armaments culture, is curbed and the massive expenditure now being directed towards perfecting and modernizing the instruments of war is channeled towards securing more equitable and better conditions of livelihood for the peoples of the world. Even a token reduction in arms expenditure can produce dramatic results if channelized into the development of the less affluent sections of the world. In this context we welcome the convening of the International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development next year.
We have welcomed the resumption of negotiations in Geneva between the United States and the USSR on a complex of questions concerning space and nuclear arms, to be considered and resolved in their interrelationship, with the declared objective of working towards the complete elimination of nuclear arms everywhere. All nations have a stake in the success of the Geneva negotiations and it is, therefore, with some concern that we note that these talks have not produced any concrete results so far. We hope that the forthcoming summit meeting between the leaders of the two countries will give a significant impetus to this process.
I should like at this stage to refer to the Delhi Declaration issued at the end of the meeting of the Heads of State or Government of Argentina, Greece, India, Mexico, Sweden and Tanzania who, in January this year, issued a fervent appeal to the nuclear-weapon States to halt all testing, production and deployment of nuclear weapons and their delivery systems, to be followed by substantial reduction in their nuclear forces. The Delhi Declaration specified two steps for special attention - the prevention of an arms race in outer space and the early conclusion of a comprehensive test ban treaty. These leaders from five continents called for a continuing program of arms reduction leading to general and complete disarmament accompanied by measures to strengthen the United Nations system and to ensure the urgently needed transfer of substantial resources from the arms race to economic and social development.
In determining our international political and economic policies we, the non-aligned countries have consistently refused to tailor our responses to the dictates of cold-war predispositions. We do not mortgage our decisions to foreign dictates, we do not seek confrontation. But we urge the necessity of change as the key to the transformation of the world community. India does not believe, however, that such a transformation can be achieved merely by resort to strident rhetoric or by destructive criticism. The test for the international community consists in managing change by peaceful and co-operative means, recognizing the objective imperatives of our situation in the present-day world. Therefore, we seek the widest co-operation of all nations of the world. But we ask that such co-operation be based on equality, justice and a genuine recognition of our mutual interdependence.
As nations subjected to colonial domination and racial discrimination we stand firmly committed to the complete elimination of the pernicious practice of apartheid or racism in any form. The situation in southern Africa is an affront to the conscience of mankind. The policies of apartheid of the racist regime in Pretoria constitute a source of tension, instability and conflict, endangering both regional and international peace and security. The recent tragic developments in South Africa, as a result of the fresh wave of terror and repression unleashed by the racist regime following its imposition of a state of emergency, testify to Pretoria's determination to continue its repressive policies. Mr. Botha's statement in Durban of 15 August provided ample proof, if proof were indeed needed, that Pretoria remains wedded to apartheid, that it will continue to turn a deaf ear to the legitimate aspirations of the oppressed majority in South Africa and to the voice of the entire international community, that it will persist in its attempts to divide the struggling majority in South Africa, and that it will show no scruple in killing, maiming and detaining arbitrarily those who dare raise their voice in protest.
Recent events make it clear, at the same time, that the people of South Africa will not be cowed into submission. As the special communique on South Africa, adopted by the non-aligned countries at their recent ministerial Conference in Luanda, stated: "The countdown to the collapse of apartheid has started in earnest". We call once again for the immediate and unconditional release of Nelson Mandela and other valiant freedom fighters under detention. We are convinced that the struggle for a united, democratic and non-fragmented South Africa will, before long, find culmination in final victory. We reiterate to our brothers and sisters in South Africa the assurances of our total solidarity and support.
Equally, our hearts go out to the suffering people of Namibia who have now completed a century under oppressive colonial occupation. The same abhorrent regime that persecutes its own people persists in its illegal occupation of Namibia, now close to two decades after the United Nations assumed direct responsibility over the Territory. The attempts by that regime to set up another puppet administration in Namibia through the so-called Multi-Party Conference, have met with the universal contempt and repudiation that they deserve. The Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement on Namibia, held in New Delhi from 19 to 21 April this year, reaffirmed the clear and consistent support of the Non-Aligned Movement for the cause of Namibia and set out a concrete Program of Action to advance that cause. During that historic meeting, India took an important step forward by according full diplomatic status to the representative of the South-West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO) in New Delhi, thereby reaffirming its firm support for the Namibian cause. The United Nations Security Council, convened in response to thQ call made by the non-aligned countries at New Delhi, has once again called for immediate and unconditional implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978), which constitutes the only basis for a peaceful settlement of the
Namibian question. Once again. South Africa has spurned that call. It is incumbent on the Council to meet again.
It is clear that South Africa could not have persisted in its defiance of the will of the international community for so long but for the diplomatic and moral support and the wide-ranging collaboration in the economic, military, nuclear and other fields that-it has been receiving from its friends and allies. The pursuit of apartheid, the occupation of Namibia, and the repeated acts of aggression against independent African States, jointly and severally, all constitute threats to peace. Yet the Security Council has, time and again, been paralyzed into inaction on account of vetoes cast by one or more of its permanent members against mandatory measures aimed at the total isolation of South Africa. The Pretoria regime is beyond persuasion. Clearly, policies such as those of "constructive engagement" have failed. Comprehensive mandatory sanctions under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter are the only answer. Meanwhile, States have a moral duty to sever all links with Pretoria. The recent upsurge of public opinion in many parts of the world for more resolute action against South Africa is a welcome development. My country is proud to have led the way in 1946, when we became the first voluntarily to impose comprehensive sanctions against South Africa.
Nearer to our own shores, the destabilizing and escalating great-Power military presence in the Indian Ocean causes us great concern. Only the elimination of such presence can enable the nations of the area to shape their own destinies without hindrance or military tutelage from beyond their territorial boundaries. The 1971 Declaration adopted by the United Nations laid down the objective of a zone of peace in the Indian Ocean area, which is universally supported by all non-aligned States of the region. These States now call for the early convening in 1986 of a conference on the Indian Ocean in Colombo in order to achieve the realization of the objectives of the Declaration. The participation of all the great Powers at such a conference is crucial, indeed indispensable, to its
all the great Powers at such a conference is crucial, indeed indispensable, to its success. The presence of military bases, command structures and other forms of military presence against the express wishes of the countries of the area only add to the tensions already prevailing in the Indian Ocean littoral and should be progressively reduced and eliminated.
Meanwhile, in our own neighborhood, the countries of South Asia have embarked on a process of regional co-operation which holds out significant prospects for the betterment of our peoples. It is important that these developments are not adversely affected by the political and military factors involving the introduction of sophisticated arms serving external strategic interests. As we have repeatedly stressed, it is necessary that the existing thresholds are not crossed or new elements of controversy introduced which could adversely affect the security environment in our neighborhood. We, for our part, are committed to promoting good neighborliness and harmonious relations in the area. It is in this spirit that we look forward to the first summit meeting of the South Asia Regional Cooperation organization in December this year in Dhaka.
Our solidarity with the struggle of the Palestinian people under the leadership of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to secure the establishment of an independent State in Palestine and the return of the Palestinian and Arab territories occupied by Israel has been a well-recognized plank in the non-aligned platform. The plight of the Palestinians today is indeed one of the supreme tragedies of history. Few people have been more systematically brutalized, oppressed or humiliated in their own lands. The dispersal of the heroic Palestinians will not weaken their will to fight for their inalienable rights. Nor will it bring peace to the area. Occupation of land belonging to its neighbors will not guarantee Israel its security. There is now an increasing understanding of the fact that no comprehensive solution of the problem in the Middle East is attainable without the active involvement of the PLO, the sole and authentic representative of the Palestinian people. A comprehensive solution of the question can only achieved by a forward-losing approach based on a recognition of the realities of the Palestinian right to an independent State and the right of all the States of the region to live in peace within secure international frontiers. Any such solution must comprise the total and unconditional withdrawal of Israel from all Arab territories occupied since 1967 and the exercise by the Palestinian people of their inalienable national and human rights, including the right to establish an independent State in their homeland. The situation does not brook delay.
We underscore once again the importance of the early convening of the proposed international conference on peace in the Middle East, under the auspices of the United nations and with the participation of all parties concerned, for securing a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the region in accordance with well-established principles. India is ready to extend its full support and co-operation in this connection, and is appreciative of the efforts being undertaken by the Secretary-General.
The tragic conflict between Iran and Iraq, two valued members of the non-aligned fraternity, continues to be a matter of concern and anguish. India, along with other non-aligned countries, has taken repeated initiatives to resolve this conflict. Our efforts continue, along with the efforts of the Secretary-General and others.
In spite of the valiant efforts of the Contadora group to bring about a peaceful negotiated solution to the problems in Central America, the situation in the region continues to be marked by instability, tension and conflict. Policies of interference and intervention and the threat of the use of force imperil peace and security in the region, complicating its serious social and economic problems. The Government and the people of Nicaragua live under constant threat, harassment and intimidation. The problems of Central America can be resolved only by peaceful means, through political dialog and negotiation. The Contadora group must intensify its efforts to overcome the obstacles in its bid to bring lasting peace to the region. We are distressed by the last-minute impediments which prevented the signing of the revised draft Contadora Act for Peace and Co-operation in Central America of 7 September 1984. However, we have noted with satisfaction the presentation of a further revised draft, following the meeting in Panama earlier this month. It is our earnest hope that the meeting of plenipotentiaries scheduled for next month will finally pave the way for durable peace to return to this troubled part of the world. The endeavors of the newly constituted Lima group will no doubt strengthen Contadora's hand.
We have always affirmed the inadmissibility of interference in the internal affairs of States, as also of the introduction of foreign troops into any country. The situation in South-West Asia can be resolved only through an overall political settlement based on the principles set out in the New Delhi Declaration. India's own efforts have been directed towards this end. We support the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and non-aligned status of Afghanistan. We have closely followed the efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, which deserve the fullest support of all concerned.
Tension, conflict and instability afflict other parts of the world, including South-East Asia. Cyprus continues to face travail and threats to its sovereignty, independence, unity, territorial integrity and non-aligned status. Tension continues to prevail in the Mediterranean, the South Atlantic and the Pacific region.
Colonialism, as I observed earlier, persists in its most virulent form in Namibia. In other parts of the world as well, the task of decolonization remains incomplete. In this twenty-fifth year of the United Nations Declaration on decolonization, tribute is due to the commendable role the United Nations has played in the field of decolonization. We must also reaffirm our Lesolve to eliminate the colonial phenomenon altogether.
The world economic environment continues to cause grave concern. At the Seventh Summit Conference of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi in March 1983, our Heads of State or Government stressed that
"the international community cannot be assured of durable peace so long as the economic disparities between nations are widening". 
The Foreign Ministers of non-aligned countries, meeting at Luanda earlier this month, were constrained to point out that the world economic situation had not improved since 1583.
The limited and fragile recovery achieved in some of the industrialized countries, whose spread has remained uneven even amongst; them, is now faltering, because it has been based on unsustainable macro-economic policies. The projections for the rate of growth of the economies of industrialized countries for 1985 and 1986 remain low. The 1985 rate of growth may not exceed 2.8 per cent; it may well be lower.
At the same time, the economies of the developing countries remain under heavy pressure. Their overall growth rates remain well below levels which would offset population growth, let alone secure development gains. Combined with the severities of the adjustment process which marked the first three years of this decade, this decline in growth rates has brought into sharp focus the constraints on their economies, threatening wider social and political strife. The developing countries have been making adjustments without any parallel improvement in the world economic environment and in the face of serious resource constraints, the growing menace of an increasingly intolerable debt burden, reverse transfer of financial resources and intensifying protectionist barriers against their exports to developed countries. Against this background, the weakening of the commitment to the spirit of international economic co-operation and an erosion of the multilateral system is a deeply disturbing trend. It is paradoxical that this should be happening when there is an increasingly wider recognition that the world economy has become more interdependent, calling for a greater need to sustain and further the international consensus in favor of development.
We have also seen with growing concern the increasing resort to bilateralism or selective multilateralism with the adoption of policies and practices which run counter to the agreed goals and objectives of international economic co-operation. This is a negation of the consensus which the developed countries themselves had helped to achieve.
It is apparent that the prevailing international economic crisis cannot be explained away as a cyclical phenomenon. It has its origin in structural inadequacies which have been working to the particular detriment of the developing countries. It calls for a fundamental review of the existing structures.
It is essential that the international community renew at this fortieth anniversary session its commitment to the resumption of international negotiations with the objective of stimulating world economic recovery and ensuring sustained growth, particularly of developing countries. This requires in particular an integrated approach in the interrelated areas of money, finance, debt and trade, and a restructuring of international economic relations.
The Luanda Ministerial Conference of the Non-Aligned Countries reaffirmed the strategies for international economic negotiations adopted by the Seventh Summit at New Delhi. The Conference also defined a framewoiU for the commencement of a dialog.
I would like to suggest that our immediate efforts should concentrate on the following:
First, rectifying through appropriate measures and actions the "inadequacies and malfunctioning" of the international monetary and financial system.
Secondly, the adoption of policies and actions to implement the agreements on rollback and standstill with a widening o! the access to exports from developing countries and the removal of all infringements on principles, rules and regulations of the international trading system.
Thirdly, the adoption of methodologies which would ensure multilateral co-ordination of macro-economic policies pursued by developed countries and the placing of their monetary and financial policies within the purview of international discipline.
Fourthly, the increase of financial flows to the developing countries, in particular concessional flows to the low-income countries.
Fifthly, making the international adjustment process symmetrical and equitable.
I would also like to propose that during this session high-level discussions be undertaken to achieve understandings that would commence the process for the convening of an International Conference on Money and Finance for Development.
The critical economic situation in Africa and the drought and famine conditions have evoked a spontaneous response from the international community, including many non-aligned countries. The leaders of the African countries at the twenty-eighth summit Conference of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) have adopted a bold and courageous Declaration in which they have expressed Africa's determination to deal with the challenge of development. It is incumbent on the international community fully to support their efforts. As a token of solidarity, the Non-aligned Movement has adopted a Plan of Action. India has, on its own part, made a contribution of 100,000 tons of wheat, followed by another contribution of $US 10 million to the OAU Special Fund. Under the Plan of Action, India has already identified nine agricultural projects in Africa. Our participation in these projects, which is in an advanced stage of preparation, shall assist in priority areas for the rehabilitation of the agricultural infrastructure. The efforts by India that I have mentioned are additional to the bilateral program that my country has on an ongoing basis with the African countries as a part of which a large number of African experts are undergoing training in Indian institutions, and Indian experts are working in several areas with their African brethren in African countries. This, too, is a contribution to the priority areas of socio-economic development in Africa.
As one of the original signatories of the United Nations Charter, India has remained steadfast in its commitment to the values and ideals enshrined therein. To quote once again the words of India's first Prime Minister,
Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, from a speech he made in 1946 even before we attained our independence:
"Towards the United Nations, India's attitude is that of whole-hearted co-operation and unreserved adherence, in both spirit and letter, to the Charter governing it. To that end, India will participate fully in its various activities and actively play that role in its Councils to which her geographical position, population and contribution towards peaceful progress entitle her."
By the same token, the United Nations and its system of specialized agencies have been a valued partner for India in the task of nation building and economic development. For the assistance and co-operation that the United Nations has given us, we are deeply grateful. That, however, is not the only vindication of the trust, hope and confidence that we repose in the United Nations. The importance and utility of the United Nations for us, for the non-aligned and other developing countries, indeed for the entire international community, is to be measured not only by the material assistance the United Nations provides in bettering the quality of life on this planet, but by the higher and more noble aspirations of humanity embodied in this remarkable institution. The greatest tribute that we can pay to the United Nations on this occasion is therefore to rededicate ourselves to the Purposes and Principles of the Charter and to reaffirm our commitment to give them full effect. As this Assembly proclaimed last year, let 1985 "mark the beginning of an era of durable global peace and justice, social and economic development and progress and independence for all peoples". We hope indeed that we are on the threshold of such an era.
Sir, at the outset I should like to congratulate you on your election to the high position of President of the General Assembly for the fortieth session. I am convinced that your wealth of diplomatic experience and proven skills will contribute to the enrichment of the deliberations during this special session.
This year we are commemorating the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations, which was established with many hopes and expectations in the aftermath of a world distraught by death, destruction and the plunder of war.
Like many other peoples, but significantly different from them, the Jewish people underwent an ordeal which will leave its eternal mark not only in the long annals of its history but also in its deeper spiritual and psychological experience. This was, of course, the horrendous Holocaust which was wrought upon us by nazism and anti-semitism. For this reason the emergence of the United Nations provided a source of inspiration and light for us at the end of a very dark era in our history.
Indeed, what could be more stirring than the unequivocal declarations of principle appearing in the opening paragraphs of the United Nations Charter, such as: "We the peoples of the United Nations, determined to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war" and the call "to practice tolerance and live together in peace with one another as good neighbors"? To my great regret, however, this Organization has had a part in shattering these aspirations and noble ideals.
The slander of anti-semitism has also been propagated in the guise of anti-zionism. In this context, we sadly note the tenth anniversary of the passing of the infamous General Assembly resolution falsely equating the Jewish National Liberation Movement - Zionism - with an outrageous phenomenon totally alien to the most fundamental and spiritual values of the Jewish heritage. That resolution, 3379 (XXX), of 10 November 1975, will be remembered in the history of the United Nations as a terrible blot on its record and a discredit to the Organization and to those irresponsible Members that supported it.
Other international forums have also been exploited for the purpose of propaganda and political warfare against Israel, distorting the real purposes for which they were established. It would, therefore, be appropriate and timely to strive for what I would call "political disarmament" in these bodies, in order to guarantee that they maintain their integrity and credibility in the exercise of their legitimate functions.
Israel was established in 1948 against the background of a United Nations resolution calling for the establishment of a Jewish State in Palestine. The United Nations, however, did nothing to implement its resolution, and the State of Israel came into being through the will, the toil and the sacrifice of its people. Nor, I might add, did the United Nations alleviate the immense threats and dangers that Israel had to face since its establishment.
Since the founding of the State we have made every possible effort towards the achievement of peace and the normalization of relations with our neighbors. Peace for us is a natural and integral part of our national heritage. The Jewish people is a small, democratic and free people, striving to rebuild its renewed nationhood in its ancient homeland. We cherish peace and we teach its blessings to our children. Indeed, after a prolonged period of strife and hostility forced on us by our neighbors, we found a way to build a bridge of peace with one of our Arab neighbors.
Egypt and Israel have demonstrated clearly that face-to-face negotiations and direct dialog are the most constructive and beneficial ways of achieving peace. This was brought about on the basis of the Camp David Accords, which established a just and effective framework for the settlement of conflicts. It is for this reason that Israel is so insistent on applying this framework to the further extension of the peace process. We hope that in the near future we shall be able to negotiate with Jordan, our neighbor to the East. It is crucial that the peace treaty with Egypt should not remain the sole example of peace with our neighbors, and therefore we earnestly seek to widen and deepen that peace by extending the process to include the rest of our Arab neighbors.
From this rostrum I once again urge King Hussein of Jordan to enter into direct negotiations with Israel - not in some vague, deflecting international forum, but in direct, bilateral discussions. An international conference is a means of evading direct negotiations. It will be a stage for hostile and extreme propaganda and will not serve the cause of peace. Our aim should be the achievement of a bilaterally negotiated peace treaty between our countries. There is no change in our deep commitment to the Camp David accords, and we stand ready therefore to meet a Jordanian delegation, which may include Arab Palestinians from Judea, Samaria and Gaza, or other Arab Palestinians to be mutually agreed upon.
Israel firmly believes that there is no way to solve the problems of our region except through negotiations and peace. If King Hussein has finally decided to offer his hand in peace, let him act the way the late President Sadat did. He should not drown the quest for peace in a sea of conditions that nullify any chance of peace - conditions such as an international conference and the participation of terrorist organizations in the peace process. I should also like to urge King Hussein to free himself at this eleventh hour, from the clutches of the PLO. King Hussein has been caught in their clutches before and it seems that he has failed to learn from his own experience. Only after freeing himself from his dangerous association with the PLO terrorists will it be possible to achieve progress towards peace between Israel and Jordan. Indeed, the recent marked increase in terror attacks against Israelis stems, among other things, from Hussein's partnership with the PLO. Jordan cannot extend the olive branch of peace on the one hand and play host to terror at the same time. The two are mutually exclusive.
Our position in this regard is clear and decisive. We are firmly against any contacts or dealings with terrorists or their representatives - and, in this case, with an organization whose declared purpose is the liquidation of Israel. PLO leaders have been intimating that they are engaged in the political process of peace. However, they have been waging cruel and murderous terrorist activity all along. According to their declared program, political action and terrorist activities should go hand in hand until they achieve their goal, the elimination of Israel. He are not ready to negotiate with terror. There is no place for its self-proclaimed representatives at a table where peace, security and tranquility are to be negotiated. Acknowledging that organization would be tantamount to legitimizing terror, and should be rejected by all those who value peace.
To protect our people and territory from terror, we were obliged to act against the PLO terrorist infrastructure in Lebanon, which posed an intolerable threat to our people in the Galilee region.
Meanwhile, terror continues to wreak havoc in Lebanon. The latest outrage was the kidnapping of four Soviet diplomats in Beirut. Kidnapping and the holding of hostages for ransom is only one of the manifestations of international terrorism, whose linchpin is the PLO, which we roust fight and stamp out. This is another example of the fact that terror knows no bounds, neither political nor any other.
The removal of the various threats from Israel's northern border continues to be an important priority for us. We will do all in our power to defend and protect the population of the north. This objective has become no less important in the wake of the withdrawal of the Israel Defense Forces from Lebanon, in accordance with the decision of the Government of Israel of 14 January 1935.
Yesterday Israel took action against terror bases, this time in Tunisia. Israel's air force acted against the terrorists only after it became evident that the terrorists were mounting attacks from Tunis with impunity. Only last week, PLO terrorists, who were directed and commanded from Tunis, attacked an Israeli boat in Larnaca, Cyprus, and murdered three Israeli civilians in cold blood. In recent months, those headquarters were responsible for a number of seaborne attempts
against our people, which were prevented by Israel's navy. We had no intention of attacking Tunisia, although that country has permitted terrorist bases to exist on its soil. We acted against murderous criminals in order to prevent the continuation of their criminal acts.
The United Nations has been sadly remiss in meeting the challenge of international and PLO terror. It could and should have come out resolutely against this evil phenomenon of our time and placed it outside the pale of civilization. Instead, it has equivocated and, worse, legitimized terror in terms that have provided encouragement to the terrorists and their supporters.
I regret to state that, in spite of numerous outrages and continuing attacks by PLO terrorists, this issue has never been seriously addressed by the Security Council or other United Nations and international forums. Israel cannot be expected to ignore this double standard. In spite of this, Israel is willing to act with other free nations to curb, if not stamp out, terrorism. Similarly, we urge joint international action against terrorists and their sponsors.
Among the most distressing and oppressing phenomena of our international experience is racism. The very word evokes dark and brutal memories of the long history of the Jewish people. Apartheid is a system of discrimination which the Jewish faith and the State of Israel totally reject and repudiate. The Government of Israel, on 11 August 1985, reiterated that it is unconditionally opposed to the policy of apartheid in South Africa and to any discrimination on grounds of race, religion or color or on any other grounds.
Israel has diplomatic relations with some of the African States and we are ready to renew our relations with those with which we do not have them. This is, of course, up to them. We believe that many have by now seen who the real friends of Africa are: it is not those who use high-flown words but will not lend a helping hand in time of need and distress, or those who remember Africa only when they need its votes at the United Nations. The State of Israel, in contrast, was one of the first to reach out to the nations of Africa, in their early years of sovereignty and statehood and in their current travails, and we are ready to increase our efforts.
In the area of disarmament the nations of the Middle Bast are confronted with three main challenges. These are the reduction of conventional arms, the prevention of the proliferation of nuclear weapons and the eradication of the use. of chemical warfare. My Government believes that concerted regional action on all three issues is a moral imperative of the highest priority.
Concerning the accumulation of conventional arras, Israel voices its concern over the accelerated supply of large quantities of weapons to a number of belligerent Arab Governments in our region. These regimes do not need these arms for their defense, but are stockpiling them to use against Israel. This can only serve to undermine the chances for peace in the Middle East.
On the subject of nuclear weapons, we believe that the most effective and credible barrier to proliferation in so sensitive an area as the Middle Bast is a freely and directly negotiated convention establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone, based on a system of obligations binding' on all States concerned. Israel stands ready to begin such negotiations without delay or preconditions.
While Israel is conscious of the necessity to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons, we are also aware of the substantial contribution which the peaceful use of nuclear energy can make to the well-being of the world and the right of all countries to benefit from such uses. We support those international agreements that would ensure the status and inviolability of nuclear facilities dedicated to peaceful purposes.
Another issue that arouses the deepest anxiety is the repeated use of chemical weapons in the Iran-Iraq war and the danger that such use may spread in a manner that could not easily be reversed, if at all. It is tragic that the sixtieth anniversary of the 1925 Geneva Protocol forbidding the use of such weapons should be commemorated in this manner. This total disregard for solemn international legal obligations by Iraq demonstrates the difficulty of achieving genuine disarmament. But we must not despair; we must continue our efforts in this vital field of human endeavor.
The deteriorating situation of the Jews in the Soviet Union obliges us once again to speak out in defense of their elementary rights. Our concern relates especially to the hundreds of thousands of Soviet Jews who have indicated their desire to join their people in Israel. The Soviet authorities, however, in flagrant violation of the Helsinki Final Act and many other international obligations assumed by the Soviet Government, refuse them permission to leave.
Many of those Jews who have been denied permission to leave are forced to live as outcasts from Soviet society, subject to all manner of official harassment and persecution, while being effectively deprived of the means of legal redress. Increasing numbers have been engulfed in recent months in an accelerating wave of arrests, trials and savage sentences of imprisonment on trumped-up criminal charges. Jews seeking to disseminate knowledge of the Hebrew language have been prominent among these recent victims of judicial repression. These Jews are in no way violating Soviet law, nor are they involved in any form of anti-Soviet activity. Their real crimes, in the eyes of the authorities, are their persistent demand to leave for Israel and their efforts, in the face of strenuous official opposition, to perpetuate their Jewish heritage, culture and religion.
All of these outrages are taking place against the background of a relentless campaign of anti-semitic incitement, usually camouflaged as anti-zionism, in the officially controlled media - a campaign designed by the authorities to encourage an attitude of suspicion, hatred and contempt towards Soviet Jews on the part of the Soviet population.
We call upon all persons of goodwill and all Governments in the civilized world to join us in our protests and in urging the Soviet authorities to conform their policies towards Soviet Jewry to the international obligations solemnly undertaken by the Soviet Government.
Israel seeks good relations with all States including, naturally, the Soviet Union. We have looked to the new Soviet leadership for signs of change in its attitude towards Soviet Jewry. Regrettably, so far we have seen no positive changes whatsoever. .We therefore have no choice but to continue to expose energetically and protest vigorously these flagrant violations of the rights of our fellow Jews seeking to join their people in Israel. He shall continue to do so untiA every Soviet Jew who so wishes is free to exercise this basic right.
There is also the problem of the Jews of Syria, who are subjected by the Syrian regime to discrimination and restrictive policies and are not free to choose to live wherever they wish. This is a flagrant violation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, of which Syria is a signatory. Jews who wish to travel abroad must leave their families behind as living hostages to ensure the travelers return.
Several hundred young Jewish women remain unmarried because of the depleted male Jewish population in Syria. The Syrian Government has cruelly refused to allow those women to leave the country in order to be able to marry within their faith and establish families.
tJe are also concerned about the small, ancient Jewish community left in Ethiopia, because of its isolation and suffering and the latest disasters that have befallen that country. Some of these Jews have already returned to their historic homeland and have been received as long-lost brothers and sisters who have finally returned home.
The people of Israel and its Government have expressed their solidarity with the Ethiopian people, which has undergone much suffering as a result of the recent famine and other difficulties. We appeal to the Ethiopian Government to respect the cultural and religious rights of the Jewish community and to enable it to continue to maintain its heritage and religion and, on humanitarian grounds, to permit those among them who so desire to be reunited with their families in Israel.
The fortieth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations may be a fitting occasion for a review and reappraisal of its activities, in frank and constructive self-criticism.
The United Nations should not merely celebrate its past but also plan for its future.
Some may feel disheartened by the fact that, after so many years of United Nations preoccupation with the problems of the developing countries, we still remain so distant from the goal of bridging the gap between the poor and the rich nations of the world. Poverty, hunger, malnutrition and disease still characterize the conditions of life in many parts of the world.
One inescapable conclusion is that progress has too often been hampered by a tendency to substitute slogans for serious plans of action. Meeting the world's pressing economic and social problems will require new dimensions of international co-operation. The danger of famine continues to afflict developing countries. There is dire need for urgent action by the world community. The peoples of Africa are struggling to free themselves from the curses of poverty and hunger, and the rest of the world must help them in this struggle.
The vital element of developing traditional agriculture has been sorely neglected. Israel is now preparing an aid proposal for more efficient food delivery systems that would provide better nutrition and would link such aid with land and water development programs.
The success of integrated rural development has been proved in Israel's own rapid agricultural development. Israel has much experience in the proper use of soil and water, marketing organization, agro-industrial systems appropriate for developing countries, and the integration of populations and development projects. He are ready to share our know-how in these fields with other developing countries. The benefits of this experience can contribute to raising living standards in many societies.	4
Israel has presented to international organizations, both within and outside the United Nations, a development proposal entitled "Transitional Economy". It seeks to break the vicious circle of poverty by improving the productivity and quality of life in developing countries. The proposed program seeks to combine a comprehensive development process with decentralized planning and implementation.
In the 26 years of Israel's involvement in international development efforts, Israel has co-operated with more than 100 countries and trained over 50,000 men and women in agriculture, in rural development and in health and education. During Israel's development it encountered some of the same problems that are now facing African countries and has successfully overcome them.
The United Nations may recapture some of its prestige and authority if it gives priority to these pressing social and economic issues. The magnitude of the tasks before us will require unprecedented international co-operation.
Unfortunately, the United Nations record is not very encouraging. At its last session the General Assembly had 143 items on its agenda. It passed no less than 38 resolutions relating to the Middle East, out of which 37 were negative, even hostile, in their reference to Israel. Such resolutions have long ceased to attract any attention or carry any weight. Yet the General Assembly did not see fit to address itself to such danger-spots as the Iraq-Iran war and Afghanistan, or to many of the socio-economic problems which plague our society.
Let us put aside the political differences that beset our world and join forces in an effort to find solutions for the ordinary man, woman and child, who are too often ignored in the heat of political debate. Let us work together in the spirit of the ancient prophets who gave to the world the concept of the brotherhood of man, a concept which has been the basis for the great ideals of mankind.
In the present age of unprecedented opportunities, Israel calls upon all Governments, international agencies and non-governmental organizations to rise to the challenge offered by science and technology. Let us share the fruits of scientific and technological advances to improve our lives. Let us build a moral and prosperous future to achieve justice and dignity for all. Let the United Nations become, truly, a "United Nations for a better world".
I must begin by expressing the profound regret of the New Zealand people at the terrible earthquakes in Mexico. Our thoughts are with the people of Mexico. New Zealand is a country which is subject to earthquakes - we know the devastation they can cause.
It is a privilege and a pleasure for me to address the Assembly over which Ambassador de Pinies presides. I first came to the United Nations as a student intern in the 1960s. By then Ambassador de Pinies had already been a prominent figure here for some years. It is entirely appropriate that he should now have been elected to the Assembly's highest office. I offer him my congratulations, and the full support of my delegation for his efforts to make this fortieth session a fruitful and memorable one.
As we celebrate this fortieth anniversary of the United Nations, the thoughts of all of us must turn to reflect on the aspirations and objectives that were pursued with such energy and confidence when the Charter of this Organization was drawn up. For a New Zealand representative it is natural to remember with pride that our Prime Minister of the day, the Right Honorable Peter Fraser, contributed to this original process with statesmanlike vigor. Today especially I wish to recall and pay homage to the leading role he played in seeking to assert the rights of small countries to the maximum possible protection under the Charter against the vicissitudes of international life and in the aftermath of two World Wars.
Now, forty years on, this is no less cogent a problem. My Government, by irony of fate, finds itself at this rostrum again concerned to see maintained, in difficult circumstances, the sovereign rights of a small state against the increasingly complex and sophisticated pressures that are generated from larger
countries within the international community.
It continues to be ray Government's apprehension that, forty years on, the atomic weapon has kept its malign pace along with the existence of the United Nations. No less than in 1945, the horrific atomic shadow still falls across all
our proceedings.
In saying that, I am not expressing a platitude. My point is that the continued development of this weapon over the lifetime of our organization has in fact succeeded in distorting the fabric of international life. In our own experience it conditions the sovereign freedoms we had thought in 1945 were once and for all assured to us. At the very least as policies of power are pursued it has impinged on standards or international morality and behavior.

In such a political climate, it is natural that smaller countries may turn to the possibilities of collective self-help that the Charter of the United Nations encourages. It is indeed to the advantage of the United Nations that each country contributes the perspective of that part of the world in which it finds itself -the South Pacific - there has over recent years been a growing perception that great Power rivalries could start to extend to our region. The fact is, however, that the strategic circumstances of the South Pacific are not those of the northern hemisphere; nor has the South Pacific so far been an area of great-Power confrontation. It need never be; and our own security is best served by keeping it so.
Against that background the countries in the region have acted. We have set in being the best practical measure of agreed arms control available to us to guard against the emplacement of nuclear weapons in our midst. As was announced earlier this year, the South Pacific Forum countries endorsed and opened for signature on 6 August, the anniversary of Hiroshima Day, a treaty establishing the world's second nuclear-weapon-free zone in a permanently inhabited area. This South Pacific nuclear free zone Treaty signals in no uncertain terms the deeply anti-nuclear sentiments of our peoples, and their desire to live in peace and independence and to run their own affairs in accordance with their own wishes.
It is basic to their peace of mind that there should be no use, testing or stationing of nuclear explosives in the South Pacific, and that the activities of the South Pacific countries themselves should fully respect and fulfill the aims of such applicable international measures as the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
To these ends, all parties to the South Pacific nuclear free zone Treaty undertake not to possess, manufacture or acquire nuclear explosive devices anywhere, nor allow them to be stationed on their territory. They also undertake to prevent the diversion of fissionable material to non-peaceful purposes, and not to dump radioactive waste at sea in the zone.
Under the Treaty, South Pacific countries retain their unqualified sovereign rights to decide for themselves, consistently with their support for these objectives, their security rights, and such questions as the access to their ports and airfields by vessels and aircraft of their countries. The Treaty is not, therefore, some sort of disguised attempt to undermine existing military alliances. It is a determined effort to ensure that the South Pacific is not riven by the tensions which have overshadowed so many other parts of the world.
To the South, the Zone borders the area of another and much older agreement -the Antarctic Treaty. We value that Treaty not just because of the nuclear-free and demilitarized zone it establishes for Antarctica but because for 25 years it has effectively guaranteed the stability of the region to the South of New Zealand. It remains the only possible guarantee that that region will continue to remain free from international rivalry and conflict.
To the East, the new zone borders the area covered by the Treaty of Tlatelolco. The joining of the areas covered by that Treaty and the Antarctic Treaty with the vast area covered by the new Treaty means that a large part of the Southern hemisphere has declared its determination to be free of nuclear weapons. As my own Prime Minister said last year to this General Assembly:
"This initiative represents, I believe, a major advance for the region. It would not, we know, spare us from the consequences of nuclear war but, when in place, it would significantly strengthen the existing measures, both global and regional, to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons." (A/39/PV.7, p. 11) Now in 1985, with the Treaty concluded and awaiting in due course its entry into force, we see it as a fitting contribution to this anniversary of the United Nations that we are celebrating.
I should add that the South Pacific Forum countries hope that the five nuclear States will, after consultation with them, sign the relevant Protocols to this Treaty. Thereby they would agree not to use, or threaten to use, nuclear explosive devices against any country or territory in the zone. They would also undertake not to test nuclear explosive devices there.
In this anniversary year of the United Nations, it is painful to have to point out once again that one of the nuclear-weapon states continues to test nuclear explosives in the South Pacific, against the manifest and long-established wish of all the countries in the area that this activity should cease.
These nuclear testing activities have this year led to a new turn of events in the region which, because of its gravity, I am bound to bring to your attention.
Politically motivated offenses and terrorism have been virtually unknown in New Zealand in the past. But the scene has changed as a result of the incident in July 1985 in which the Greenpeace vessel "Rainbow Warrior" was sunk at its berth in Auckland, New Zealand, by a bomb attack which killed a crew member. The circumstances indicated international terrorism. It was well known that the vessel was intended to sail to French Polynesia to protest against the continuation of nuclear explosions at Mururoa Atoll. The incident has gained world-wide attention, and the New Zealand Government has made known its determination to bring those responsible to full account for this outrage. Large scale investigations by the New Zealand police are still under way. Within New Zealand, two French nationals have been arrested and charged with murder, arson and conspiracy, and are due to come before the court in New Zealand in November this year.
I shall not expand upon this notorious incident in detail, except to note that the latest public pronouncement by the Prime Minister of France, after the French Government's own most recent investigations, has acknowledged that agents of the French secret services did indeed sink the "Rainbow Warrior", acting under orders to that effect. It had earlier been established that, for the purpose of surveillance of the Greenpeace fleet, elements of French military forces had been deliberately introduced into New Zealand, under orders from their Government, without the permission of the Government of New Zealand and in derogation of our sovereignty.
Small States must place reliance on international law and we must rely on the protection which the international community, through the United Nations, can give us in circumstances of this serious nature.
Inquiries into the "Rainbow warrior" incident are still being pursued, and the Government of New Zealand is concerned that a traditionally good and highly valued relationship with the Government of France should continue. I am bound to note that the New Zealand Government addressed on 6 September 1985 a formal communication to the Government of France.
In that message New Zealand has reserved its legal position and its rights of action under international law, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, with respect to matters arising from this unfortunate incident. That is a clear enunciation of our position in relation to an issue which is shown to implicate the responsibility of the French Government.
It is certainly my Government's hope that the most recent statement by the French Prime Minister will provide a basis for resolving outstanding questions . between the two Governments arising out of the affair. And I am very pleased to report to the Assembly today that only last evening I met with the French Minister for Foreign Relations, Mr. Dumas, at the New Zealand Mission to the United Nations. He began to discuss possible ways to find solutions to problems arising from the Rainbow Warrior incident, and we have agreed to have another meeting within the next few days.
By virtue of their vulnerability, smaller States have often felt that they must take additional steps to preserve their Charter rights. In the years following the Second World War, a number of countries, including New Zealand, moved, consistently with the Charter, into defensive treaty alliances. This has not meant, however, that countries such as New Zealand have forsaken their right to think for themselves or have abandoned significant sovereign rights. That was not intended.
New Zealand, for example, as a party to the Non-Proliferation Treaty, has forgone the possession of nuclear weapons. We have also declared unambiguously that we do not want any country to defend New Zealand with nuclear weapons. In short, my Government does not seek to be part of any calculation that involves the accumulation of nuclear weapons. We will not have any nuclear weapons on our territory. We will not allow any to be brought in. And ships that are nuclear armed will not come into New Zealand ports.
As will be clear from what I have already said in relation to the South Pacific nuclear-free-zone Treaty, we have taken our own stand on principle, because in the South Pacific there is no need for a build-up of nuclear armaments - indeed, the reverse is true.
The stand we have taken is fully consistent with New Zealand's active membership of the Western community. We see our participation in that community, our partnership with our friends and neighbors in the South Pacific and our support for this world Organization as cumulatively strengthening the fabric of peace in our part of the world.
In practical terms, the effect of the re-evaluation of our interests that we have undertaken will be a new concentration of New Zealand's efforts on our immediate neighborhood. This will involve an expansion of New Zealand's political, economic and defense activities in the South Pacific region and the assertion of an increasingly active role there. This new and strengthened regional approach should provide the basis for a continued, sound and stable relationship with Australia and the United States based on a clear definition of New Zealand's interests and a policy of self-reliance.
Events of recent years lead one to ponder whether the reiteration of the ideals of our Charter over the past 40 years has not bred a measure of easy familiarity, even of complacency, against which we should be very much on our guard in the period ahead. Even those States which themselves generated the great national revolutions - revolutions which inspired the League of Nations and our Charter - have only imperfectly acknowledged in practice the full implications of the existence of newly independent States and the democratic rights those States are perfectly entitled to see maintained and protected.
I hope that our ocean region will not be vulnerable in that respect. It certainly need not be, and it is already organized in regional ways to assert its own distinctive voice internationally*
Here, the United Nations can take its due credit in helping a tide of decolonization which has changed the political map of the Pacific dramatically. In 1945 no island country was independent; in 1985 12 are. United Nations stewardship has often been instrumental in the peaceful achievement of self-determination. The Charter, as well as the 1960 Declaration on decolonization, provided the guiding beacons for the navigators who plotted the course towards independence, and the Special Committee of 24 has monitored progress. It still continues to do so, and New Zealand will be happy to receive next year a Visiting Mission from the Committee to the last remaining overseas responsibility which New Zealand has - the island community of Tokelau.
Decolonization in the South Pacific is not yet complete. In Micronesia to the north, lengthy negotiations per many years with the United States have produced Compacts of Free Association which have the support of the relevant peoples of the Trust Territory. We do not believe that unilateral changes should be made now to the agreed definition of the future relationship between the United States and the Marshall Islands and the Federated States of Micronesia. We will, however, look for and support an early termination of the Trusteeship Agreement in respect of those parts of the Trust Territory, in accordance with the expressed wishes of the peoples. We look forward to welcoming the Federated States of Micronesia, the Marshall Islands and Palau into membership of the South Pacific Forum before too long.
Further south, the region watches anxiously the difficulties faced by the people of New Caledonia in building a consensus for independence in that country. The rights and aspirations of the indigenous Kanak people must be met in the context of New Caledonia's multiracial society. We regret the violence and loss of life which have occurred over the past year. New Zealand supports the present plan for the establishment of regional councils and a congress, leading to a referendum on self-determination before the end of 1987. We welcome the recognition by the administering Power, France, that independence is the logical outcome of this process. It will be important to ensure that the steps outlined are adhered to. The Kanaks have been disappointed too often in the past. Only by following a predictable and short pathway to independence can further disruption and violence be avoided.
I have already noted that political emancipation and the assertion of a say in their own destiny have led the South Pacific countries to early recognition of the desirability of co-operation with each other. Political independence in the Pacific, as elsewhere, is not automatically accompanied by economic self-determination, but acting together has strengthened the voice of the region in international forums. And it can assist in tackling some of the intractable problems arising from smallness, isolation and a scarcity of resources. The island States depend heavily on external assistance. The international price of copra and sugar has a profound affect on people's daily lives. Some significant regional efforts have been made under the auspices of the South Pacific Forum to improve trade access, shipping, telecommunications and the knowledge and control of marine mineral and fishing resources.
Distant water fishing nations have been less respectful of the region's main resource in the past. This situation is improving, largely as a result of the evasiveness of the Pacific Forum nations, and important multilateral negotiations with the Government of the United States on a treaty regulating fishing are currently under way. A successful conclusion will make possible control of purse seiner activity within the 200-mile economic zones of Pacific signatories, and eliminate an area of serious friction. New Zealand looks to the United Nations and other international bodies to continue to help is overcoming the problems of economic security for the very small island States, in support of the region's own efforts to do so.
One issue on which the countries of the South Pacific are united is that of racial discrimination. We all have multiracial societies; we are all committed to making racial harmony the foundation for our nation-building. It follows that we are all totally opposed to the systematic racial discrimination that is practiced in South Africa under the name of apartheid. Since my Government came to office last year we have demonstrated our commitment to that cause: the South Africans have closed their consulate in Wellington, and a proposed rugby tour of South Africa has been canceled. All New Zealanders are appalled the rising tide of violence that is threatening to engulf South Africa. The South African Government must be persuaded to institute the necessary reforms before it is too late. It must be brought to realize that it cannot maintain apartheid by force. It must talk unconditionally to the leaders of the black majority. It must accept that racial partnership offers the only hope for the future of that tormented country. All of us must do whatever we can in a concerted way to produce this result. New Zealand's contacts with South Africa, whether economic or otherwise, are now minimal. I need hardly say that we shall readily comply with any additional sanctions imposed by the international community;
I have focused on practical issues of importance to our Pacific neighborhood - because it is in workable solutions to those issues that the elements lie for continued stable and peaceful development in the South Pacific. He are aware of the larger dimensions to all these problems, and notably of the tensions that impede the prospect of achieving genuine disarmament in our time.
Implicit in what I said earlier is that my part of the world is by no means impressed either with the speed of the global disarmament process or with the failure of the nuclear Powers to read an agreement on limiting their nuclear arsenals.
In the General Assembly last year my Government gave expression to the conviction amongst New Zealanders, as amongst peoples everywhere, that nuclear weapons expose to annihilation those whom they purport to protect; that each new development in nuclear weaponry opens up a more alarming and a potentially more destabilizing prospect than the last. There are already more than enough nuclear weapons to destroy us all many times over. Yet the number goes on increasing. The dilemma is recognized universally. TO control the spread of nuclear weapons and eventually to eliminate them completely are goals of the greatest importance. Where those who have them and those who do not seem to differ is in the sense of urgency. And it is to the United Nations that smaller countries such as my own must look to express that agonizing conviction, which has so recently been voiced by the vast majority of countries assembled at the Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference just concluded in Geneva. 
A year age the Soviet Union agreed to take up the offer of the United States to resume bilateral arias control negotiations, with the goal of leading to the complete elimination of nuclear weapons everywhere. My Government greatly welcomed that move. The issues are complex. We know only too well that there will be no easy or necessarily quick solutions. But solutions are not beyond the skills of negotiation if the political will is there. New Zealand calls on the negotiating parties to pursue their task with good faith and the utmost urgency. The time is past for picking around the edges of the agenda or for diversionary proposals -time-bound and shrouded in propaganda.
We would view with the deepest concern any prospect of competition between the major Powers extending into yet another environment - outer space. But we do not accept that there can be no progress in the talks on strategic weapons and intermediate-range nuclear forces as long as there is no agreement on outer space. The talks must not be held hostage in this way.
Much hangs on the meeting that will take place shortly between President Reagan and General-Secretary Gorbachev. We most earnestly hope for a successful outcome. We do not for a moment underestimate the complexities of the issues the two leaders must deal with. But we urge them to set a framework for a new co-operation from which the negotiations in Geneva may derive the momentum they need to reach agreements to stop the arms race.
At the same time, the efforts of the international community towards meaningful international arms control agreements must continue. The Conference on Disarmament addresses many important issues. No task is more difficult than to forge reliable instruments of international law. But progress in the Conference on Disarmament is, at best, haltingly slow. We urge it to get on with its tasks with commitment and determination.
This Assembly considers many disarmament and arms control proposals in the course of its deliberations. Many of these recommend what is practical and achievable. Some are symptomatic only of an ideological divide.
One of the most serious proposals before the Assembly will again be the draft resolution, jointly sponsored by New Zealand end Australia, urging the conclusion of a comprehensive test ban. A comprehensive test ban, banning all testing in all environments permanently, is regarded by virtually all States as the most immediate and practical step that can be taken to halt and then reverse the arms race. Balanced, practical, verifiable, it will be a major restraint on the spread of nuclear weapons. It will straitjacket the development of new types of weapons without undermining existing strategic balances. It will inhibit compulsive competitiveness among the nuclear Powers.
On two occasions, in the early sixties and in the late seventies, agreement was almost achieved on a comprehensive test ban. We have been disappointed by the setbacks which have prevented such a prohibition from being put in place. My delegation will again seek the means to encourage and speed up this work.
We are celebrating the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations. Time has not produced universal contentment with this Organization. Some of the criticisms which have been made arise from exaggerated and unrealistic expectations. As the Secretary-General reminds us in his latest annual report, the United Nations is not a super-State. It cannot do more than its Members will allow it to do. The policies of Member States have so far prevented the Organization from exercising some of the powers given it by the Charter. They have also prevented it from achieving some of its fundamental purposes. Those are facts.
It is also a fact that the Charter remains the only universally accepted basis of international order. The principles it enshrines are generally recognized today, as they were 40 years ago, to be essential for world peaces and those principles are the foundations of the international regime under which we all live - a regime which, with all its failings, gives individual countries and peoples more freedom than they have ever had before. The United Nations is today the beacon of hope for all small nations. It is their democratic voice by which they can express their fears and their aspirations.
The essential function of this Organization is to uphold the principles of the Charter. First in importance is the principle that "all Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force". Living, as we do, under the threat of nuclear annihilation, we have as strong a common interest as ever in supporting the United Nations and helping to achieve this, its most elusive, but its moat vital, objective.
Sir, permit me first of all to congratulate you upon your election to the high post of President of the united Nations General Assembly for the fortieth session and to wish you success in your work.
I should like to address the delegation of Mexico, whose country has suffered such a terrible natural disaster, entailing heavy loss of life and tremendous destruction, On behalf of the Soviet leadership and on behalf of all the Soviet people, we should like once again to convey to the Government and people of Mexico our most profound condolences.
Four decades have gone by since the victory of the freedom-loving peoples over German fascism and Japanese militarism. The United Nations, whose birth was the natural result of that great victory and whose work has represented the world's major hope for preventing new wars, has now been in existence for 40 years.
Today it can be stated with great satisfaction that those have been 40 years without a world war. In that period truly gigantic changes have taken place in the world. These changes include the establishment and development of the world socialist system - a system of States whose very political and social nature excludes the possibility of any interest in war. All the practical activities of the countries of the socialist community in the international arena are based on the policy of the peaceful coexistence of States with different social systems. The role of socialism in world affairs has been steadily increasing.
Over an extremely short historical span of time the hurricane of the peoples' liberation struggle has destroyed and eliminated from the face of the earth the colonial system of imperialism. Over 100 new States have emerged from its ruins. Today they are full-fledged Members of the United Nations.
The forces that are at work to strengthen peace and prevent war are constantly growing. At present their struggle involves people of all continents, of all generations and occupations, and with the most diverse political beliefs.
The past 40 years have been a period of rapid progress in the scientific and technological revolution, which is not only drastically changing our concepts of the structure of the universe and of matter itself but is also creating ever broader opportunities for meeting the spiritual and material needs of every individual and of all mankind. Even today the achievements of science, if they are used for constructive purposes, make it possible to resolve almost any economic problem. However, they can also generate unprecedented dangers whenever they are used for developing means of annihilation and destruction.
In the complex and rapidly changing world of today, which is the scene of a continuing struggle between the forces of progress and the forces of reaction, between the forces of the future and those of the past, the development of relations among States, including the major Powers possessing the greatest military potential, has followed s changing and at times zigzag course. Aggravations of international tension have alternated with periods when that tension abated; international crises have sprung up and have been overcome, some of them being so acute as to bring mankind to the verge of catastrophe. It would be fair to say that many a time when the international barometer has forecast a storm the United Nations has raised its voice in warning and has been able to take practical steps to reduce the threat.
The greatest hopes for stable peace emerged in the 1970 s, which went down in history as the decade of detente. Detente was based on the general recognition that it was inadmissible in the nuclear age to seek to attain political and ideological goals by means of war and that the policy of achieving the military superiority of some states over others or of one social system over another was wrong and dangerous.
The countries of the socialist community and many other States have every right to take pride in having been the architects and engineers of detente. Yet in the late 1970s and early 1980s the world once again witnessed a stepping up of the activities of the forces which never supported the policy of detente and are now seeking to undo its most important accomplishments. As a result, much of the system of international relations is out of joint and the risk of war has sharply increased.
My delegation wishes to set forth the views of the soviet Union regarding the reasons for the current unfavorable development of the situation in the world and ways of remedying the existing state of affairs. It can be remedied only if there is an understanding, as has been pointed out by Mikhail S. Gorbachev, of the "realities and the dangers which we will inevitably face tomorrow if today those who can and must take the only correct decision evade the responsibility incumbent on them".
We perceive the greatest peril in the fact that the nuclear arms race has, at it were, made a fresh start and is forging ahead. Added to this there is the threat of the arms race spreading to outer space. There is a great possibility of the arms race acquiring an uncontrollable and irreversible character. In the final analysis, this is the road leading to a nuclear catastrophe.
It is also alarming that of late it has not been possible to settle a single regional conflict or to eliminate .a single hotbed of military tension. In the meantime the flames of "local" wars, more often than not undeclared, have been responsible for the deaths of tens of thousands, and indeed hundreds of thousands. Mankind is suffering through being denied the opportunity to deal with such urgent problems as those relating to food, ecology, energy, population and the constantly widening economic gap between the developed and the developing countries. It has been denied that opportunity because the intellectual and material resources needed to find a radical solution to these problems common to all mankind are being squandered on the arms race.
Not a single twist in the arms race spiral was initiated by the Soviet Union. It is only in response to actions of the other side and out of legitimate concern for our own security and that of our allies and friends, concern for international security as a whole, that we have developed or are developing this or that weapon system.
Moreover, as early as 1946, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics proposed that nuclear weapons should be banned for all time. We have been advocating this ever since, and this remains our position now. we have been proposing and continue to propose that agreement should be reached on renouncing all weapons of mass destruction, reducing and totally eliminating their existing stockpiles, and cutting down armed forces and conventional armaments. Our country has come out with a proposed on general and complete disarmament under strict international control.
These radical proposals have yet to be implemented, and it is the United States and some other NATO countries, rather than the soviet union, that are to blame for this fact.
It is precisely because of their refusal to follow the example of the Soviet Union and the People's Republic of China, which has also unilaterally pledged not to be the first to use nuclear weapons, that the threat of nuclear war continues to hang over the world.
None the less, due to the vigorous efforts of the Soviet Union and other peace-loving States a number of treaties and agreements limiting the arms race in major areas have been concluded. These are the 1963 Moscow Treaty Banning Nuclear-Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under water, the 1968 Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear weapons, the Treaty on the Limitation of Anti-Ballistic Missile Systems and the SALT I Agreement, signed in 1972, and the 1979 SALT II treaty. All these treaties, which have served in large measure to reinforce strategic stability, became possible because political realism was also displayed by the then leaders of the united States and other western countries.
It is not the fault of the Soviet Union that local conflicts break out and are raging in various regions of the world. The only thing that we could be "guilty" of is that we have invariably been and remain on the side of the peoples threatened by imperialism and of the States upon whose sovereignty and generally recognized rights imperialism is encroaching.
As regards the increasingly acute economic problems common to all mankind, the Soviet Union has consistently been in favor of uniting the efforts of all States and peoples with a view to finding a rational solution to those problems. This is the thrust of the proposals made by our country, by all Warsaw Treaty member countries, for a drastic reduction in the military expenditures of States, and above all of the major Powers.
These are all facts, which cannot be disputed.
Responsibility for the current critical state of international relations rests with another group of countries, namely, the United States and some of its closest allies.
It was they who, in the early 1980s, wrecked the structure of negotiations which had taken such an effort to build, negotiations which had shown signs of progress towards agreements in many areas ranging from complete and general prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests to the limitation of sales and supplies of conventional armaments, from banning the development of anti-satellite systems to limiting military activities in the Indian Ocean. It was the united States that refused to ratify the SALT II treaty designed to pave the way to further, ever more substantial cuts in strategic arms. It was the United States that in 1983 torpedoed the Soviet-United States talks on the limitation of nuclear arms in Europe by embarking on the deployment of its new nuclear missiles on the European continent.
And the new military programs which now cover not only the land, oceans and atmosphere of our planet but also outer space are United States programs too.
No particular perspicacity is needed to see clearly that precisely those States that are obstructing disarmament efforts are also set on fomenting local conflicts. They bear responsibility for the failure thus far to come to grips with problems common to all mankind.
All of this is being said not for the sake of polemics but in order that the United Nations may, on the basis of real facts and through concerted efforts, devise effective ways of radically improving international relations and strengthening universal security.
What are these ways as we see them?
It is said at times that all that is needed is that the two super-Powers should stop competing with each other for influence in the world. This proposition stems either from ignorance or from malicious intent. First, the Soviet Union has no intention of placing itself above other States and peoples, nor is it seeking opportunities to order them about or dictate its will to them. Secondly, the Soviet Union is not involved in any competition whatsoever, whether for markets, natural resources, control over sea or air routes, or the possession of outer space.
On the other hand, it is of course true that the Soviet Union is one of the world's two most powerful nations. But the whole point is what political aims are served by that Power. Those who invoke the concept of the "two super-Powers" would ' be well advised to ponder once in a while what would happen to their independence and what turn world developments would generally take if the USSR were weaker than it is and if the Soviet people were not investing so such of their effort, material resources and scientific endeavor in maintaining its economic and military potential at an adequate level.
In discussions about the ways of improving the situation frequent mention is also made of the need to restore, above all, confidence among States. This, it is said, would make it possible to resolve all major problems, including those of halting the arms race and settling regional conflicts. Indeed, confidence is an important factor in overcoming the current difficulties. We feel, however, that it is impossible to achieve a necessary and reliable degree of trust in relations among States unless the causes and the material roots of distrust are removed.
But work to restore confidence must be pursued, and that is what we are doing. In particular, at the Stockholm Conference of states participating in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, the soviet union is working for the adoption of a complex of large-scale, effective political, military and technical confidence-building measures. At Stockholm we are now prepared to proceed immediately, together with our negotiating partners, to the actual drafting of agreements to that effect. Our country attaches major importance to the pan-European process as a whole.
The Soviet Union is building and developing its relations with all States in strict compliance with the Final Act and on the basis of the 10 principles proclaimed therein. It attaches special importance to the factor of confidence in those relations, and it is pleased when it sees that this factor is present in its relations with various countries in Europe, America, Asia, Africa or Oceania.
In our relations with other States we have always given priority to the search for ways of easing international tension and averting the danger of war. Of great importance in this context is the forthcoming visit of Mikhail Gorbachev to France.
We also want to build normal, stable relations with the United States. We have never been the initiators of confrontation between the Soviet Union and the United States. We do not believe that the tensions today in Soviet-American relations result from an inevitable clash of national interests. We therefore believe that both sides have an interest in the successful outcome of the forthcoming meeting between the leaders of the Soviet Union and the United States. This is precisely how the Soviet Union approaches that meeting. It remains to be seen what will be the attitude of the other side in this matter.
We are convinced that the Soviet-American summit meeting should focus on the most important problem of the day, the problem upon whose solution truly depends on the possibility of decisively reducing the danger of war, restoring international trust and creating the conditions necessary for resolving many other pressing issues in relations among States. The problem I am referring to is that of preventing an arms race in cuter space and ending the arms race on earth, limiting and reducing nuclear arms and enhancing strategic stability. I will address this question in somewhat greater detail.
To begin with, it would appear indisputable that as long as States possess nuclear weapons the risk of the outbreak of nuclear war cannot be completely ruled out. It is equally true, however, that in conditions of strategic equilibrium, that risk is comparatively lower, for strategic equilibrium means essentially that each side, even if it became a victim of nuclear aggression committed by the other side, would retain sufficient strategic capacity to strike an equally devastating blow to the aggressor. Consequently, in conditions of strategic equilibrium there could be no winner in a nuclear war and starting one would be tantamount to committing suicide.
Yet the situation might change if one side should try to acquire such a nuclear potential as would encourage it to think that by a single strike it could deprive the other side of adequate retaliatory capacity against aggression, particularly if the potential aggressor should develop a space-based anti-missile shield and count on it to protect itself against a retaliatory strike. It is obvious that in such case the aggressor might be tempted to deliver or threaten to deliver a first "disarming" nuclear strike - as it is now known - counting on its immunity to retaliation. Hence the extreme danger inherent in any bid for military superiority in a nuclear age. Yet this is precisely the purpose of the new United States military programs, work on which has already begun or is about to begin.
It could be argued that this is a purely hypothetical danger since the Soviet Union has repeatedly stated that it would not allow the other side to achieve superiority and would take appropriate counter-measures to restore the balance.
But would that mean that the problem of the danger of nuclear war would simply disappear?
It is true that our country would not permit military superiority over it. The State and Party leadership of the Soviet Union has instructed me to reaffirm this once again in this United Nations forum. Those who may expect that the Soviet economy would not be able to stand up to the strain of the qualitatively new stage in the arms race which is currently being forced upon us are profoundly mistaken. Our country and the Soviet economy have had to withstand even greater pressures. Today, the economic might of the Soviet State and its scientific and technological potential are such as to leave no doubt whatever in anyone's mind concerning the ability and determination of our people to meet that new challenge.
However, it should not be forgotten that the higher the level of military confrontation in this nuclear and space age, the more shaky and the less secure, even if strategic equilibrium is maintained, become the foundations of world peace. Nuclear war in these conditions could result not only from a deliberate decision but also from attempts at blackmail or from miscalculation by one side as to the intentions or actions of the other. It could also break out as a consequence of someone's reckless behavior prompted by a sudden aggravation of the situation or because of malfunctions of computers, which are being increasingly relied upon in the operation of modern, sophisticated weapons systems.
Such is our understanding of the current strategic and political realities. It is based on grim facts that cannot be ignored.
It is precisely for this reason that the Soviet Union has been so persistent in seeking not merely the maintenance but a lowering of the existing level of strategic equilibrium and the early adoption of effective measures to stop and reverse the arms race. We know - and many other States now realize this too - that there is no more time to waste, for it may turn out to be too late.

We have gathered in New York in the final days of the first month of autumn. It is a time associated in many countries with the harvest, when farmers look to the coming winter with a feeling of work well done. This thought brings to mind another metaphor which, regrettably, has already taken root in the vocabulary of mankind - the metaphor of the "nuclear winter", we want the word "winter" in all the languages of the world to retain its one and only meaning, its original meaning and to be identified solely with the season of the year which is so beautiful and joyful.
In an attempt to establish a favorable climate for the resumption of the process of arms limitation and reduction, and, ultimately, the complete elimination of nuclear weapons everywhere, the Soviet Union has recently taken some substantial steps on a unilateral - I stress "unilateral" - basis. These steps include the decision not to place anti-satellite weapons in outer space so long as the United States does not do so. Unfortunately, however, the united States, disregarding the interests of political and military stability, recently tested an anti-satellite weapon against a target in space. Those steps also include the suspension of further implementation of our counter-measures in Europe consequent upon the deployment of united States medium-range nuclear systems on the territories of some Western European countries. Finally, there is our moratorium on nuclear explosions.
It is clear that by their very nature such unilateral steps could not be taken as measures of unlimited duration; but they could be of unlimited duration if the United States followed our good example. That would constitute significant progress towards a relaxation of military tension in the world. If, however, the United States fails to heed the voice of reason, no one will be able to blame us when the unilateral moratoriums we have declared come to an end as their terms expire. It is not for us but for the United States to make the choice.
Notwithstanding the importance of such steps as moratoriums designed to curb the arms race, the peoples of the world have every right to demand that radical measures be taken to reduce and eventually eliminate nuclear - and not only nuclear - weapons.
From the very beginning of the Geneva negotiations on nuclear and space weapons our country has been determined to achieve a radical solution to these interrelated problems and has taken a constructive position. The Soviet delegation had brought to the current round of negotiations substantial, large-scale and far-reaching proposals, we believe that agreement to ban space-strike weapons and to bring about truly radical reductions in nuclear arms would today have the most positive effect. Such an agreement could bring about a turn for the better in the entire course of world events, avert the threat of nuclear catastrophe and open up for the peoples of the world the prospect of a world free from fear for tomorrow. Mankind would be moving towards the new millennium which is already almost with us, confident that civilization would continue to advance.
The Soviet Union has put forward proposals on the whole range of issues relating to the cessation of the arms race. I am not going to mention each of those proposals for all of them will, in one way or another, become the subject of an exchange of views at the General Assembly. Let me just say that they cover the nuclear field, including the cessation of nuclear tests, as well as chemical weapons, conventional weapons and the numerical strength of armed forces. In some cases it is a question of a freeze; in others of a reduction. The Soviet Union continues resolutely continues to support proposals to establish nuclear-weapon-free zones, chemical-weapon-free zones and zones of peace in various parts of the world. It favors a limitation of naval activities and naval armaments and resolutely opposes the development of any new weapons of mass destruction.
In the context of the proposed arms limitation and reduction measures, the Soviet Union believes it necessary to provide for adequate measures of verification and control, in some cases national, and in others national combined with international, whenever there is an objective necessity for this. We have as great an interest as anyone in effective verification of compliance by all States with their obligations in connection with disarmament measures. We call upon the States represented in the united Nations General Assembly, both members of politico-military alliances and non-aligned and neutral countries, to support this approach, which we are convinced is constructive and at the same time realistic.
I would now like to offer some ideas as to what might be done to eliminate, through our collective efforts, local wars and conflicts, which result in untold suffering and innumerable casualties.
Viewed in a purely United Nations context, the solution to this problem may seem simple. All that is needed is to compel all States to comply fully and scrupulously in their actions with their commitments under the United Nations Charter and equally firmly to deny support to those who violate those commitments.
For instance, it is hard to imagine that any delegation would venture to assert here that the monstrous crimes of the Israeli aggressors on the ravaged soil of Lebanon and in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip are consistent with the principles of the United Nations Charter or that the financing, arming, training and infiltrating into Nicaragua of thousands upon thousands of
counter-revolutionaries - contras, as they are called - are consistent with those principles.
Only chauvinistic arrogance could lead anyone to deny the Palestinian people their right to independent statehood while recognizing that right for the people of Israel. All peoples and nations have equal rights.
Who is unaware of the brutal record of the South African apartheid regime, which is executing hundreds of the country's indigenous inhabitants and jailing thousands of others? Who is unaware of the acts of aggression it is constantly committing against Angola - as we see today - as well as against Mozambique, Botswana and Lesotho? It would indeed be blasphemous even to think that this inhuman regime acts in accordance with the provisions of the United Nations Charter. But it is a fact that the Pretoria racists receive support, and that this support comes from a major Power that 40 years ago was among the founding Members of the United Nations.
Of course, expressing indignation at the crimes of the racists and condemning the aggressor does not in itself mean that those crimes will be eliminated. The peaceful settlement of any given conflict with full and just regard for the legitimate interests of all sides requires a political basis for a settlement which would not be prejudicial to those interests, as well as a negotiating mechanism appropriate to each specific conflict situation.
Such political platforms for the just settlement of all or nearly all existing regional conflicts have already been or are being formulated. Suitable negotiating mechanisms either already exist or can be established.
Let us now turn to the situation in the Middle Bast. The main parameters for solving the Middle Bast problem in a manner that would take into account the legitimate interests of all parties have long ago been defined. They include the return to the Arab States of all their territories occupied by Israel since 1967, the exercise of the right of the Arab people of Palestine to establish an independent State of their own and ensuring the right of all States in the Middle East, including Israel, to live in peace and security. A negotiating mechanism for such a settlement has long ago been proposed as well, namely, an international conference on the Middle East under the auspices of the United Nations with the participation of all the parties concerned, including the Palestine Liberation Organization, and a number of other countries, including the Soviet Union and the United States.
There may, however, be some people who think that the Middle East knot can be untied by separate deals, but experience has already shown that such actions can only result in aggravating the conflict instead of settling it. We believe that this year the Genial Assembly will take an even firmer stand in favor of an early and just political settlement in the Middle East, and will demand that those who continue to resist such a settlement should stop their sabotage.
I should like to recall, in this connection, that Israel ewes its very existence to a decision of this organization, a decision which also called for the establishment in Palestine of an Arab State. It was a dual decision. The Soviet Union actively supported precisely that decision and, incidentally, it was among the first to recognize the State of Israel.
In principle, a negotiating mechanism also exists for settling the situation in Central America which was indeed conceived by the Latin American countries themselves. I am referring to the Contadora group^ with which several more South American States, recently expressed solidarity. There is also a draft act of peace in Central America drawn up by the Contadora members. It is widely supported by the States and peoples of the region, including the Government and the people of Nicaragua, the country which is the target of the spearhead of imperialist aggression. It is important for the United Nations to support the efforts of the Contadora group and contribute to overcoming the resistance of those who, instead of peace, seek to restore their domination in Central America.
It is also possible to break the deadlock in the Cyprus problem provided that an end is put to interference by imperialist forces and that the recognition of the independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Republic of Cyprus is laid down as a firm basis.
I should like to make some specific comments about Afghanistan. A political settlement of the situation that has arisen around that country is also possible. What is necessary for this is that everyone should recognize the right of the Afghan people to build their life as they wish and that armed and other forms of outside interference in the internal affairs of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan should be ended. When such interference is ended, and if there is a guarantee that it will not be resumed, it will then become possible to withdraw from Afghanistan, by agreement with the Afghan Government- the Soviet military contingent. The sooner a political settlement is achieved, the better it will be for everyone.
The proposals of Viet Nam, Laos and Kampuchea provide a good political framework for building good-neighborly relations between all the States of South-East Asia, particularly between the countries of the Association of South-East Asian Nations and the States of IndoChina. The basis for such relations is gradually taking shape and the countries concerned are perfectly capable of establishing a negotiating mechanism. What is important is that no one should stand in the way of their wish to read agreement with each other.
We support the efforts of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea designed to bring about the peaceful reunification of Korea and the demand for the withdrawal from South Korea of all foreign troops as well as the proposal to make the Korean peninsula a nuclear-free zone.
The question of the situation in southern Africa is an urgent one today. What needs to be done here is for the Security Council finally and fully to exercise its authority with regard to the racist South African regime, which, in violation of the United Nations decisions on the subject, refuses to transfer power to the Namibian people and poses a threat to the security of African States and global security.
A quarter of a century has gone by since the United Nations adopted, on the initiative of the Soviet Union, a decision which has contributed substantially to changing the face of the world today, namely, the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. The work that was started then has now been almost completed - almost, but not entirely. There should be no room on our planet for the remaining fragments and hotbeds of colonialism. In this matter, too, the United Nations should speak out unequivocally and definitively. It is important that the newly free countries and peoples should be given assistance in ensuring their genuine political and economic independence.
The United Nations quite rightly can and should raise its voice against the exploitation of developing countries by imperialist Monopolies, against the plundering of their natural resources and the strangling of their economies with the noose of indebtedness. Cuba and some other States Members of the United Nations have proposed ways of solving the problem of financial indebtedness.
We support the demands of the newly free States for the establishment of a new international economic order on a just and democratic basis in accordance with earlier decisions of the United Nations and we also support their apposition to what is known as cultural and information neo-colonialism and all other forms of neo-colonialism.
It is inadmissible that the States of Asia, Africa and Latin America should be regarded as a sphere of someone's "vital" interests, as an arena for confrontation with socialism. Those States are the influential Non-Aligned Movement and actively support disarmament, detente and the peaceful settlement of conflicts, which has mice again been convincingly demonstrated at the recent Conference of Foreign Ministers of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Luanda.
The rights and freedoms of the individual are inextricably linked with the rights of peoples. The unique experience of our country eloquently testifies to this. Socialism has not only ensured that each and every citizen enjoys equal rights to work, housing, rest and pensions, has not only made it possible to obtain all kinds of education and medical services free of charge, but has also provided comprehensive guarantees of those rights. The standards of social justice were established in close co-ordination with the realization of the principles of self-determination of all nations and nationalities, including the preservation of their identity and the development of such national phenomena as language, literacy, literature and the arts.
Thanks to the advantages of the socialist system, the peoples of the Soviet Onion, oppressed in the past, backward and divided, now stand together, united and therefore strong, and have over a historically short span of time reached the most advanced frontiers of economic development and created a flourishing spiritual culture and attained the heights of human civilization.
We believe that this is the path that not only leads to economic and spiritual prosperity but also contributes to the building of trust between peoples and, on this basis, to bringing them closer together and concerting their efforts in order to attain the goals common to all mankind. That is how we understand the essence of the question of the rights and freedoms of the individual and peoples.
The United Nations, by virtue of its Charter, must play an important role in encouraging and developing respect for human rights throughout the world. This provision, which laid the groundwork for international co-operation in the field of human rights, was included in the United Nations Charter on the initiative of the Soviet Union. Forty years have gone by since that time but, regrettably, to this very day flagrant, massive violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms are taking place. This is an inherent characteristic of a society where the power and wealth of a minority exist at the expense of the majority of the population. Such violations have become a norm of life in those States whose leaders are trying so hard to depict themselves as champions of human rights.
I should like once again to draw members' attention to a problem, the solution to which will largely shape the world of our children, grandchildren and great grandchildren. I am referring to the problem of the peaceful exploration of outer space.
Until only recently, space was the realm of science fiction, but it has now become a theater of man's practical activities. The peaceful exploration of space holds out for mankind truly limitless prospects of utilizing scientific and technological achievements to promote the economic and social progress of the peoples of the world and to solve the tremendous problems facing mankind on Earth.
However, these truly cosmic dimensions - and here I am not speaking figuratively but literally - also present new requirements to the inhabitants of the Earth and above all to the leaders of States.
There should be no repetition of the mistake made four decades ago when states and the peoples of the world were unable to prevent the great intellectual achievement of the mid-twentieth century - the release of the energy of the atomic nucleus - from becoming a means of mass annihilation of human beings. This is a folly which should not be allowed to recur at the end of this century when mankind, having filled the first pages of its space history, is facing a choice: space will either help to improve the living conditions on our planet or it will become the source of a new and deadly danger.
In wishing to contribute to man's progress towards new heights of civilization, our country has taken a new initiative by proposing the inclusion in the agenda of this session of the General Assembly of an item entitled "International co-operation in the peaceful exploration of outer space in conditions of its non-militarization".
At the same time, the Soviet Union has submitted to the General Assembly specific proposals regarding the main directions, areas and principles of broad international co-operation in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes. Outer space is indivisible and all States should be able to take part in its peaceful exploration.
This means that progress should be made by joint efforts in both basic and applied areas of space exploration, so that all peoples can benefit from space research. It is our view that such co-operation could best be carried out within the framework of a world space organization. And this could become a reality provided that all channels for the militarizing of the boundless regions of outer space are blocked off.
To counter the sinister plans of "star wars", the Soviet Union is placing before the international community the concept of "star peace".
The Soviet union hopes that its proposals will be carefully examined by the General Assembly.
The Soviet delegation has set forth the views and proposals of the Soviet Union which we have found it necessary and timely to submit for the consideration of the United Nations. It is our hope that they will be regarded with understanding by all States represented in this Hall and by all the peoples which make up a united mankind.
Much useful work for the benefit of peace and international co-operation has been done by the United Nations over the past 40 years. However, the united Nations has still a great deal more to do since it appears that we are now altering upon a most crucial period in the history of mankind, when it will have to take a decision on this question of paramount importances whether to live in peace or perish in nuclear war.
In this regard, I should like to quote the following policy statement by Mikhail S. Gorbachev:
"Our goal as we see it is to resolve together - for no one is able to do it alone - the major problems which are essentially common to us all: how to prevent war, how to end the arms race and embark on disarmament, how to settle existing conflicts and crises and prevent potential ones, how to create a world climate that would allow every country to focus attention and concentrate resources on finding solutions to its own problems - show me a country that has no problems - and how to join efforts in resolving global problems."
Let me start by joining the President of Brazil in conveying to the people and Government of Mexico our deep sympathy over the devastation wrought by earthquakes and our solidarity with them as they work to recover and rebuild. We admire the way the Government and people of Mexico are dealing with their problem. For our part, we a?.9 responding rapidly to Mexico's request for assistance with medicine, blankets and equipment to help in removing rubble, searching for survivors and fighting fires. But these are Mexico's short-term needs. The long-range impact and cost of the earthquakes are still being determined, but one thing is clear - they will be enormous. Here, too, the United States is prepared to respond to Mexico's plight.

As I look at the devastation - and, perhaps, as you do on your television screens and you see the pictures, you cannot help but be struck by the thought that Mexico City in some ways looks war-torn. Of course, an earthquake is not a man-made event. When the earth shook in Mexico there was nothing anyone could do about it. But our task here at the United Nations is to see to it that man does not cause the earth to shake. So let us devote ourselves to the cause of peace and freedom.
Three years ago, when I addressed this body for the first time, I stressed the need for realism. There is probably no other quality so appropriate and necessary for this Organization. But realism does not mean cynicism, or even pessimism. It means a clear-sighted appreciation of the opportunities we face, as well as of the obvious problems. It means remembering the many challenges that the world community has overcome, and drawing lessons from that. It means understanding that idealism and the yearning for human betterment are themselves part of reality, and thus have enormous practical significance.
The founding fathers of the United Nations are sometimes accused of naive Utopianism. Supposedly they ignored the realities of power politics in attempting to create a global system of collective security. I doubt it. The men and women who set up this Organization 40 years ago were among the great statesmen of the century. They drafted the Charter as a set of standards for international conduct - knowing full well that the world's nations probably would fall short of those standards, but knowing also that the setting of high goals is a necessary precondition to their pursuit and attainment.
The lofty goals of the Charter have a concrete, practical meaning today. They not only point the way to a better world? they reflect some of the most powerful currents at work in the contemporary world. The striving for justice, freedom, progress and peace is an ever-present and powerful reality that is today, more than ever, impressing itself on international politics.
Our political thinking must catch up to this reality. The policies of nations must adapt to this basic human striving. This Organization, too, must adapt to reality; it cannot afford to consume itself in political warfare and unrealistic posturing. There is work to be done. Let us do it.
The world community faces enormous challenges in three areas: in satisfying mankind's yearning for democracy, freedom and justice; in preserving and perfecting global peace and stability; and in spreading economic prosperity and progress.
First, the guest for democracy and freedom. Since the end of the Second World War, modern communication has opened the eyes of most of the world's peoples to the realization that they do not have to live their lives in poverty and despair; that, on the contrary, the blessings of prosperity and liberty known in the past only by a relative few can be theirs as well. The ideals for which the war was fought, and the spread of democracy and of prosperity in the industrialized world since, created an explosion of expectations.
The result has been in recent years a revolution of democratic aspirations sweeping the world. At the time of the San Francisco Conference in 1945, most of the nations represented in this hall today were not independent States but possessions - colonies of European empires. The vast number of languages, cultures and traditions that I can now see before me testify to the revolution in the world order. The old empires eventually had to accept the post-war reality of self-determination and national independence.
Much of the conflict in the world today stems from the refusal of some governments to accept the reality that the aspirations of people for democracy and freedom simply cannot be suppressed for ever by force.
 In South Africa, these aspirations on the part of the bLack majority have as never before, drawn global attention and support. Change is inevitable. The issue is not whether apartheid is to be dismantled, but how and when. And then, what replaces it: race war, bloodbath, and new forms of injustice? Or political accommodation and racial coexistence in a just society? The outcome depends on whether and how quickly the South African Government can accept the new reality, and on whether men and women of peace on both sides can seize the opportunity before it is too late.

This such is clear; there must be negotiation among South Africans of all races on constitutional reform. True peace will come only when the Government negotiates with, rather than locks up, representative black leaders. The violence will end only when 311 parties begin a mutual search for a just system of government.
One area where the future has brightened in the past five years as the aspirations of the people to democracy have been met in country after country is Latin America - as President Sarney just said so eloquently. In contrast to only 30 per cent in 1979, today more than 90 per cent of the people of Latin America live under Governments that are either democratic or clearly on the road to democracy.
In Central America, El Salvador, under the courageous leadership of President Duarte, has shown that democracy can take root and thrive even in the most difficult terrain. Its citizens have braved extremist violence to participate overwhelmingly in four free elections since 1982. Their President's current personal ordeal only serves to underscore the sacrifices thousands of Salvadorians continue to make as they fight to realize the ideals of the United Nations Charter. For this commitment they should be applauded by all Members. Ironically, El Salvador is today the only democracy subject to the scrutiny of a special rapporteur for human rights.
Among El Salvador's neighbors, Costa Rica has long been the region's beacon of representative government; Honduras is about to replace one freely-elected government with another; and Guatemala is about to join them as a democratic nation with the election of a president in November. These developments should enhance regional co-operation for economic development, which the United States supports through our Caribbean Basin initiative and President Reagan's initiative for peace, development and democracy.

But regional peace in Central America is threatened by the rulers of Nicaragua and their Soviet and Cuban allies. Behind a cloak of democratic rhetoric, the Nicaraguan communists have betrayed the 1979 revolution and embarked upon a course of tyranny at home and subversion against their neighbors. Brave Nicaraguans are fighting to restore the hope for freedom in their country and the other nations of the region are working together in collective self-defense against Nicaraguan aggression.
How can this crisis be resolved? The Central American nations, together with their nearest neighbors, the members of the Contadora Group, have subscribed to a document of 21 objectives. These include non-interference in the affairs of one's neighbors, serious dialog with domestic opposition groups, free elections and democracy in each country, the removal of foreign military personnel and a reduction of armaments. My Government supports a verifiable treaty based on full and simultaneous implementation of the 21 objectives. We welcome the resumption of talks next month in Panama and hope they lead to a final agreement. Contadora is the best forum for pursuing a settlement.
In El Salvador, President Duarte, true to his pledge to the Assembly last year, has pursued a dialog with the guerrilla opposition. Would that the rulers of Nicaragua would make,- and honor, a similar pledge to the Assembly this year. In San Jose on 1 March of this year the Nicaraguan democratic resistance called for internal dialog, moderated by the Roman Catholic Church, to end the killing.
The people of the region are waiting for a positive answer from the rulers of Nicaragua. Can it be that, never having been chosen by their people in a truly free election, they lack the confidence to face opponents they cannot silence or lock up, as they have so many others? The united Nicaraguan opposition deserves to participate in Nicaraguan political life and has an important role to play in the diplomatic process. Regional peace will not come without it.
The reality of democratic revolution is also demonstrated by the rise of national liberation movements against communist colonialism: in Afghanistan, Cambodia, Angola and other lands where, as in Nicaragua, people have organized in resistance to tyranny. Unlike the old European empires that came to accept the post-war reality of self-determination and national independence, the new colonialists are swimming against the tide of history. They are doomed to fail.
In Afghanistan the almost six-year-old Soviet invasion has inflicted untold suffering on a people whose will to resist and to free themselves from a pitiless tyranny cannot be broken. Hundreds of thousands of Afghans are dead or maimed, millions more make up the largest refugee population in the world and countless villages, schools and farms lie in ruins. Nowhere in the world has the carnage wrought by Soviet imperialism been greater than in Afghanistan and nowhere has the resistance been more determined and courageous.
The withdrawal of Soviet forces, as the General Assembly has noted on six occasions, would lead to solution of the Afghanistan problem. A solution must also encompass restoration of the country's independence and non-aligned status, self-determination for the Afghan people and the return in safety and honor of the more than 3 million refugees, unless and until the Soviet Union permits such a solution the national liberation struggle in Afghanistan will continue, the world-wide effort to provide succor to a beleaguered people will go forward and Soviet protestations of peace on this and other issues will not ring true. My Government, together with others concerned, stands ready to implement a just solution to this problem.
Cambodia, as we all know, stands as one of the worst examples in history of a totalitarian ideology carried to its bloodiest extreme. Today, courageous freedom fighters under the leadership of Prince Norodom Sihanouk and Son Sann struggle to reclaim their country. He continue to support the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) program for a peaceful solution; Vietnamese forces must withdraw completely, and Cambodia's independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity must be restored under a Government chosen in free elections.
In other countries where the apparatus of repression is well developed, countless thousands of men and women wage private struggles for freedom, armed only with their consciences and their courage. Some suffer for their political convictions, others for their religious beliefs: solidarity trade unionists in Poland; Jews, Baptists, Roman Catholics, Pentecostalists and others in the Soviet Union; Baha is in Iran. With all the men and arms at their disposal, what are these Governments afraid of?
These brave and often nameless prisoners of conscience struggle to achieve for men and women in every corner of the world the promises of this Organization. He are with them, and we call on all States as Members of this body to honor their solemn commitments. As Thomas Jefferson once said,
"The opinions of men and women are not the rightful object of any Government, anywhere."
The quest for peace continue on many fronts. And for all the obstacles confronting it, there are examples of success - such as the treaty on Antarctica, which recently marked a quarter century of effective international co-operation. We can learn from problems overcome as we tackle the formidable problems ahead.
In the Middle Bast, 10 or 15 years ago, peace between Israel and any Arab State seemed a remote, if not impossible, dream. Finally, after untold suffering and four wars, a courageous leader, Anwar El-Sadat, abandoned the old ways of thinking and took the step no other Arab leader had been willing or prepared even to contemplate: he recognized that the State of Israel was here to stay and, with Prime Minister Begin, vowed there would be no more wars. Peace and normal relations were established, and the Sinai was returned.
The past year has seen major efforts toward new negotiations between Israel and its Arab neighbors. The United States is committed and engaged in support of those efforts, in accordance with President Reagan's initiative of three years ago. Yet the lesson of the past is clear: progress can be achieved only through direct negotiations, based on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). There is no other way, and evasion of this reality only prolongs suffering and heightens dangers. Nothing positive will ever be achieved by chasing illusions of so-called armed struggle; but much can be accomplished by parties who are committed to peace and engaged in serious dialog. The moment is at hand - this year - to make major progress and to begin direct negotiations.
To the east, we have the continuing failure of reason to prevail and end the devastating war between Iran and Iraq. Prolonged by Iran's refusal to come to terms with its inability to achieve victory, this war has now entered its fifth year, with no end in sight. We again call on both parties to negotiate an end to the fighting.

On the Korean peninsula we see the first tentative steps being taken to get away from the mode of thinking that has characterized the pa at years. A decade ago, there seemed little hope for a significant reduction of tension. Yet last year both Koreas began a multifaceted, direct dialog, which the United States supports as the key to a solution. While the animosities of a lifetime are not resolved quickly, a start has been made. We also believe that membership in the United Nations for both the Republic of Korea and North Korea, in accordance with the principle of universality, would help reduce tensions.
Perhaps the most dramatic problem that requires new ways of thinking is international State-sponsored terrorism. Terrorism is every bit as much a form of war against a nation's interests and values as a full-scale armed attack. And it is a weapon wielded particularly against innocent civilians, against free nations, against democracy, against moderation and against peaceful solutions. It is an affront to everything the United Nations stands for.
Progress has been made against the terrorist threat through co-operation in the United Nations system. Many nations subscribe to The Hague, Tokyo and Montreal Conventions to make air travel safer and to suppress hijacking and sabotage. Progress has also been made in providing protection for diplomats, and some nations have agreed on how to handle hostage situations. Just this month, participants at the Seventh United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, held at Milan, adopted a strong, broad-ranging resolution urging all States to adhere to these agreements and to strengthen international actions against terrorism.
Much more remains to be done. The United States and other nations, for example, are working with the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) to improve standards of security. Over this past year, so far 90 potential terrorist actions against United States facilities or citizens have been deterred or prevented. But the fight has only begun, and it cannot be won by one Government alone. The civilized world must put the terrorists and their supporters on notice: we will defend ourselves in any and every way we can.
The reality of the nuclear age has spelled the United States and the Soviet Union to engage in a dialog, of varying intensity, for the past 40 years. This dialog has been an unprecedented attempt by two rivals to manage their competition and avert war. We know that we share a responsibility for maintaining peace, not just for our peoples, but for all the earth's peoples.
Despite all the difficulties, let us remember what has been accomplished. After the two most destructive wars in history, the super-Powers, joined with others, have averted world war for four decades. We have had some success in limiting nuclear testing. Working together with other nations since the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in 1968, we have succeeded in restricting the proliferation of nuclear weapons. Twenty years ago it was conventional wisdom that there would be 15 to 25 nuclear-weapon States by today; yet the number of States acknowledged to possess nuclear weapons has held at five for the past 20 years. The United States remains committed to all the goals of the Treaty, whose Third Review Conference just concluded successfully in Geneva. And the United States and the Soviet Union have taken practical steps to avoid conflict. Our navies have long agreed to work together to prevent incidents at sea. And we have set up and improved the "hot line" for crisis communications.
In the nuclear and space arms talks in Geneva, the United States has advanced far-reaching proposals: a reduction by almost one-half in the most destabilizing weapons, strategic ballistic missile warheads, and the elimination of the whole class of the United States and Soviet longer-range intermediate-range nuclear forces missiles worldwide, all leading ultimately to the complete elimination of nuclear arms. We repeatedly have stressed our readiness for give and take and to
 consider alternative proposals. Each of our proposals has been followed up by further attempts to find common ground with the Soviet Union. He have offered trade-offs and have made clear our readiness to take account of legitimate Soviet concerns to obtain an agreement that would enhance strategic stability and strengthen deterrence..
Progress at Geneva has been slow. Thus far the Soviet Union has not negotiated with the responsiveness that the talks require. None the less, our determination to reach an equitable agreement has not wavered.
In this spirit, President Reagan last June decided to continue our policy of taking no action that would undercut the limits of previous agreements, to the extent the Soviet Union shows comparable restraint. Despite serious reservations about those agreements, and serious concerns about the Soviet record of non-compliance.', the President made this decision to foster a climate of truly mutual restraint to facilitate progress in arms control.
While the most direct path to a safer world is through equitable, verifiable reductions, we also see value in verifiable limitations on nuclear testing. For that reason, President Reagan, in his speech to this body last year, proposed that the United States and the Soviet Union exchange visits of experts at test sites to measure directly the yields of nuclear-weapon test. This would significantly improve confidence in the verifiability of proposed treaty limits on underground testing. The Soviet Union rejected this offer. Nevertheless, last July, the President issued an unconditional invitation for a Soviet team to observe and measure a nuclear test at the Nevada Test Site. We again call on the Soviet Union to take up this offer, which is a concrete, positive step toward verifiable restrictions on nuclear testing.
 When the Anti-Ballistic-Missile Treaty was signed in 1972 it was assumed that tight limits on defensive systems would make possible real reductions in strategic offensive arms. But the Soviet Union has never agreed to any meaningful reductions in offensive nuclear arms. Instead, it has continued an unprecedented military build-up - particularly in heavy intercontinental ballistic missiles with a first-strike capability - which is eroding the basis on which deterrence has rested for decades. The strategy of reliance on offensive retaliation to preserve deterrence and prevent war thus is being called into question by Soviet actions.
The answer is, first, for us both to agree that strategically significant, verifiable reductions in the numbers and destructive potential of offensive weapons. But there are additional ways to redress the problem. President Reagan has directed our scientists and engineers to examine, in the light of new technologies and fully in accord with the Anti-Ballistic-Missile Treaty - the feasibility of defense against ballistic-missile attack. Strategic defense could give our children and grandchildren a safer world. We would continue to rely on deterrence to prevent war, but deterrence would be based more on denying success to a potential attacker and less on threatening massive mutual destruction. Such a means of deterrence should be safer and more stable. Our goal is not to achieve superiority but to add to the security of both sides. As former Soviet Premier Kosygin said, an anti-missile system "is intended not for killing people but for saving human lives". The Soviet Premier was right.
We want to co-operate with the Soviet union in making progress on these most important of all issues. Progress requires - it demands - good will, realism and honesty. Behind the curtain that encloses Soviet society, free from the open debate we see in the West, a major strategic defense program has proceeded for decades. The current Soviet leaders know that. In the past 20 years the
 Soviet Union has spent about as much on strategic defense as on its offensive nuclear forces. The Soviets know that. The Soviets have the world's most active military space program, last year conducting about 100 space launches, some 80 per cent of which were purely military in nature, compared to a total of about 20 United States space launches. The Soviets know that, too. They deploy the world's only anti-ballistic-missile system, whose nuclear-armed interceptors and other components are undergoing extensive modernization. They are researching many of the same new technologies as we, and are ahead in some. And the Soviet Union has the world's only extensively tested and fully operational anti-satellite system. The Soviet leaders know full well their own efforts in these fields. Their propaganda about American programs is blatantly one-sided and not to be taken seriously.
So let us get down to real business, with the seriousness the subject deserves, and let us do so in the quiet of the negotiating room, where we can really make progress cm narrowing our differences.
Progress needs to be made in other arms-control areas as well. Restraints on chemical and biological weapons have eroded in recent years as international agreements have been violated by the Soviet Union and others. In April 1984 the United States proposed a comprehensive treaty for a global ban on chemical weapons. We will again introduce a draft resolution on chemical weapons in the First Committee. We must have talks on serious, verifiable proposals.
To reduce the risk of conflict through miscalculation we and our Atlantic allies have proposed significant confidence- and security-building measures at the Conference on Disarmament in Europe. To enhance security in Central Europe we have repeatedly sought ways to move the mutual and balanced force reduction talks in Vienna forward.
In sum, the United States and the Soviet Union now have a historic opportunity to reduce the risk of war. President Reagan looks forward to his meeting with General Secretary Gorbachev in November. We have a long agenda. The United States is working hard to make it a productive meeting and we want the meeting itself to give a further impetus to the wide-ranging dialog on which we are already embarked. Soviet acts of good faith and willingness to reach fair agreements will be more than matched on the American side.
Just as there is a democratic revolution in the world today, so there is also a revolution in economic thinking. Mankind is moving towards an ever greater recognition of the inescapable tie between freedom and economic progress. Command economies, in spite of all their pretensions, have not done very well in liberating people from poverty. In reality, they have served as instruments of power for the few rather than of hope for the many. Expectations of material progress and prosperity have been fulfilled in countries whose Governments have applied reason and fresh thinking to their problems, learning from experience rather than slavishly Allowing outworn dogma. The new way of thinking - economic freedom -actually is a return to old truths that many had forgotten or never understood.
Those developing countries in Asia relying on free market policies, for example, have enjoyed one of the most remarkable economic booms in history despite a relative lack of natural resources. The ASEAN nations and the Republic of Korea have grown at a 7 per cent a year rate over the past decade, the fastest rate in the world, and ASEAN has become a model of regional development and political co-operation. In recognition of the success of economic freedom the island nations of the South Pacific have continued to encourage the private sector as well. We are joining with them in a dedicated effort to negotiate quickly a regional fisheries agreement that will benefit all.

The success of these and other countries demonstrates that the laws of economics do not discriminate between developed and developing. For all nations equally the true source of wealth is the energy and creativity of the individual, not the State. After decades of fashionable socialist doctrine we see today on every continent efforts to decentralize, deregulate, denationalize and enlarge the scope for producers and consumers to interact in the free market. In India, China and elsewhere new policies are being adopted to unleash the creative abilities of talented peoples. At the Bonn economic summit last May the leaders of the largest industrial democracies acknowledged the same truth. The road to prosperity begins at the same starting point for all nations: freedom and incentives for the individual.
This truth should be our guide as we address today's economic challenges,.
In sub-Saharan Africa drought has placed perhaps 30 million men, women and children at risk. We do not know how many have already died. Along with other Western countries, the United States has undertaken one of the largest disaster relief programs in history. This year alone the United States has provided $1.2 billion for drought and famine relief and $800 million in other economic assistance. The nations that have been helping should continue to do so; those that have not borne their share should start to do so.
But we owe it to the suffering to ask this question: Why is food so scarce? Drought, without question, is part of the reason, but in some countries there are other, more important reasons. One is Government policies that have severely harmed agricultural productivity. These policies must be reversed. Those countries that have undertaken liberalizing reforms are reaping the benefits and can show the way for others. Another problem is lack of appropriate technologies. The United States is carrying out a long-term program to strengthen African agricultural research, which we hope will help to produce a green revolution on the continent.
 Elsewhere in the developing world, as in Africa, countries face the continuing problem of debt. Many have undertaken necessary, though painful, adjustment, taking courageous steps to cut Government spending, eliminate subsidies and price controls, permit currencies to adjust to the market, free interest rates to encourage saving and discourage capital flight and create conditions to attract new capital. Austerity, however, is certainly not an end in itself. The purpose of short-term adjustment is to get back on the track of long-term growth.
In all these efforts we must be careful that the heavy burden of servicing the historic debt levels of the developing nations of Latin America and Africa does not inhibit their future growth. Creative co-operation between borrowers and lenders, with continued constructive assistance from the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF), will be essential in achieving that goal.
Other nations too have a major part to play in helping these countries overcome their debt problem and resume sustainable growth. External financing to support effective adjustment has been and will continue to be important. Access to export markets is also necessary. Indeed, an open trading system is crucial to the hopes of all of us. Trade expansion has been an engine of post-war prosperity. It would therefore be suicidal to return to the protectionism of the 1920s and 1930s which helped bring on the great depression. Protectionism is not a cure; it is a disease, a disease that could cripple all of us. Trade must be free, open and fair. The United States will work to see that it is. But there must be a level playing field. We want open trading, but that means mutuality. Barriers erected against American products are just not acceptable to us.
As President Reagan is saying today in a major speech,
"The freer the flow of world trade, the stronger the tides for human progress and peace among nations."
 To preserve and strengthen the trading system may well be the central economic issue facing the world community today. For that reason it is essential that all nations join now in preparations for a new General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. (GATT) round next year; no nation, even one as large and as powerful as the United States, can by itself ensure a free trading system. All that we and others have done to provide for the free flow of goods and services and capital is based on co-operation* Indeed, it was that very spirit of co-operation that prompted the United States and four of the leading industrial nations yesterday to pledge firm resolve to work together in addressing the pressing economic issues of this decade.
Sound economic policies in every country are the key to strengthening the world economy. In the United States policies that have unleashed individual talent, reduced Government's role and stabilized prices have helped to produce more than 8 million new jobs since 1982 and lead the world out of recession. But many imbalances in the world economy remain, notably in trade accounts, exchange rates and capital flows. These must be corrected by the world community acting in concert if recent economic gains are to be preserved and hopes for progress sustained. For its part, the United States must restrain public spending, reduce its budget deficit and encourage saving. Others must do more to reduce rigidities and promote the private investment needed to facilitate adjustment and spur expansion.
I believe we can surmount our problems just as we succeeded in solving the energy crisis and bringing inflation under control. There was a time when those problems too seemed insurmountable. We can succeed again today if we have the honesty and courage to face our problems squarely and if our ways of thinking conform to reality.
Forty years ago the founders of the United Nations recognized that new ways had to be found to regulate conduct between nations. That remains true today. The
 Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights speak to us, not as different races, creeds and nationalities, but as human beings, men and women. Our task as we look at the next century is to learn that the things which unite us - the desire for peace, human rights and material well-being - as set down in those documents are far more important than the things which divide us.
The main obstacle to greater realization of the goals of the Charter is the lust of the few for power over the many, just as it has been the obstacle to human happiness since the dawn of history. But change is inevitable. And today change, technological change, holds out hope perhaps as never before. The revolution in communications and information may be the most far-reaching development of our time. Those political systems that try to stand in the way of the free flow of knowledge and information will relegate their citizens to second-class status in the next century. The future belongs to societies that can spread knowledge, adapt, innovate, tap the unfettered talents of well-informed citizens and thus fully exploit the new technologies; free societies clearly are best equipped for this challenge. The communications revolution will be a truly liberating revolution, for it threatens the monopoly of information and thought upon which tyrants rely for absolute control.
On every continent - from Nicaragua to Poland, from South Africa to Afghanistan and Cambodia - we see that the yearning for freedom is the most powerful political force all across the planet. The noble ideals of democracy and freedom are in the ascendant. Today, we can look with renewed hope to the day when the goals of the united Nations truly will be met.










At the outset I should like warmly to congratulate you. Sir, on your election to the presidency of the fortieth session of the General Assembly and to wish you every success, in your highly responsible post.
I wish also to take this opportunity to express my thanks to your predecessor, Mr. Lusaka, for his contribution to the work of the last session, for which he has won the respect of all of us.
Being convened during celebrations of the fortieth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations, the present session is more significant than the previous ones. The United Nations is the outcome of victory in the world war against fascism. The United Nations Charter laid down the purposes and principles for maintaining world peace, suppressing acts of aggression, ensuring international security, promoting international co-operation, respecting the equality of nations, large and small, settling international disputes by peaceful means and refraining from interfering in the internal affairs of any State. Facts show that these purposes and principles established 40 years ago are still of great immediate significance four the just handling of the problems facing the world today. The purpose of solemnly commemorating the fortieth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations is to reaffirm the unalterable principles of the United Nations Charter and further strengthen the functions of the United Nations so that it may play a greater role in the noble cause of maintaining world peace and increasing international co-operation.
In the past 40 years tremendous changes have taken place in the international situation and the world as a whole. The vigorous movement for national independence has made colonialism a thing of the past as a system. A number of countries have taken the road of socialist development. The emergence of the third world and the numerous small and medium-sized countries on the world political arena has brought a fundamental change to the pattern of international relations. With the rapid development of modern science and technology, mankind has achieved successes beyond the imagination of the past generations in the effort to conquer nature, expand productive forces and enhance its own welfare and has broadened the vistas of a better future before it.
The changes of the post-War world are reflected in the changing United Nations. The emergence of many newly-independent countries in Asia, Africa, Latin America, and Oceania and the consequent big increase in the membership of the United Nations have strengthened the universality of the Organization. Despite the twists and turns the United Nations has gone through, we should on the whole give a positive appraisal of its efforts for peace, international co-operation and the greater well-being of mankind. We congratulate the United Nations on its achievements over the past 40 years and are ready to work with all other Member States to strengthen the role of the Organization.
Compared with the preceding year there are certain signs of relaxation in the world situation. But the root cause of tension remains. There is a universal desire for a genuine relaxation of international tension. To this end it is imperative to stop the arms race and seek fair and reasonable solutions to regional conflicts. Here, I should like to speak on those two issues.
In the past four decades of discussions on disarmament have been going on every year, both inside and outside 'he United Nations. Regrettably, the arms race has never ceased for a single moment. On the contrary, it has kept escalating. That is an undeniable historical fact. One may ask several questions: How many nuclear weapons were there in the world in 1963 when the partial nuclear-test-ban Treaty was signed? How many nuclear weapons were there in 1972 when the interim United States-Soviet agreement on strategic arms limitation was signed? And how many more nuclear weapons are there today as compared with 20 years ago? The number of strategic nuclear warheads alone has increased several times. This trend cannot but cause general concern. The arms race cannot possibly be a unilateral affair. Although both sides have claimed only to maintain parity, each is in fact bent on gaining supremacy over the other. When one side declares that it has fallen behind and must catch up, the other side will do likewise on the same excuse. This inevitably leads to an alternating escalation of their arms race. In order to change the long-standing situation in the arms race, in which each side tries to outdo the other, it is imperative for the two nuclear Powers that possess 95 per cent of the world's nuclear weapons earnestly to consider taking the lead in drastically reducing their nuclear arsenals. They will still have enough left to destroy each other even if their nuclear arsenals are cut by half, let alone by a quarter. It must be pointed out that the arms race between the super-Powers has been extended from land, sea and air to outer space. If this trend of large-scale qualitative escalation is allowed to continue unchecked, it is bound to increase the danger of war and to pose a grave threat to world peace.
We welcome the resumption of disarmament talks in Geneva between the United States and the Soviet Union. The two countries will also hold a summit meeting in the near future. It is hoped that through serious talks they will reach a practical and effective agreement without prejudice to third countries. Of course, it would be unrealistic to pin our hopes for peace on their talks only.
In view of the grave threat to world peace posed by the continued escalation of the arms race and in view of the strong desire of the people of the world for nuclear and conventional disarmament, the Chinese delegation wishes to put forward to the General Assembly the following four-point proposal:
First, in order to reduce the danger of a nuclear war and to create the conditions for the complete elimination of that danger, all nuclear States - and the two big nuclear Powers, the United States and the Soviet Union, in particular -should undertake not to be the first to use nuclear weapons in any circumstances and should unconditionally pledge not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear states or against nuclear-free zones. Proceeding on such a basis, an international convention prohibiting the use of nuclear weapons should be concluded with the participation of all nuclear States.
Secondly, in order to avert the possible escalation of a conventional war into a nuclear war in areas with a high concentration of nuclear and conventional weapons; the two military blocs - the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Warsaw Treaty organization - should reach an agreement as early as possible on the drastic reduction of their conventional weapons.
Thirdly, outer space belongs to all mankind and ought to be used for peaceful purposes for the benefit of all. The United States and the Soviet Union should immediately stop the arms race in all its forms in outer space. All countries with a space capability should refrain from developing, testing or deploying outer space weaponry. An international agreement on the complete prohibition and destruction of outer space weaponry should be concluded as soon as possible.
Fourthly, in view of the fact that the arms race in the development of chemical weapons has not been checked, the 40-nation Geneva Conference on Disarmament is called upon to complete its negotiations at an early date and to conclude a convention on the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of chemical weapons. Pending that, all countries capable of manufacturing and producing chemical weapons should stop testing, producing, transferring and deploying chemical weapons and should pledge not to use such weapons.
The aforesaid points are all reasonable measures for resolving the most pressing issues of our time. We hope that the above proposal will be considered by the General Assembly in the interest of promoting disarmament and a relaxation of international tension.
China's position on disarmament is clear and firm. We are resolutely opposed to the arms race and stand for practical and effective measures to reduce armaments. China's military expenditure has long been kept at a low level. Although there has been a fairly rapid growth in China's economy in recent years, its military expenditure has not increased correspondingly.
The few nuclear weapons China possesses and the United number of nuclear tests it has conducted are solely for the purpose of self-defense. On the very first day we came into possession of a nuclear force, we declared that China would never be the first to use nuclear weapons. China has also undertaken not to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear States or nuclear-free zones.
Not long ago, China decided to reduce the size of its military force by 1 million. Part of China's military industry is being shifted to civilian production so as to meet the increasing daily needs of our people.
We have demonstrated our desire for peace and our policy of peace with actual deeds.
The existence of hot spots is an important source of world tension and turbulence. Where there are hot spots, there is a danger of expanded conflicts and crises and they deprive large parts of the world of tranquility. How to end conflicts and remove hot spots is a concern of us all. We are in favor of political settlement, but political settlement can only be achieved through peaceful negotiations on a fair and reasonable basis. In other words, there must be full respect for the sovereignty and independence of countries and strict observance of the international principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of any other country. Professed readiness for a political settlement with the intent to impose on others a fait accompli created by aggression, expansion and interference is nothing but a fraud. The Chinese Government has always maintained that international disputes should be settled through peaceful negotiations on an equal footing, in accordance with the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, without resort to the use or threat of force.
The Kampuchean question remains a matter of concern to the international community. While expanding the war in Kampuchea and incessantly violating the borders of Thailand and China, Viet Nam has resorted to political tricks by using "political settlement" as a means to split and destroy the Kampuchean patriotic forces one by one. But this attempt cannot possible succeed. The tripartite Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea, headed by Prince Sihanouk, has closed its ranks and persevered in the struggle against the aggressors, winning extensive support from the international community.
China is firmly opposed to Viet Nam's occupation of Kampuchea and any big Power's support for such acts of aggression. In our view, the key to the solution of the Kampuchean issue is the withdrawal of all Vietnamese troops from that country. The so-called complete withdrawal of troops from Kampuchea by 1990 is a sheer hoax, the aim of which is to eliminate the resistance forces and perpetuate Viet Nam's control over Kampuchea. China sincerely hopes that Kampuchea will become an independent, peaceful, neutral and non-aligned country. We appreciate the position taken by the countries of the Association of South-Bast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in support of the Kampuchean people's struggle against Vietnamese aggression, for national salvation and in the search for a just solution to the Kampuchean question. The proposal for a Kampuchean solution put forward by the recent ASEAN Foreign Ministers' meeting is reasonable, as are the position and steps taken by Democratic Kampuchea in regard to the present situation. Viet Nam should make a positive response to all this if it really wants a solution.
The Afghan issue is in essence one of armed aggression against, intervention in and occupation of a non-aligned country by large numbers of troops dispatched by a super-Power, which have not only grossly trampled on the norms guiding international relations but also posed a grave threat to the peace and security of neighboring regions. We condemn the intensifying military suppression of the Afghan people and demand the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan. We support the efforts made by the parties concerned to bring about a just solution to the Afghan question in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations.
We resolutely support the just struggle of the Palestinian and other Arab -peoples and strongly demand Israel's withdrawal from the Arab territories it has occupied since 1967. We maintain that all countries in the Middle East are entitled to exercise the right to independence and existence. We support the Arab countries and the Palestine Liberation Organization in their efforts to strengthen their unity and to attain their national goals through political negotiation and by other means. We are in favor of holding an international conference on peace in the Middle East under the auspices of the United Nations so as to seek a just and comprehensive solution to the Middle Bast question and bring about peace in the region.
We are opposed to any outside intervention in the affairs of the Central American countries. The internal problems of Central American countries should be solved by the people of the respective countries. We support the Contadora Group in its continued efforts to arrive at a peaceful settlement of Central American problems and hope that the parties concerned will take practical steps and hold consultations on an equal footing so as to ease the tension in the region.
Recently, the situation in southern Africa has deteriorated drastically. In defiance of opposition from the international public, the South African authorities have clung stubbornly to the system of apartheid and racial discrimination, openly declaring a state of emergency in some towns and cities, in ruthless suppression of the black people.
They have set up an interim government in Namibia to obstruct its independence and intensified their acts of aggression and provocation against neighboring countries. That racism and apartheid should exist now, in the 1980s, is a disgrace to mankind. We indignantly condemn the South African authorities for their crimes perpetuating racist rule, bloody suppressing the black people in South Africa and willfully invading and threatening neighboring States.
We sternly demand that the South African authorities immediately abolish the so-called interim government they have rigged up in Namibia and terminate their illegal occupation of the country so that it may attain independence at the earliest possible date, in compliance with Security Council resolution 435 (1978). We will, as always, unswervingly support the South African people in their struggle against racism, the Namibian people in their struggle for national independence and the other peoples of southern Africa in their struggle for national security, peace and stability.
We support the proposal put forward by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea for the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea - namely, the establishment of a confederate republic with two coexistent systems and the holding of parliamentary talks between the North and the South, as well as tripartite talks. United States troops should be withdrawn from South Korea. We support dialog between the north and the south and appreciate all efforts conducive to the relaxation of tension on the Korean peninsula.
While discussing the danger of war in the current international situation, we must not lose sight of the growth and development of forces for peace.
For the sake of survival and development, the third-world countries, whose aggregate population accounts for three quarters of the world's total, resolutely oppose war and the arms race, and demand world peace.
Many member States of the East and West military blocs, having suffered the catastrophe of two world wars, are unwilling to be dragged into another war.
The many small and medium-sized countries in Asia, Oceania and Europe do not want war. They demand independent and equal participation in international affairs and oppose big-Power domination of the world.
Hundreds of millions of people in the world, including intellectuals, artists, scientists and religious leaders of different races and creeds, all hate war and desire peace. Engaging in different forms of activity against the arms race and the threat of a nuclear war. they constitute a mighty and irresistible force for peace.
In a word, the people are the motive force of history and the masters of the world. They will take their destiny into their own hands. Popular desire for peace is the general trend of the world. Whoever undermines peace by resorting to an arms race and the threat of war will be opposed by the overwhelming majority of the people. Drawing a bitter lesson from the Second World War, they are determined to take preventive measures against the possible danger and avoid the recurrence of the historical disaster. Both the nuclear super-Powers have overkill capabilities and neither of them can afford to ignore the calamitous consequences of a nuclear war for itself, therefore, so long as the people of all countries continue their efforts, persevere in struggle and develop the peace forces against war, there are good hopes for the maintenance of world peace.
Development is a major issue closely related to world peace. World economic development has been characterized by growing imbalance and instability in recent years as a result of the widening economic gap between the developed and the developing countries. At present, many countries still face grave economic difficulties. Latin America groans under a crushing debt burden. Africa is not only plagued with drought and famine but also beset by the debt problem. And Asia is suffering greatly from trade protectionism. Moreover, they are generally faced with lack of development funds, a fall in the prices of raw materials and primary products and sharp fluctuation in the money and financial markets. All this greatly hinders the growth of the developing countries.
Since achieving political independence, the developing countries have scored marked successes and accumulated valuable experience in their strenuous endeavor to develop the national economy. Facts have shown that the important point for the third-world countries is how to formulate a development strategy suited to their actual conditions so as to alleviate the current economic difficulties and ensure a steady economic growth. As an old Chinese saying has it, "Poverty gives rise to a desire for change and change will work out a way leading to success and success tends to hold out." The developing countries should be able to lift themselves out of their backwardness. They have rich natural resources and industrious people who desire development. Provided they bring into play all positive factors, tap their own potentials and take part actively in South-South co-operation, they can gradually overcome their difficulties in the course of development.
Of course, the development of the third world is not a matter of concern to the third world alone. The international community should take effective measures to create an international economic climate favorable to the economic development of the third world. In a highly interrelated world, the economic stability and growth of the developed countries cannot be based on the stagnation and poverty of the developing countries. The existing international economic order is evidently out of step with the changed world economic and political pattern. To change it into a fair and just economic order benefiting the people of all countries is the call of our time. Besides, the economic stability and development of the South are an important factor making for world peace and stability. The developed countries should be farsighted enough to proceed from the overall interests of the world and give serious attention to the question of the North-South relations. At present, it is imperative in particular to take effective measures in favor of the developing countries by alleviating their debt burden, lowering interest rates, opening markets and providing them with funds and increased economic and technological assistance.
In the international economic field, trade, money, finance and debt are interrelated. It is necessary for the international community to seek a composite solution to these pressing issues facing the world economy. The United Nations and other international organizations should step up their role of co-ordination in improving North-South relations. China supports North-South dialog and South-South co-operation in the hope that the joint efforts of North and South will lead to a stable and balanced development of the world economy.
Here we wish to mention in particular the critical state of the African economy. The 21st Summit Meeting of the Organization of African Unity, held not long ago, gave expression to the eager desire of the African countries for closer unity and co-operation and the revitaligation of the African economy. We call on the international community and especially the developed countries to do their part in helping the African countries overcome their economic difficulties and improve their economic position.
China is both a socialist country and the largest developing country in the world. We have achieved great successes in all fields since the founding of the People's Republic of China 36 years ago. However, prolonged efforts are required before we can thoroughly eliminate backwardness in China and turn our large country of 1 billion people into a modern socialist country with Chinese characteristics. We are carrying out an economic reform to invigorate the domestic economy and open the country to the outside world. This is a great experiment. Experience in our reform over the past few years gives us full confidence in its success. To attain our goal we need peace not only for the rest of this century but in the next century as well.
In international affairs, we pursue an independent foreign policy of peace namely we oppose hegemonism and maintain world peace; strengthen China's solidarity and co-operation with the rest of the third world and support the other third-world countries in their just struggles to safeguard their sovereignty and independence and develop their national economies; develop normal relations with all other countries on the basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence irrespective of the differences or similarities in their social systems as compared with that of China; do not enter into alliance or strategic relationship with any big Power or line up with one against another; make our own independent judgment on international issues; and support whatever is in the interest of world peace, international co-operation and common development and oppose whatever is not.
Proceeding from the fundamental interests of the Chinese people, China's independent foreign policy of peace is also in the fundamental interests of the people of the whole world. Fully aware of our responsibility and weight in international affairs, we are determined to do all we can to help relax tension, maintain world peace and promote international co-operation. China will never do anything detrimental to world peace. We will not interfere in the internal affairs of other countries, nor seek spheres of influence or practice hegemonism. This is, and will remain, our position. China is a factor making for peace and stability. It is our hope that, with the growth of its economy and strength, China will be able to contribute more to the cause of peace and human progress.
Peace, co-operation and development are our goals. They are also our earnest aspirations, which we wish to reaffirm to the whole world on the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations. The Chinese Government and people are determined to make sustained and joint efforts together with the peoples of other countries for the realization of these lofty aspirations.Let me offer you my congratulations. Sir, on your election to the high office of President of the fortieth session of the United Nations General Assembly, in this jubilee year your long diplomatic experience with the United Nations will be of inestimable assistance to us.
Let me offer my thanks also to Ambassador Paul Lusaka for his successful work as President of the thirty-ninth session. He helped to ensure that during the last session of the General Assembly the major problems of Africa were dealt with pragmatically, realistically and in a genuinely sympathetic spirit.
Forty years ago, in founding the United Nations, the nations learned the lessons of the Second World War. The Federal Republic of Germany, though not a founding Member of the United Nations, has always, since it was constituted, worked for the fulfillment of the United Nations mission to preserve world peace. We do this by means of our policies in pursuit of peace in Europe and throughout the world.
For 40 years Europe has lived without war. In the North Atlantic Alliance, to which the Federal Republic of Germany as a liberal democracy has firmly hitched its destiny, a community of States was established which is a model of peaceful co-operation on a basis of equality and makes a contribution to peace and stability beyond its own frontiers.
In the European Community, friendship and co-operation have taken the place of centuries of rivalry and confrontation. From the original Community of six States the present Community has developed with its 10 members, and there will soon be 12 members. The forthcoming accession of Spain and Portugal to the European Community will bring great enrichment and new strength to the liberally and democratically constituted States of Europe. We want to put closer common foreign and security policies on a contractual basis. The way to European union is signposted. We regard an active policy in pursuit of peace as a historical duty to our own continent and to the world.
Europe is more than the States of the European Community. When we speak of Europe, we mean the whole of Europe. Peace in the world is particularly dependent on the relations between West and East in Europe. Through the partition of Europe, the German nation was torn apart. Tension between West and East affects us most acutely. For us, therefore, a policy on Germany is a policy in search of peace in Europe and a policy in the spirit of the United Nations. It is not possible to secure peace in Europe without a contribution by both German States. War must never again emanate from German soil. Joint efforts for peace are imperative. That is the essence of the community of responsibility in which both German States fulfill their special mission and duty to ensure peace. Our co-operation merits the support of all States sincerely interested in stability and genuine detente at the heart of Europe.
It is encouraging that on 12 March 1985 Federal Chancellor Helmut Kohl and the Chairman of the Council of State of the German Democratic Republic, Erich Honecker, jointly recognized the opportunity for a new phase of West-East relations presented by the resumption of the arms control dialog between the United States and the Soviet Union. The Federal Republic of Germany will do everything in its power to help improve relations between West and East. The treaties concluded during the seventies by the Federal Republic of Germany with its neighbors continue to be a solid basis for such improvement. The starting point was the 1970 Treaty of
Moscow, which put relations between the Federal Republic of Germany an<5 the Soviet Union on a new footing. Through the Treaty of Moscow and the treaties with the People's Republic of Poland and the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, as well as the Treaty on the Basis of Relations with the German Democratic Republic, we opened up,
out of a national and historical responsibility for peace, new long-term prospects for relations between West and East. We stand by these treaties. Our contractual
policy is not inconsistent with the political aim of the Federal Republic of Germany to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will regain its unity through free self-determination. That is the wording of the "Letter on German Unity" handed over by the Federal Government to the Soviet side
on the occasion of the signing of the Treaty of Moscow. These treaties and the Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin cleared the way for the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE).
On 1 August 1985, at the meeting marking the tenth anniversary of the signing of the Helsinki Final Act, all participating States affirmed their determination to continue the CSCE process and to implement all parts of the Helsinki Final Act. This Final Act is a realistic and balanced document. It is not a peace treaty but sets the course towards a future peaceful order in Europe. The CSCE process is intended to combine the precepts of peaceful coexistence between States and a wide range of co-operative options, on the one hand, with respect for the fundamental rights and interests of people regarding exchanges and information, on the other. It has encouraged States to pool their resources and creative powers. Co-operation is intended to check and reduce the potential for conflict inherent in the existing clashes of interests and differences between systems of values. The opportunities offered by international co-operation will become even more important in the light of the dawning technological revolution. A robust and enduring peaceful order that takes account of the legitimate interests of all concerned must be based on efforts to build confidence and establish co-operative security, combined with the participation of all in economic, scientific and technological progress. Cultural exchanges play a particularly important role in the creation of such an order.
Free and creative contacts and exchanges among all nations and presentation of cultural achievements on a reciprocal basis impart knowledge and deepen understanding of one another. In Europe the joint cultural heritage has always remained a unifying bond in spite of horrific wars, a bond transcending ideological frontiers.
Awareness of the cultural identity of Europe is growing, as is the realization on all sides that Europe will continue in future to have a common fate. The Cultural Forum to take place shortly in Budapest within the CSCE process will give all participating States the chance to substantiate their desire for cultural co-operation and exchanges.
The network of diverse connections developed between West and East in Europe has stood up in past years to serious strains. Our aim now must be to reach more extensive, more comprehensive results than in the seventies. The sound beginnings made in those days must be exploited.
We welcome the forthcoming summit meeting between the President of the United States and the General Secretary of the Soviet Communist Party. The Federal Chancellor, Helmut Kohl, has repeatedly advocated such a summit meeting. The meeting in Geneva is intended to become the new beginning of a top-level dialog. Above all, we hope for a significant impetus to the negotiations in Geneva.
On 8 January 1985 the United States and the Soviet Union agreed to resume negotiations. They began on 12 March. The document of 8 January is of great political importance. It creates new opportunities for arms control, dialog and co-operation within the West-East relationship. Far-reaching negotiating objectives are laid down in the document: to prevent an arms race in space and to terminate it on Earth? to reach effective agreements to limit and reduce nuclear weapons, both intercontinental and intermediate-range; and to strengthen strategic stability. The Federal Government unreservedly supports those negotiating objectives. They are in the interests of all nations.
We are well aware that results take time. The subjects under negotiation are intricate and complex. Each side must heed the security interests of the other. Tension and distrust must be reduced. Success depends on the negotiating parties endeavoring seriously and flexibly to reach co-operative solutions. They must consider themselves responsible for a common task. In the relations between West and East, no side must try to achieve a level of security that means less security for the other side.
Developments in the balance of military power between West and East since the 1970s are drastic evidence of that fact. The massive arms build-up by which the West has increasingly felt threatened since the period of detente in the 1970s has brought no major advantage to its originators; on the contrary, it has promoted the search for new types of space-based defensive options. Drastic and reliably verifiable reductions in nuclear offensive potential will therefore necessarily influence the need for, and the scope of, future defensive weapons. Both questions must be considered and resolved in their natural and political interrelationship, as was agreed on 8 January 1985.
The efforts to .achieve co-operative security are a key to the development of a stable relationship between West and East, on which world peace is largely dependent. If success is to be achieved during the present negotiations, existing arms control arrangements must be adhered to. The Federal Republic of Germany welcomes the decision made by President Reagan regarding continued observance of the SALT limitations. Co-operative solutions to the central security issues require a political environment marked by a minimum of mutual trust. A particularly important factor in that trust is predictability of the long-term intentions of the other side. That is why a sound and constructive relationship between the super-Powers is indispensable. But confidence-building and arms control are not a matter for the super-Powers alone: the medium-sized and small States, too, must endeavor to establish an enduring, stable basis for West-East relations. Distrust must be reduced wherever it exists.
Not only nuclear weapons, but also the other potential weapons must be reduced. That is why the multilateral negotiating forums remain for us indispensable components of the arms-control process.
It is an encouraging sign that the Third Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons has had a successful outcome. The Non-Proliferation Treaty has proved its worth as an important element of international arms control and of the peaceful use of nuclear energy. It has shown that multilateral arms control is possible.
The mutual and balanced force reduction negotiations in Vienna and the Stockholm Conference on Confidence and Security Building Measures and Disarmament in Europe concentrate on conventional forces and are an essential complement to the nuclear negotiations in Geneva. The aims of those negotiations, too, are stability at a low level of .forces, openness, transparency, predictability and the renunciation of force by means of specific confidence-building measures. Here in New York we launched an initiative aimed at drawing up guidelines for confidence-building measures that could be applied throughout the world.
Without reliable verification, arms-control agreements would be built on shaky foundations. The attempt to establish a universal prohibition of chemical weapons is still being hampered by the outstanding verification issues, which must now be tackled with vigor. It is high time that an end was put to the scourge for mankind constituted by those chemical weapons of mass destruction that have been outlawed for decades. Partial, regional solutions do not achieve that. They would make the question of verification even more complex. However, we welcome every effort by other States to bring about reliable verifiability. In that spirit, we are studying the suggestions made to us by the German Democratic Republic and the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic. The States at the heart of Europe have every reason to help resolve the verification question, thereby ensuring that chemical weapons are banned worldwide.
We know that a state of non-war through nuclear deterrence cannot be the ultimate method of securing peace. If deterrence against attack, deterrence against war - in other words the strategy of preventing war - should ever fail, there would be inconceivable consequences. The fortieth anniversary of Hiroshima renewed our awareness of that truth. In the nuclear age security can no longer be based solely on autonomous efforts. The long-term preservation of peace, however,
requires co-operative solutions; for that reason, disarmament and arms control are integral components of our security policy. We want to avoid any type of war, including war waged without nuclear weapons.
No one must reserve the option to make the first use of conventional weapons. Given the present state of technology, a conventional war would be a thousand times more dreadful than the Second World War. In Europe, with its high levels of armaments, even a conventional war would be a catastrophe. Our Alliance has declared that it will never be the first to use arms. We do not seek superiority. We do not wish to defeat or control anyone, nor do we wish to make any side arm itself to exhaustion.
The many trouble-spots in the world, the regional conflicts, must not be seen only from a European point of view; above all, they must not be fitted into the mold of the West-East confrontation. That is why we regard genuine non-alignment of the States in the Third World as a tremendously important contribution to world peace and to the realization of the purposes of the United Nations. The great idea of equal rights and self-determination of peoples must not remain empty words. Article 1 of the Charter of the United Nations makes it clear that all nations possess the same right to determine their own national life and political actions, including the political pursuit of peace. That right entails respect for the special needs of peoples in their own regions. No State and no power bloc has the right, or can usurp the right, to decide on issues vital to other nations.
We, along with the vast majority of the United Nations, therefore demand the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan. Striving for ideological supremacy means rejecting real non-alignment. That was recognized with the utmost clarity at the summit conferences of the non-aligned countries in Havana and New Delhi and most recently at the Foreign Ministers Conference in Luanda. Real solutions to the problems of the third world must come from the regions in question.
The European Community, our regional Community, is also an attempt to solve regional problems by means of an increasingly close association of the European democracies. Together with our European partners, we support regional co-operation and associations of States in all other parts of the world too. We actively support the peaceful settlement of conflicts among neighbors. That helps to keep East-^West confrontation out of the third world.
On the basis of this concept of regional co-operation, we support the Contadora process in Central America, a process initiated in the region itself. It is the only realistic way for Central Timerica to approach the solution of its problems. In Luxembourg, on 11 and 12 November, another conference is to take place between the Foreign Ministers of the European Community, Spain and Portugal and those of the Central American States and the Contadora group. We want to continue the dialog between the two regions of Central America and Europe; we seek close co-operation between them.
We also seek structured economic and political co-operation between the European Community and the Gulf Co-operation Council. In the Middle East we support regional efforts to increase the willingness of all parties to the conflict to negotiate and bring about peace. We acknowledge the positive elements of the Fez plan. We welcome the initiative of King Hussein and hope that it will help pave the way towards negotiations. Only through negotiations and the renunciation
of force can accommodation be found between the right of Israel to exist within secure and recognized boundaries and the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination.
We support the regional efforts for peace of the countries of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN). The European Community recognized from the very beginning that the economic and political co-operation pursued by the ASEAN States was an exemplary form of regional co-operation that pointed the way ahead. The ASEAN countries' Kampuchea initiative in the United Nations can count on our vote.
We are pleased that talks have been resumed between the two parts of Korea. We support all efforts to eliminate tension on the Korean peninsula. That should also open the way for accession to the United Nations.
To work for peace in the world also means to co-operate in order to meet together the economic and social challenges faced by mankind. North and South must co-operate to bring about successful development in the third world. North and South must also co-operate to come to terms with the global structural transformation that the third industrial revolution will cause once the transition has been made to the age of information and communication technology. This new age offers great opportunities to mankind. It will enable the world to grow even closer together and will extend the scope and the need for international co-operation. It will open up new opportunities for the individual responsibility and personal development of everyone.
The one world in which we live today cannot remain a peaceful world for long if it remains divided into rich and poor nations, into technically advanced and technically backward nations. The establishment of a truly peaceful world means overcoming hunger and poverty in all regions of the world.
Our look back at 40 years of the United nations is also a look back at 40 years of development co-operation. Despite all the problems that remain unsolved, the last 40 years have been a period of unprecedented economic growth, particularly for the third world. The gross national product in Asia, Africa and Latin America grew by 5.6 per cent annually during the 30 years from 1950 to 1980; that means that it increased fivefold. Between 1960 and 1982 life expectancy rose from an average of 42 to 49 years; infant mortality was cut in half; and whereas in 1960 only 50 per cent of the children received primary education, 94 per cent receive it now.
Two central themes of this sessions of the General Assembly are the debt crisis and the situation in Africa. Since 1982 we have made progress towards overcoming the debt crisis, but the crisis is far from having been mastered. It continues to tick like a time-bomb in the world economy and jeopardizes the growth and social stability of the developing countries, as well as the health of the banking system in the industrialized countries. What can be done?
First of all, we must find methods for restoring credit flows to a normal level and for enabling adequate resources to flow into the developing countries. However, the very volume of such funds means that this task cannot be fulfilled by the international financial institutions alone, nor even principally by them. Private banks and investors must continue to play the main role. I appeal to the commercial banks not to shirk this responsibility. For their part, the debtor countries must also make every possible effort during the coming years to reform their internal economic policies and to fight inflation. Only in that way can they strengthen their international creditworthiness, create a favorable climate for investment and terminate the flight of capital. He must, however, be aware also of the fact that the debt issue is not only an economic and financial
issue; it is also a political question. It is a question of the social peace and internal stability of the debtor countries. They must not be confronted with impossible demands. The servicing of foreign debt must not be paid for in the third world with recession, unemployment and hunger, or with a threat to freedom, democracy and independence.
Secondly, if the debt crisis is to be resolved, further interest-rate reductions are required. The industrialized countries must pursue an economic and financial policy that enables interest rates to be reduced further. They must reduce their budget deficits.
Thirdly, the markets of the industrialized countries must remain open to developing countries; they must be opened even wider. Protectionism is a danger not only in economic growth in the industrialized countries; protectionism is a deadly danger to the developing countries. Free world trade is of vital importance to the developing countries. Only if the industrialized countries open up their markets to exports of finished and semi-finished products from the developing countries can the latter be more firmly integrated into the world economy, whoever denies the third world access to its markets is denying it development. The Federal Republic of Germany supports open markets, particularly with regard to the third world. The high trading surpluses on our market, particularly those of the African and Latin American countries, bear witness to that fact. So that free trade can be secured and consolidated, we advocate that the next round of negotiations in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) be commenced as soon as possible. The acute danger to international free trade stems particularly from the great trade imbalances in the world. It would however be a fateful mistake to seek to overcome them by means of trade barriers. It would mean misunderstanding the roots of the problem.
An interdependent world economy does not permit any isolationist economic policies pursued with no regard to their effects on other countries. The stronger the economy of a country, the greater its responsibility.
The call to open up markets to the third world is also addressed to the socialist industrialized countries. They still continue to take less than 5 per cent of the finished products exported by the third world. That is in no way compatible with their international economic position and the responsibility that they also bear.
The second great task facing us at this session of the General Assembly is that of aid for Africa. After the last session of the General Assembly, the international community organized assistance to combat the threat of starvation. The Federal Government helped with food, transport and medicines. Innumerable people in my country gave generous donations. Assistance for Africa must continue and, indeed, be increased. Donors and recipients are agreed that external help alone cannot bring about the breakthrough. Africa knows that it needs economic reforms and that it must make agriculture the focal point of its development efforts. Good producer prices are essential as an incentive to farmers to increase production, but the reforms in Africa can be implemented only if they are supported by adequate help from outside. Acting on a mandate from the Bonn Economic Summit, the seven industrialized States represented there prepared proposals for the fight against hunger in Africa which were approved here in New York yesterday by the seven Foreign Ministers.
The Federal Republic of Germany regards development policy as part of its policy in pursuit of peace. We want the developing countries to become economically more self-sufficient and independent. We want to strengthen the economic foundations of genuine non-alignment. The Federal Republic of Germany has not concentrated its assistance on a few selected countries; on the contrary, we
have helped wherever the need was greatest. We have remitted the debt of the world's poorest countries to an extent unequaled by any other industrialized country.
The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany considers population policy to be a necessary component of a successful development strategy. We therefore also support the United Nations Population Fund. It has performed valuable work and played a considerable part in slowing down the rate of population growth. However, further successes are needed.
Worldwide interdependence is particularly clearly illustrated in the field of environmental protection. In that field "international home affairs" are becoming an element of international policy, and in that field mankind is making collective decisions regarding its own future. Our forests are in danger. Our agricultural land is being eroded; deserts and steppes are spreading; seas, lakes and rivers are becoming increasingly polluted; animal and plant species are becoming extinct. It is vital to preserve the natural sources of life on which we all together depend on the shrinking planet Earth.
In the field of North-South co-operation it is vital to begin dealing in good time with the questions raised by the new forms of technology, microelectronics and bioengineering. These forms of technology present great opportunities, particularly for the developing countries. Gene technology offers great potential for a solution to the world food problem. The new telecommunications and radio satellites offer the opportunity to equip entire regions of the third world quickly and relatively cheaply with a communications infrastructure. However, the opportunities are accompanied by risks. For instance, the new forms of information technology in the industrialized countries are accelerating automation. This poses
the danger to the developing countries that the advantage they derive from lower labor costs will be eroded. North and South must co-operation to take the opportunities offered to the third world by these new forms of technology and to avert dangers. What seems to me to be the greatest opportunity is, that the new technological revolution will permit many developing countries, at least in some sectors, to enter the new information age at practically the same time as the industrialized nations.
The United Nations has recognized the dignity of man as the supreme principle. All States must follow this principle at home and in their foreign relations. The United Nations has created a comprehensive system of universally binding standards to protect human rights. The 1984 Convention against Torture is a document directed against humiliation, inhumanity and cruelty. I hope that the next agreement in this sphere will be a further optional protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights concerning the abolition of the death penalty. We are faced with the task of putting human rights not only into words but a.J.so into practice. For this, we need international institutions that strengthen the protection of human rights. We call for the appointment of a high commissioner for human rights and for the creation of an international court of human rights at the United Nations.
In many parts of the world human rights are still violated. One special human-rights problem that depresses us all is that of apartheid in South Africa. We seek the peaceful elimination of apartheid in the Republic of South Africa. That is consistent with the ethical basis of our constitution, with the demands of the Christian churches and with the deep conviction of the people of my country. At issue are equal rights for all South Africans, irrespective of the color of their skin. The world watches with horror and outrage the escalation of the bloody clashes in South Africa. We appeal to the responsible authorities in South Africa to release each and every political prisoner, to end forced resettlement, to put a stop to arbitrary detention without trial and to terminate the state of emergency. Only in negotiators with the authentic leaders of all groups of the population can a permanent solution be found. The form that solution will take must be decided by the people in South Africa themselves; no one outside South Africa has the right to lay down how this should be done. The South African Government has recently given indications of specific reforms. These must now be implemented quickly. Further, increasingly extensive reforms are essential, until apartheid has been fully eliminated. We hope that the responsible leaders do not miss the last opportunity given them by history.
The right of peoples to self-determination must be the basis of the solution to the question of Namibia. Security Council resolution 435 (1978) remains for us the indispensable basis for any Namibian solution. We appeal to the Government of South Africa to make the way clear at last for the internationally recognized independence of Namibia. It is free elections that must decide which Government the majority of the people wishes.
The United Nations is 40 years old. This year, we shall rededicate ourselves solemnly to the principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations. Secretary-General Perez de Cuellar has called on us to pursue a new co-operative internationalism. We support his practical proposals. We do not need a new Charter, but we do need a new spirit in the United Nations. It is here, it is in this building, that the preservation of peace must begin. The United Nations was created to reconcile differing interests. It must not be abused for propaganda and for short-term voting successes, useful as they may be for domestic political purposes and votes. To be sure, the United Nations is a political Organization, and politics means struggles over power, influence, values, programs and personalities. And yet we must not forget that the United Nations is a precious instrument in our hands. Our war-scarred fathers have created it. We still have to learn to make the best possible use of the instrument offered us by the United Nations for the preservation of peace. History will not judge us by occasionally small tactical successes; it will judge us solely by whether we succeeded in avoiding the final catastrophe and enhancing the human dignity of all mankind. The dignity of man, his inalienable and fundamental rights, must remain the yardstick against which all our actions are measured.I should like first to congratulate the President on his election. I see it as a tribute not only to him personally but also to his country which holds a distinguished place in international co-operation. Everyone knows how much Spain means to France. In the very near future, our peoples will be together in the European Community. I am pleased that a common future now stands before them.
I should also like, before beginning my address proper, to add my expressions of sympathy to those already voiced by numerous speakers before me regarding the tragic events that have just occurred in Mexico.
The international community quickly demonstrated its solidarity, and my country joined in this widespread movement. I should also like to express here the respect that France has for the courage and dignity shown by the Government and people of Mexico in the face of their terrible ordeal. The catastrophe there reminds us that the happiness of men is uncertain and their destiny precarious. May they by their actions avoid compounding the suffering caused by nature.
This session of the General Assembly marks the fortieth anniversary of our Organization. It is the age of maturity, a time for reflection and for taking stock.
Speaking on behalf of France, a Founding Member of the United Nations and permanent member of the Security Council, I should like to refer to the three main ideals of this Organization which are the reason for its existence, namely, security, freedom and development.
With respect to security, the power of the atom is the dominating factor.
Peace through deterrence has so far prevented East-West conflicts from taking the form of direct confrontations between nuclear Powers. Maintenance of the balance of forces - nuclear as well as conventional - is of vital importance. This armed peace must be maintained for the future at a verifiable level of arms at the lowest possible level.	"	,
The Soviet-American talks in Geneva on nuclear arms and space should lead the two countries directly concerned to proceed to deep cuts in their most destabilizing offensive weapons while maintaining strategic equilibrium.
France welcomed the resumption of contacts between East and West and is particularly pleased that the General-Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Mr. Mikhail Gorbachev, is to visit Paris shortly.
New technologies have led some people to think that we could be turning a page of the nuclear era in 10 or 20 years, at the end of some ill-defined transitional period. This idea, which is attractive at first sight, merely reopens an old debate which has nurtured an illusion in mankind - the illusion that security can be achieved through invulnerability. Have we realized the extent to which a would-be aggressor could turn this risky situation to his own account?
At the Geneva Conference on Disarmament in June 1984, and then again this year, France made two proposals: first, that the two super-Powers limit the military uses of space at the same time as they reduce their offensive nuclear systems; and, secondly, that multilateral negotiations strengthen the international administration of the organization of space for peaceful uses.
The use of devices in space to see, listen and communicate contributes to security; satellites already constitute guarantees for peace and could fill this function even better if the international satellite monitoring agency my country proposed more than seven years ago were established. But, on the other hand, let us acknowledge that the deployment of new types of anti-missile or anti-satellite weapons on earth or in space would lead to a new race, with its risk of destabilizing effects. We see that possession of anti-missile and anti-satellite operational devices by one of the two super-Powers is viewed as justification for the other's efforts. It is high time that the two super-Powers agreed not to continue in this direction, they should distinguish very well between research, testing and development.
During the same time, the Conference on Disarmament should in our view set forth the rules limiting anti-satellite systems. It should also establish real confidence-building measures for space, strengthen the existing system of notification of launches of objects into space, and, lastly, extend to the satellites of other countries the bilateral commitments already made by the United States and the Soviet Union concerning the immunity of their observation satellites.
Those proposals are intended to be constructive and realistic. They take into account both the destabilizing nature of certain military activities in space and the difficulty of verifying the dismantling of systems already in place.
Let us therefore define the true nature of the challenge in space so as to avert the risk of a new arms race. But, in so doing, let us not forget the main objective: the reduction of the offensive nuclear weapons systems of the two most heavily armed countries.
As far as my country is concerned, the President of the French Republic defined in this very body two years ago the conditions in which France would be ready to participate in this undertaking. Our willingness on this score has not changed; it has not diminished.
It is in the context of such a process that France judges it necessary to raise again the question of nuclear testing designed to modernize its defensive force. I know that many delegations consider this a painful problem for which a solution is long overdue. We respect their concern, but in the case of issues like this we cannot settle for fine words or an imprecise assessment. So let us examine the facts.
To date, France has carried out less than one-tenth of the total number of nuclear tests carried out by the Soviets and the Americans. As of 1974 it ceased tests in the atmosphere. It takes every precaution in carrying out its tests, and this was confirmed, in particular, by the team of international experts that went to the site last year. No other nuclear Power did this before and none has done it since. Only recently, in Mururoa, the President of the Republic renewed the invitation he had extended to the countries of the South Pacific to see for themselves, at the actual site, the harmless nature of French nuclear tests.
Though not bound by any negotiated agreement, France has reduced the power of its tests below the threshold of 150 kilotons, a figure that the Soviet Union and the United States have presented to this Assembly for the past 10 years as a step deserving of the highest praise. At every opportunity, France demonstrates its goodwill, but it will never compromise its security interests; nor will it renounce the legitimate exercise of its sovereignty, whatever the cost to it. Continuation of the tests is in fact necessary to maintain the credibility of its forces. The limitation of tests could only be understood and be meaningful in the context of an eventual deescalation by the most heavily armed Powers.
But the debate on international security is not limited to the problems of nuclear disarmament.
The Stockholm Conference on Confidence- and Security-Building Measures and Disarmament in Europe is to cur mind very important. Thirty-five States are participating and are seeking to define concrete measures to establish confidence among all.
In addition to threats of conventional conflicts, the specter of the use of chemical weapons has also resurfaced recently. I should like to repeat strongly ray country's condemnation of any violation of the Geneva Protocol of 1925, wherever it takes place. France supports and will continue to support the efforts of the international community and, in the first place, those of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, to proceed without delay to an impartial establishment of the facts where allegations of the use of these weapons have been made. France has not hesitated to speak out in favor of the work of the Conference on Disarmament toward negotiating a convention banning the manufacture of chemical weapons and providing for the destruction of existing stockpiles under international supervision.
More generally, the deterioration of the security conditions in the world is a check to development when it does not wipe it out altogether. That is why we repeat that disarmament and development must be linked. The President of the French Republic made this point in 1983 from this very rostrum. France is ready to serve as host to an international conference on this subject in Paris.
The recent work of the preparatory committee of the United Nations conference on the relationship between disarmament and development has confirmed during the course of the summer the readiness of everyone. X am therefore pleased to state again here France's offer.
I come now to the second part of my statement.
France will speak out against all attacks on liberty, on the physical and moral integrity of the individual and the dignity of the human person, and will act indefatigably wherever these values are threatened.
We recently celebrated at Helsinki the tenth anniversary of the signing of the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe.
That anniversary reminds us of the great ambitions we had at that time: to formulate for the old continent rules other than those imposed by threat, force or ideology, building not only between States but also between their citizens, new and peaceful relations based on the sovereignty and equality of each State and on the right of peoples to self-determination, with respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Let us look back at the record of the past 10 years. It is mixed. Certainly, Europe has escaped the wars that are devastating so many other parts of the world, and its borders have been respected, and that is the main thing. But economic co-operation, cultural exchanges and contacts between people have not developed as they should. Human rights are still all too often, sometimes seriously, violated or ignored. Much still remains to be done, therefore.
Governments must win the confidence of their citizens. Let us earn that confidence by guaranteeing them the exercise of all their freedoms, without which there can be no genuine democracy.
Let us reunite families. Let us allow people to move and ideas to circulate without hindrance. Let us guarantee free exchanges. Let us agree to live in the diversity of our cultures.
How can I fail to mention under this heading one of the tragedies of our time - apartheid? The origin of the conflicts that are convulsing South African society is to be sought in that system, which is based on an odious doctrine and shameful practices.
Responses to our many appeals have been announced by Pretoria; they are not enough. Only by the speedy and total elimination of apartheid will there be salvation for South Africa.
The opening of genuine dialog between all the communities and recognition of the same civil and political rights for all South Africans constitute the only possible and acceptable basis for change. The current repression and violence can only lead to an impasse.
Faced with the deteriorating situation, France felt the time had come to take concrete initiatives. As early as May 1985 the Prime Minister announced the Government's intention to take measures against Pretoria if significant progress was not made within a reasonable period of time. Because of the worsening situation resulting from the imposition of a state of emergency, France recalled its Ambassador and decided on the immediate suspension of any new investment in South Africa. It then won adoption in the Security Council of resolution 569 (1985) , which recommends that States take voluntary measures against South Africa in order to induce its Government to engage in dialog. Since yesterday all the members of the European Community are taking actions to that end.
Since we took action other countries have joined us. That is what is most important. The freedom and dignity of a people are at stake.
The intransigence of the South African Government over Namibia is not acceptable either. After the withdrawal of South African troops from Angola in April 1985 there was some ground for hope. But the establishment of a so-called interim government in Windhoek, the action of South African military forces in Angola last May and again a few days ago and the raid on the capital of Botswana have shattered those hopes and helped to block negotiations. Despite those setbacks and difficulties, the international community must continue tirelessly to repeat that only Security Council resolution 435 (1978) constitutes an acceptable basis for a definitive settlement to the question of Namibia.
Toe many conflicts are causing bloodshed in the world, bringing suffering and death in their wake. In the Middle East the United Nations is endeavoring to secure respect for the principles enshrined in its Charter.
France supports all initiatives that will help lead to progress towards a solution to the Israeli-Arab conflict through dialog and negotiation. It approves the initiative of the King of Jordan last 11 February, in agreement with the leader of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), and will continue to provide assistance and support, just as it will encourage the Head of the Government of Israel in that regard.
My Government, as it has demonstrated on many occasions, is ready to support the efforts of those who sincerely desire to work for peace, which can be based only on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). In order to be lasting, that peace must take into account two principles that are indivisible: the right of Israel to exist in security and the right of the Palestinians to self-determination, with all that that implies.
As for Lebanon, which has been so sorely tried, it, too, has the right to peace and its inhabitants have the right to security, whatever the community to which they belong. France has continually asserted that the solution to the crisis in Lebanon must be based on the respect for the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and unity of that country. That in turn presupposes a genuine national reconciliation among all the Lebanese, My Government is working ceaselessly to that end, giving assistance and support to the lawful authorities of the country.
I wish also to mention here the fate of individuals, French and others, held hostage in Lebanon. The French Government condemns categorically that odious blackmail, and solemnly appeals to all those who may be able to help secure their release.
I turn to the conflict between Iran and Iraq. The international community has often expressed its extreme concern about that endless and bloody confrontation.
It is essential that there finally be a cease-fire and that the relevant Security Council resolutions, which have lost none of their value and relevance, be accepted at last by the two belligerents and implemented in their entirety.
In order to speed up the start of the necessary negotiations, France encourages and supports international initiatives - in the first place, naturally, the action taken by our Organization.
In Afghanistan, foreign intervention has been sustaining the war for almost six years. Far from abating, the fighting is spreading and growing in intensity, exacerbating the trials of a courageous people. There as elsewhere, justice is consistent with good sense. An answer is to be found only in a political solution that will secure simultaneously the withdrawal of foreign forces, the free self-determination of the population and the stability of the region.
We know that those are the principles that guide the good offices of our Secretary-General. France supports them, without overlooking the fact that their success depends first on the intentions of the occupying Power, which alone is in a position to remove one of the major causes of international tension. Did the head of the Soviet delegation, when he spoke the day before yesterday open the door to hope?
With regard to the distressing and dangerous situation in Cambodia, France reiterates its condemnation of the occupation of that country by foreign forces. It deplores the exacerbation of suffering inflicted on civilian populations by the recent military operations on the Khmer-Thai border. It stresses the urgency of a peaceful solution based on the withdrawal of foreign troops and the national reconciliation of the Khmer people.
The division of the Korean people - a tragedy that has been with us for 40 years - still continues. In the last few months a few encouraging signs have appeared. Recently, separated families were able to meet again for a few hours. I see in that reason for hope.
At this point I should like to mention the hope that is emerging from the changes in an entire continent: I refer to South America. Happily, democracy continues to be consolidated there. France welcomes that, especially as a difficult economic situation and the burden of considerable foreign debt have imposed difficult economic policies on Governments.
In Central America, clearly the conflicts cannot be resolved by military means. The countries of that region should be encouraged to find quickly among themselves the path to negotiation. The Contadora group therefore has our support and backing.
I now come to France's third priority in external policy - development. The overriding need for solidarity between the industrialized and the developing countries derives from the conviction - which has been repeated many times by the French Head of State - that the future of the North and the South is linked and that there can be no lasting growth for the developed countries if the developing countries are excluded. For the past two years the international community has accomplished a great deal towards helping these countries - first of all, during crisis situations.
Who could deny that Governments and public opinion responded rapidly and generously to the extreme hardships of the African countries? I should like to praise the initiatives taken by the Secretary-General, Mr. Perez de Cuellar, in particular the organization last March of a donors' conference in Geneva and the creation of the United Nations Office for Emergency Operations in Africa.
This aid drive is without precedent. Almost 7 million metric tons of grain have been collected for Africa - a considerable figure commensurate with the tragedy that is taking place. The European Community and France made a substantial contribution to that effort, as the representative of the presidency has indicated from this rostrum. But the main problem is to avoid a recurrence of such a situation, thereby ensuring a resumption of the development process on a permanent basis.
It is essential to maintain the flow of official development assistance. For its part, France will contribute more than 0.55 per cent of its gross national product in 1985, a figure close to its 1988 target of 0.7 per cent.
The poorest countries deserve priority attention, for without an increased flow of financial resources it will be difficult, if not impossible, for them to face a particularly unfavorable international economic climate. The establishment of the Special Fund for Africa under the auspices of the World Bank - to which France has made a decisive contribution - constitutes an important step in that direction.
It is also with the hope of eradicating famine that France has proposed to our industrial partners a "plan for Africa", which provides among other things for increased agricultural development and a co-ordinated program to combat desertification. We are pleased that that plan has been adopted and that work currently being carried out by experts will make it possible to implement it soon.
Finally, I should like to confirm here the French President's intention to convene an international conference on forest protection in Paris next February. That conference could, in conjunction with other international organizations concerned - primarily the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the Organization of African Unity (OAU) - propose concrete answers to the concerns of countries which see their forests disappearing and with them often all forms of life.
Those efforts were a response to the most critical situations. For the rest, this past year has seen a relative improvement in the situation of the third world.
But I should like to make two remarks on this subject. First of all, this progress is related to the economic improvement in the developed countries. The relative decline in real interest rates and the value of the dollar have accentuated this trend. But these phenomena, while positive, are primarily and essentially cyclical and short-term, and therefore remain precarious. Let us hope that the decisions taken here in New York last Sunday by the finance ministers of the five most industrialized countries will help to consolidate this trend.
The second point is that we must guard against excessive optimism. Admittedly, the problem of international debt has been brought under control for the time being, thanks to the joint action of the Paris Club, banks and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and especially the extremely austere and courageous adjustment policies adopted by the debtor countries and their peoples. But let us be careful.
The improvement in external accounts has come about at the cost of lowered income for populations - a situation that cannot continue for long.
Debt-servicing, principal and interest, still absorb often considerable amounts, if not all, of annual export earnings.
The fragile nature of this improvement is therefore blatantly obvious. An entire continent of which I have already spoken, Africa, remains on the sidelines of this progress and continues to become increasingly impoverished. The same danger will beset the other continents; and unless we manage steadily to channel capital from the developed to the developing countries, whose financing needs remain structural, the situation will be aggravated.
Here, we cannot be satisfied with the trend of these past few years which have seen a slow-down in direct investment, a reduction in bank credits and repayments to multilateral financial institutions of amounts greater than withdrawals. All this has led to an inversion of North-South capital flows. The developing countries are now paying more to those in the North than they receive from them.
It is essential to improve the existing mechanisms for debt management by providing developing countries with adjusted financing. This is the objective of France's repeated appeals to increase World Bank capital, issue additional special drawing rights, and more generally increase official development assistance.
It is also to be feared that in the months to come the slow-down in the American economy - inadequately compensated for by the growth in Europe and Japan -may have serious consequences for the developing countries; or that rising protectionist pressures in the North will stifle developing countries by limiting their export possibilities and therefore their ability to repay debts.
Certainly, as I said a moment ago, increased dialog among the main industrialized countries is leading to an improved international climate. That dialog should be stepped up in all existing forums and on all occasions. The time has come for a comprehensive and serious consideration of this subject.
Let us take another example - monetary affairs. France, on several occasions in particular when the President of the Republic addressed this Assembly two years ago - has called for an international monetary conference that would seek to define new guidelines, thereby making monetary fluctuations more stable. Industrialized countries and groups of developing countries, in particular the non-aligned countries, advocate a comparable move. It is only through such discussions that we can make the progress the world needs so urgently.

France for its part is ready for dialog and action. In the monetary, financial and commercial fields, its determination remains firm.
At one time the North-South dialog inspired much hope, in particular within our Organization. However, global negotiations never took place, and meetings between experts in international forums have yielded very few concrete results. Today, approaches based on sectoral strategies, integrating emergency aid and giving priority to rural development and training, are being launched and developed. My country approves these approaches, which meet today's needs. But it remains essential that we formulate without delay reforms that will bring about deep and lasting changes in relations between States for the benefit of peoples, their individual liberties and their rights.
In reviewing the principal tasks incumbent upon the United Nations I have been forced to recognize that the present state of the world is far from satisfactory. More than ever, we need the United Nations, the forum pat excellence for meetings and discussion. During the fortieth anniversary we shall have a special opportunity to underscore the need to make negotiation prevail in conflicts and solidarity triumph over selfishness.
This unfortunately gloomy picture does, however, have its bright spots and more encouraging prospects. I wish to conclude on a positive note by mentioning an undertaking on which my country sets great store. I refer to the construction of Europe.
Forty years ago Europe was a devastated battlefield. What has it become today? It is a community without precedent in history, a force for peace and equilibrium in the world, a community that has learned its lesson from its past and that practices, among its members and vis-&-vis the rest of the world, the peaceful settlement of disputes and solidarity with the very poor.
Our colleague from Luxembourg has reviewed the main lines of our action. A few words will suffice to recapitulate: the coming expansion of membership to include Spain and Portugal; the renewal of the Lome Convention with 66 countries in Asia, the Caribbean and the Pacific; the establishment of direct relations with the countries members of the Contadora Group and also the work now in progress to improve institutions and technological capacities with the Eureka project and to move towards a Europe of citizens, a political Europe. Indeed, European construction will be one of the great ventures of the second half of this century.
In conclusion, let me say that France wishes, together with others, to pursue its work for peace. It has heeded the message that has come to us from the depths of history. To those who are distressed by the future of the world, it hopes that we may respond together in the name of the principles that, 40 years ago, were the. cornerstone of our action.
Let me first join those who have congratulated Mr. de Pinies on his election to the presidency of the General Assembly. Our affairs could not be in better or more experienced hands. It is a source of pleasure and pride to my country that we should have as President at this fortieth session the representative of a country shortly to become a full member of the European Community.
It is in the same spirit that I express our thanks to the outgoing President, Paul Lusaka, the distinguished representative of a Commonwealth country, for the impartial and skillful way in which he conducted the Assembly's affairs over the past 12 months.
I should like also to renew my tribute to our Secretary-General. I salute his dedication and persistence in seeking solutions to the world's problems. His latest report, like its predecessors, is another eloquent and persuasive testimony to the importance of this Organization. We shall continue to lend his efforts our fullest support.
In a few weeks we shall mark the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations. In doing so we shall reaffirm the insight defined by the then British Prime Minister, Clement Attlee, at the first session of the General Assembly, in London, as follows:
"the realization by all nations that without co-operation for peace there can be no security for any nation". That thought is just as valid today as when he spoke to a world then riven asunder by the second global conflict in 30 years, a world in which war had brought the international trading system almost to a halt, a world in which many of the greatest cities lay in ruins, a world in which some of today's greatest nations had yet to be born.
In the years since then the membership of this Organization has grown dramatically. Together we can take credit for much of the progress that has been achieved, we have moved away from the sharpness and the savagery of world conflict and undertaken a massive task of reconstruction. We have managed a period of unprecedented economic growth alongside an enormous population explosion. We have welcomed and fostered the emergence of over 100 new sovereign nations. We have fashioned and developed a range of effective institutions for international co-operation.
Britain is proud, too, to belong to two very different groupings which each in its own way demonstrates the growing pattern of interdependence. This year in the Bahamas, Commonwealth Heads of Government representing 49 nations from all continents and outlooks will be meeting together. By the end of this year, too, the membership of the European Community will have expanded to 12 with the
accession of Spain and Portugal. It is now substantially the world's largest trading bloc, and its role on the world stage is becoming steadily store significant. In his statement yesterday the Foreign Minister of Luxembourg gave eloquent expression to the shared values and common approach of all the members of the European Community.
Tomorrow the commemorative meeting of the Security Council will give us a chance to take stock of all that has been achieved over the past 40 years. We should at the same time acknowledge the scale and complexity of the tasks that still challenge us. We must not underestimate the efforts the international community still has to make if our actions are to achieve the goals sat by the founding fathers.
We still live in a world wracked by continuing violence and conflicts, by economic and social hardships and by famine and disease. Last week's massive natural disaster which has brought such tragic suffering to the Mexican people is a grievous reminder of man's vulnerability to his environment. We all pay a tribute to the courage with which the Mexican Government and people have responded to this catastrophe.
In the Secretary-General's own words,
"We face today a world of almost infinite premise which is also a world of
potentially terminal danger." {A/40/1, p2), As he so rightly argues, the solution lies in our own hands, in our will and determination to decide the kind of world we wish to see in the years ahead and to take the steps necessary to achieve it. So this special anniversary is an occasion on which we should not just reflect on our past but, much more important, look ahead to the questions that will face us in the future and start shaping our policies now.

The need for such foresight applies with particular force to our economic agenda. The appalling famine in sub-Saharan Africa has shown how a series of problems - some natural, some man-made - can case together to bring unimaginable suffering: long-run degradation of the environment, progressive failure of agricultural production and prolonged drought. This disaster has evoked a dramatic response from many countries. The West has led the way, The United Kingdom alone last year contributed a quarter of a billion dollars. Almost half of that came from private donations, the gifts of individual men and women. Moreover, we have not stopped providing funds. We have made sure through the provision of aircraft of the Royal Air Force that our supplies reach those most in need as quickly as local conditions will permit.
But spontaneous generosity even on this scale offers no long-term solution because we live in a world of paradoxes. Some areas of the world still face acute hunger and are unable to feed themselves. Other parts - astonishingly more and more - face mounting problems of over-production. The pattern of this development is itself remarkable. The vast populations of China and India, despite all the prophecies of doom, are now more them self-sufficient in food. Increasing reliance on the enterprise of individuals and on the incentives of the market place has in many cases provided the spur to growing efficiency. By contrast, other countries, some of them better endowed with natural resources, still face the need to import food. And in some regions natural resources are being threatened or destroyed by over-exploitation while nearby, sometimes even in the same country, they are underdeveloped and under-used.
If we are to resolve these contradictions, ensure a more balanced development of the world economy and secure a rising standard of living for all our citizens, we must create a wider understanding of the reasons for success and failure.
We must identify ways to exploit and yet preserve our resources more effectively. We must train our people more imaginatively, deploy our common technological knowledge more skilfully. We must shape our institutions and societies so that the natural forces of economic change and growth are encouraged and not stifled. As has been shown in Ethiopia, the United Nations can play a vital role in matching resources to needs.
Sustainable economic growth is essential if we are to secure a reduction in the present crippling burden of debt in many countries. Last year the world economy grew by 4.3 per cent, the fastest rate for six years. Many countries have acted courageously in meeting the economic and social pressures of adjustment. We have heard in this debate why it is necessary for this difficult match of problems to be handled sensitively. That is why there is a duty on us all, as we respond through the international institutions on a case-by-case basis, to take account of the very real problems faced by debtor countries. We must try to create the stable framework that will enable them to pursue their policies of adjustment. That is the importance of the continuing need to reduce deficits in some of the industrialized countries.
Almost three years ago I had the privilege of presiding as Chairman of the Interim Committee of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) over a substantial increase in IMF quotas. Last year, at the Economic Summit in London, we were able to encourage the introduction of multi year rescheduling agreements where appropriate. We need new to address ourselves to the level of resources available to the World Bank. Britain would like to see early agreement in principle to a general capital increase for the World Bank and stands ready to play its part.
An urgent and continuing need is for us to support and strengthen the open trading system. This is essential if we are to resist protectionism and ensure that
our trade contributes to the prosperity of all countries, particularly those in the developing world. We welcome the forthcoming meeting of the Contracting Parties to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) to discuss a new round of negotiations. Without such a new round the forces of protectionism will gain in strength. Time is running out.
We need not simply preserve the open trading system but also see that it works more openly and more widely. Open trading needs to be broadened to include the service industries and the expanding economies of those countries that are' increasing their industrial base. Greater stability in world currency markets is essential. In particular, we need stability at rates that will promote the expansion of world trade rather than increase protectionist pressures. That is the importance of the agreement reached in this city only three days ago at the meeting of Finance Ministers and central bankers of the major industrialized countries.
But the need to look ahead is not confined to economic issues. We need the same approach in tackling the complex political and security issues that face us. The Secretary-General has reminded us of the extent to which the fundamental architecture of this Organization has been flawed by what he refers to as "the lack of that unanimity of the permanent members which was to have been its main driving force". Nowhere is this more evident than in the division between East and West. Perhaps the most important question facing this Organization during its fifth decade is whether we shall be able to record positive steps that will narrow this crucial gap.
I believe we can. The last two years have seen a considerable increase in contacts between East and West. I welcome that. Since becoming Foreign Secretary I have made a point bf visiting every one of the countries in Eastern Europe and getting to know their leaders. In the same spirit we welcomed Mr. Gorbachev's important visit to Britain at the end of last year. The first meeting between
President Reagan and Mr. Gorbachev will take place this November. That will be an important opportunity for searching and substantive discussions which can lay the
foundation for greater mutual confidence between East and West. It should demonstrate that the leaders of the world's largest Powers are serious in their desire to overcome the difficulties between them.
But contact alone is not enough. The true foundations of understanding cannot be laid in an atmosphere of mistrust. Mr. Gorbachev has said "there is no fatal inevitability of conflict between the Soviet Union and the United States". In that he echoes President Reagan's belief that "the Soviet leaders have much to gain from joining the West in mutual arms reductions and expanding co-operation". The Soviet Union and its leaders need have no doubt about the sincerity of the Western commitment. The people of Britain would like nothing better than a reduction in tension and an increase in co-operation. The task for statesmanship roust be to transform common aspirations into the substance of agreement.
The world needs this most urgently in the field of arms control. We warmly welcomed the resumption of the Geneva negotiation on nuclear and space arms between the United States and the Soviet Union. We support their aim of preventing an arms race in space and terminating it on earth.
Our overriding objective must be to obtain security at the lowest level of armaments. We do not believe that either side should strive for superiority. The aim must be mutual balance, taking account of current developments. The outcome of the process should enhance and not undermine deterrence. The negotiations must be on the basis of compliance with existing obligations. These talks present a forum for hope, a chance for constructive negotiations, and a potential for real and verifiable progress. It is only at Geneva that public declarations can be transformed into agreements that are seriously intended. Megaphone diplomacy leads only to a dialog of the deaf. But a genuine wish to serve the cause of peace will meet a swift response from our side.
Recently Mr. Gorbachev told the world that his country trusts the United States no more than the latter trusts the Soviet Union. Mrs. Thatcher made much the same point when she said that neither side looks at each other through rose-tinted spectacles. Verification provides one of the essential elements in any arms control agreement. In itself, it breeds the confidence essential to the preservation of a regime of arms control. Equally, verification requires a measure of confidence on both sides in the good faith of the other.
If that objective is to be achieved it is vital that countries comply with the treaties and commitments which they have undertaken. Particularly important are those treaties between the United States and the Soviet Union which govern strategic relationships: the strategic arms limitation agreements and the Treaty on the Limitation of Anti-Ballistic Missile System. These agreements form the foundation for the present structure of mutual security.
Concern for international stability was of course a prime motivating force behind the Non-Proliferation Treaty. For that reason, we were particularly pleased with the successful outcome of the recent Review Conference and the substantive final document agreed by consensus. We share fully the Conference's conviction that the Treaty is essential to international peace and security. We support unreservedly their determination to enhance its implementation and further strengthen its authority.
There is no doubt that this result reflects the renewed commitment of the international community to use the Non-Proliferation Treaty to prevent the further spread of nuclear weapons. We call upon those who remain outside the Treaty especially those with significant unsafe-guarded nuclear facilities - to accede to the Treaty is soon as possible and so help to protect the world against the potential horrors of nuclear war.
But equally we must not overlook the importance of the Non-Proliferation Treaty in promoting the safe use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, particularly in the developing world. We have announced our intention to double, between now and 1990, the funds we contribute to developing countries party to the Treaty through the technical assistance projects administered by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). By these actions we shall continue to demonstrate our commitment to check uncontrolled nuclear proliferation.
It is right that we should concentrate our attention on the global issues that threaten all nations' security. But in this world of close interdependence, more specific regional issues also affect our interests. I think in particular of southern Africa, where the growing crisis in South Africa and the continuing threats to her neighbors cause us grave concern.
We strongly condemn the incursion into Angolan sovereign territory by South African defense forces. We have joined with the rest of the Security Council in giving force to this condemnation. Such acts can only undermine the stability of the region and damage efforts to achieve Namibian independence. South Africa should be in no doubt of our determination that Namibia must be brought quickly to independence in accordance with Security Council resolution 435 (1978)j this resolution remains the only internationally accepted basis for a Namibian settlement.
Southern Africa has seen major changes in recent years with the coming to independence of Mozambique, Angola and Zimbabwe. It is essential that all the countries of the region should be freed from the present tensions and allowed to concentrate on building a peaceful and prosperous future in harmony with their neighbors.
In South Africa itself we deeply deplore the failure of the South African authorities to lift the state of emergency, the continuing repression of peaceful protest, and the detention of citizens without trial. More fundamentally, we reject the system of apartheid - which is so contrary to the values of the United Nations Charter and which undermines much of real value in South Africa. He call upon the South African Government urgently to move beyond mere words to actions which are long overdue: to end apartheid, and to establish a system of government acceptable to the people of South Africa as a whole.
Britain is united with other countries in its determination to see fundamental changes made. We have consistently brought pressure to bear on the South African Government to achieve this. We comply fully with the United Nations arms embargoes, we do not collaborate with the South Africans in the development of their nuclear program, civil or military. Our guidelines for the disposal of North Sea oil exclude sales to South Africa. We operate controls on a wide range of sensitive exports to South Africa. We fulfill our obligations to discourage sporting contacts. We have fully applied the European code of conduct to British companies operating in South Africa to ensure that they contribute as effectively as possible to the crucial changes we wish to promote.
Where we differ from some is not in our willingness to apply pressure but in our judgment of the likely effectiveness of mandatory economic and trade boycotts. I understand the passions that prompt calls for such measures. But we are not persuaded that measures of this kind would achieve the aims of those who call for them. They would diminish rather than increase effective pressures on the South African Government to introduce fundamental changes, and would bear most heavily on the weaker sections of the population and neighboring countries. We believe that all those with longstanding political, economic and diplomatic contacts with South Africa have a responsibility to use such links to promote fundamental change.
In keeping with this approach, we have reached agreement with our European partners on a number of measures which we believe will strengthen the forces for change in South Africa. I have today announced our adoption of all the measures agreed at Luxembourg on 10 September. These measures build on the recent visit of my three Community colleagues which clearly demonstrated European concern. In recent weeks there have been signs of movement by the South African Government. These must now be translated into firm decisions to dismantle apartheid. To this end there is now an urgent need for dialog with genuine representatives of the African majority.
In the Middle East tension has too often flared into violent conflict. It is a sad reflection that in no single year since the United Nations was founded has this area been at peace. Nowhere are negotiated settlements more urgently needed.
In Lebanon there can be no peace until the communities there themselves work together to rebuild their country free from outside interference. Israel must withdraw all its forces from Lebanese territory as soon as possible. And the Lebanese themselves must put an end to the appalling cycle of violence in that country. We condemn without reservation the kidnapping of innocent hostages, including the British United Nations official, Mr. Alec Collett. His kidnappers should release him without delay. In the Gulf, we are all appalled by the tragic and wasteful conflict between Iran and Iraq which has now lasted almost as long as the Second world War. We deplore the use of chemical weapons. And we entreat both sides to refrain from attacks on civilian targets - particularly those on merchant shipping in international waters. An early initiative to end the war is desperately needed. The Secretary-General's eight-point proposals offer the best way forward. We will continue to give him our full support.
A solution of the Arab/Israel dispute has been a major goal of this Organization almost from its foundation. That in itself testifies to the exceptional difficulties in securing a balanced settlement. But I believe that this year there are signs of readiness to seek peaceful solutions to the dispute. I think in particular of the constructive moves by King Hussein of Jordan, for v. \ch Mrs. Thatcher has recently reaffirmed our active support. The world community must give firm backing to all those who eschew violence in favor of patient diplomacy. That is the way towards a just and lasting peace based on the principles long espoused by the United Nations.

Only the parties directly concerned can negotiate such a peace. But if they are to have the confidence to enter what are bound to be difficult and delicate negotiations; they will need strong encouragement and support from the entire international community so fully represented here in the United Nations. This Organization is based on confidence in the power of diplomacy, negotiation and dialog. Hy Government shares that faith. The vital necessity is for the process of dialog to get urgently under way in this area where for so long minds have failed to meet.
I am conscious that it is only too easy for speakers addressing this Assembly to call on other countries to put their house in order. I should therefore like to turn to two issues where Britain is making a direct and positive contribution.
The tragic divide in Cyprus continues. The Secretary-General has shown skill and determination in seeking to bring the two parties together after the failure of talks in January. We wish his current initiative every success, and hope that President Kyprianou and Mr. Denktash will agree to meet as soon as possible. The British Government continues to do everything it can to assist the Secretary-General. An agreement has been tantalizingly close before. All the parties have a responsibility to see that it does not evade us again.
Over the past year we have kept up our active search for ways to restore more normal relations with Argentina. Since the conflict, we have removed financial restrictions, and offered talks on a series of practical issues. On several occasions we have pressed for the reciprocal lifting of restrictions on trade. In the absence of an Argentine response we took yet another unilateral step last July - to improve trading relations by lifting our ban on Argentine imports. Argentina has failed to reciprocate.
We shall continue to look for ways of improving relations with Argentina. At the same time we shall maintain our firm commitments to the people of the Falkland Islands.
By insisting that Britain must first commit itself to negotiations on sovereignty before there can be discussion of any aspect of our bilateral relations, Argentina has blocked progress. Ours is the sure realistic approach to the re-establishment of confidence between the peoples of the United Kingdom and Argentina and the reduction of tension in the South Atlantic.
There are many areas where mutually beneficial co-operation is possible, for example, in the increasingly urgent task of conserving the South Atlantic fisheries. Informal discussions in the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) have shown that an international effort will be required to deal with this. We are ready to give our support to the FAO's constructive initiative and hope that the Argentines will be equally prepared to work with the FAO.
This international approach to the conservation of fish stocks has been seen to be effective in other contexts. We were encouraged, for example, by the progress made at the recent meeting in Hobart of the Commission set up under the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources.
Fisheries are only one aspect of the complex task of managing the resources of the continent of Antarctica. This has been successfully achieved under the Antarctic Treaty for a quarter of a century. The Treaty has preserved the continent as a zone of peace, free from nuclear explosions and dumping, militarization, or active territorial disputes. We firmly believe that an attempt to apply a common heritage regime would upset this proven system, risk destabilizing the region and jeopardize the present close international scientific collaboration in Antarctica. We shall maintain our support for the Antarctic Treaty system.
In Central America there is widespread agreement on a number of objectives: the need for greater stability, for economic progress and for the reinforcement of democracy. These objectives are clearly set forth in the Con tad or a documents. The Contadora process has our firm support. The path to peace must lie through the strengthening of democracy and the limitation of arms; above all through the ending of cross-border subversion and interference. The present tense situation calls for the greatest possible restraint on all sides. The planned meeting in Luxembourg later this autumn between the Foreign Ministers of the Ten, plus Spain and Portugal, the Central American States and the Contadora countries will be a further demonstration of our support for peace efforts.
In recent months, there have been a number of direct contacts between North and South Korea, contacts which are continuing and broadening. It is my profound hope that these may lead to a peaceful and lasting solution to the Korean problem, and that the people of Korea may shortly be represented at this forum.
Viet Nam's illegal occupation of Cambodia is a continuing affront to international law. It jeopardizes regional stability. It flies in the face of international opinion. We give our firm support to the efforts of the members of he Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) to persuade the Vietnamese Government to reach a political solution based unequivocally on the principles approved by the United Nations.
The sixth year of Soviet occupation of Afghanistan has witnessed intensified Soviet efforts to subdue the Afghan people and to put pressure on Pakistan, where some 3 million Afghan exiles have found refuge. We hear much from the Soviet Government about its support for the oppressed peoples of the world. Yet in Afghanistan they are the oppressors. Why do they not honor their principles and signal their support for the admirable effort of the Secretary-General to achieve a solution, by agreeing to withdraw their troops? Only this concrete action will satisfy the demands of the world community and bring peace to Afghanistan.
It is clear that in founding the United Nations our predecessors were as much concerned to promote the interests of individuals as to further those of their Governments. It is therefore particularly deplorable that 40 years later the rights, liberties and well-being of so many individuals should be at risk: not just from poverty, hunger and disease, but also from the policies and actions of Governments.
We must all do everything we can to give force to our fine words about human rights. I said in Helsinki last July that while the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) had lit a beacon, the future strength of its light would depend entirely on the performance of the signatory States.
That holds good in the United Nations context as well. The United Nations Commission on Human Rights and other United Nations organizations have a major role to play in making the existing human rights instruments more effective. But to achieve their targets they must have the full co-operation of the Member States.
The United Nations finds itself today deeply involved in threats to our societies undreamed of by the founding fathers. The modern problem of drug abuse continues to take on new and more horrifying forms. This is a vice that particularly threatens our young people - and hence our future societies. Britain is increasing the resources devoted to the war against drugs and introducing new measures designed to strip those involved in drug trafficking of their ill-gotten rewards. Every Member State needs to take firm national action. But national efforts are only a part of the solution. Effective international co-operation to eradicate production, trafficking and the illegal harboring of offenders is urgently required. The Venezuelan initiative for a possible United Nations convention is a useful start. But we must all make a sustained and united attack on this vicious problem.
Equally effective co-operation is required if we are to halt the spread of terrorism. Every attack on an innocent individual, every hijacking and every bomb is an attack on us all. Britain has taken steps to tighten control of unacceptable activities by members of diplomatic missions. In order to reduce the scope for aircraft hijackings Britain has also put forward specific proposals for extra international action to take sore stringent security measures at airports and in civil aviation operations. As the Secretary-General has pointed out, many of the necessary international agreements are in place. They need to be enforced. We must all sake it clear that we will not submit to blackmail, that we will not tolerate terrorist acts and that we will not harbor terrorists.

The agenda of international problems is long and complicated. But if we are to take the right measures, we need to have the right mechanisms. On the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations, we should undoubtedly look again at the way in which this Organization works: to learn from its failures and to build on its successes.
There are many ways in which this Organization can be improved. We must get better value for money throughout the united Nations systems. We must look for more effective co-ordination. We must prevent politicization of the technical bodies. We must try to streamline and make more relevant the work of the political organs. Many sensible and practical suggestions have been made. I think in particular of the recent proposals put forward by past Presidents of the Assembly on how this body can be more effective. But we must act on them.
I have today concentrated on the challenges that still remain after the efforts of 40 years and on the dangers of complacency and inaction. But I am heartened by the evidence I see of a more practical and pragmatic approach to co-operation between our peoples. The General Assembly played a part with its economic declaration of last year. This year's human suffering in Ethiopia has prompted encouraging examples of international co-operation: British and Soviet aircraft worked side by side; united Nations and voluntary agencies pooled their efforts.
Most striking of all was the moving response of our young people. The Live Aid concerts touched the hearts of millions of young men and women around the world.
Their reaction showed that idealism and energy can rise above the barriers that divide us. It showed, too, the vigor of free societies, where individual initiative can still set a standard for Governments to match and can remind us of the real brotherhood of man.
We who hold the responsibility of political leadership have to show that we are capable of rising to that challenge.
Sir, I should like to begin by congratulating you on your unanimous election to the presidency of the United Nations General Assembly at the fortieth session. You are a distinguished son and eminent representative of a country with which India has close and cordial relations, and your association with the United Nations goes back many years. We are confident that you will provide this Assembly with able stewardship.
I should also like to place on record our appreciation of the effective and statesmanlike leadership given to the Assembly at the thirty-ninth session by your predecessor, Mr. Lusaka of Zambia.
I wish also to pay a tribute to our Secretary-General for his untiring efforts in the cause of peace and for his patience, perseverance and wisdom. He has won our admiration for his skillful handling of several crisis situations. We wish him continued success and reiterate to him our support.
Before proceeding further, allow me to express cm behalf of the people and Government of India our profound grief at the heavy toll in human and material terms claimed by the earthquakes which so tragically struck Mexico last week. We express our solidarity with and support for the people and Government of Mexico in their hour of travail and in their heroic efforts to overcome this unprecedented calamity.
Mr. President, you preside today over a historic session. The United Nations has completed 40 years of its existence. These have been years not only of tribulation but also of promise and even achievement. The world is surcharged with suspicion and uncertainty, with incipient as well as overt conflict, but the ideals of the United Nations continue to instill optimism. The dawn of independence and freedom for the overwhelming majority of mankind, particularly in the erstwhile colonial and imperial domains in Asia, Africa and Latin America, has been a significant and welcome development of our times.
The generation that launched the United Nations also saw the launching of the nuclear age. While conventional attitudes towards this world Organization are still shaped by the memories of the Second world War, there is today a new specter that haunts our civilization, the specter of a nuclear catastrophe. Hostile military blocs are poised against each other with an armada of nuclear weaponry that could wipe out all life on this planet many times over. Survival in this nuclear age has become the key issue of our times.
The United Nations today is the hub of diplomatic activity for the nations of the world. Whatever their divergence in political systems, economic structures or cultural mores, they come together in almost daily contact on a variety of bilateral, multilateral and global issues. Yet this so-called democratization of international relations is only part of the story. On the other hand, the pressures and divisions that characterize contemporary international relations seriously hamper the Organization and reduce its capacity for effective action. As Jawaharlal Nehru stated at the United Nations as early as 1948:
"We have got into a cycle of hatred and violence, and not the roost brilliant debate will get you out of it, unless you look some other way and find some other means. It is obvious that if you continue in this cycle and have wars which this Assembly was specially meant to avoid and prevent, the result will be not only tremendous devastation all over the world, but the non-achievement by any individual Power or group of its objective." In his thought-provoking report on the work of the Organization, the Secretary-General has very aptly characterized the United Nations as an essential element in the historic choice before humanity - between a world of technological promise and one of potentially terminal danger. He has rightly stressed the need to strengthen the concept of international authority embodied in the United Nations as one that should serve as a substitute for "unilateral action, exclusive alliances end spheres of influence" (A/40/1, p.2). His specific suggestions deserve careful study and reasoned application.
We in India and in the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries believe that the United Nations represents, in a real sense, the best hope of mankind. As the late Prime Minister, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, stated in her address to the United Nations General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session, "Firm faith in the United Nations is central to the non-aligned" (A/38/PV.9, p.3). Our affinity for the United Nations is rooted in our world view. We cherish peace. We believe in the equality, sovereignty and independence of States. We have a fundamental conviction in the dignity and worth of the human person. The United Nations embodies in itself these lofty principles and more. It constitutes a unique international forum where nations can resolve their differences and work together for the common good of humanity.
Throughout the years of India's freedom struggle, our leaders viewed independence not in narrow national terms but as part of the struggle of oppressed peoples everywhere for justice - political, social and economic. Following India's attainment of independence in 1947, our democratic institutions have stabilized and given to our people a deep sense of participation and commitment in determining the nation's priorities in the political and economic fields, as well as in the building up of its social and cultural ethos. In our international relationships, the commitment to the policy of non-alignment has been both instinctive and inevitable. As the Prime Minister of India, Mr. Rajiv Gandhi, has stated:
"We have inherited a well-tested and consistent foreign policy which serves our national interest. We have always believed in working for peace. Our policy is to be friends with all countries on the basis of reciprocity and mutual benefit. Our commitment to non-alignment and a new world economic order based on justice means a total dedication to the twin causes of peace and development. He also believe in safeguarding the independence of States and upholding the principles of non-interference and non-intervention."
Only a few weeks ago we marked the fortieth anniversary of the dropping of the first nuclear bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Memories of that catastrophe make us even more acutely aware of the devastating potential of nuclear arsenals today. As we begin this fifth decade of the nuclear age, the attitudes of nuclear-weapon States towards the possession and use of their nuclear weapons have not undergone any basic change. There is a wide gap between public fears of a nuclear war and the calculations of statesmen and strategists of the efficacy of the nuclear balance of terror. Ever increasing expenditures are being undertaken for the qualitative development of weapons. New generations of weapon systems have come into existence and the militarization of outer space appears imminent. Indeed a whole range of new strategic concepts are being built which seek to smother any sense of moral outrage that humanity may feel over the politics of nuclear confrontation among the most powerful States of the world.
All nations stand to suffer to a greater or lesser degree from the impact of the arms race. No one can predict with certainty the devastation that would be caused by a nuclear war. When the immediate effects of the blast and fire- are combined with the long-term effects of the fall-out, the erosion of the ozone layer and the damage to all our planetary life support systems, it is clear that another world war might well bring an end to human history.
It is time for us to go the roots of our predicament. If the States most responsible for creating this threat are as yet unprepared to suggest urgent measures for preventing the outbreak of a nuclear war, others should take the lead. There is clearly today a rising tide of protest all around the world against the wasteful and dangerous arms race. The political climate generated by the spontaneous popular movements against the accretion of armaments, against the testing of nuclear weapons and against the use of science and technology for
purposes inconsistent with humanitarian principles, makes it imperative for us to take bold action now.
The tendency towards the legitimization of nuclear weapons should be reversed. The process of reduction of nuclear arsenals should be commenced as the only way to build up confidence and trust among States. A commitment by leaders of the major nuclear-weapon States to follow a path of arms limitation rather than arms build-up is the need of the hour. The evolution of healthy national societies in the world can only be ensured if the pervasive influence of an armaments culture, particularly of a nuclear armaments culture, is curbed and the massive expenditure now being directed towards perfecting and modernizing the instruments of war is channeled towards securing more equitable and better conditions of livelihood for the peoples of the world. Even a token reduction in arms expenditure can produce dramatic results if channelized into the development of the less affluent sections of the world. In this context we welcome the convening of the International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development next year.
We have welcomed the resumption of negotiations in Geneva between the United States and the USSR on a complex of questions concerning space and nuclear arms, to be considered and resolved in their interrelationship, with the declared objective of working towards the complete elimination of nuclear arms everywhere. All nations have a stake in the success of the Geneva negotiations and it is, therefore, with some concern that we note that these talks have not produced any concrete results so far. We hope that the forthcoming summit meeting between the leaders of the two countries will give a significant impetus to this process.
I should like at this stage to refer to the Delhi Declaration issued at the end of the meeting of the Heads of State or Government of Argentina, Greece, India, Mexico, Sweden and Tanzania who, in January this year, issued a fervent appeal to the nuclear-weapon States to halt all testing, production and deployment of nuclear weapons and their delivery systems, to be followed by substantial reduction in their nuclear forces. The Delhi Declaration specified two steps for special attention - the prevention of an arms race in outer space and the early conclusion of a comprehensive test ban treaty. These leaders from five continents called for a continuing program of arms reduction leading to general and complete disarmament accompanied by measures to strengthen the United Nations system and to ensure the urgently needed transfer of substantial resources from the arms race to economic and social development.
In determining our international political and economic policies we, the non-aligned countries have consistently refused to tailor our responses to the dictates of cold-war predispositions. We do not mortgage our decisions to foreign dictates, we do not seek confrontation. But we urge the necessity of change as the key to the transformation of the world community. India does not believe, however, that such a transformation can be achieved merely by resort to strident rhetoric or by destructive criticism. The test for the international community consists in managing change by peaceful and co-operative means, recognizing the objective imperatives of our situation in the present-day world. Therefore, we seek the widest co-operation of all nations of the world. But we ask that such co-operation be based on equality, justice and a genuine recognition of our mutual interdependence.
As nations subjected to colonial domination and racial discrimination we stand firmly committed to the complete elimination of the pernicious practice of apartheid or racism in any form. The situation in southern Africa is an affront to the conscience of mankind. The policies of apartheid of the racist regime in Pretoria constitute a source of tension, instability and conflict, endangering both regional and international peace and security. The recent tragic developments in South Africa, as a result of the fresh wave of terror and repression unleashed by the racist regime following its imposition of a state of emergency, testify to Pretoria's determination to continue its repressive policies. Mr. Botha's statement in Durban of 15 August provided ample proof, if proof were indeed needed, that Pretoria remains wedded to apartheid, that it will continue to turn a deaf ear to the legitimate aspirations of the oppressed majority in South Africa and to the voice of the entire international community, that it will persist in its attempts to divide the struggling majority in South Africa, and that it will show no scruple in killing, maiming and detaining arbitrarily those who dare raise their voice in protest.
Recent events make it clear, at the same time, that the people of South Africa will not be cowed into submission. As the special communique on South Africa, adopted by the non-aligned countries at their recent ministerial Conference in Luanda, stated: "The countdown to the collapse of apartheid has started in earnest". We call once again for the immediate and unconditional release of Nelson Mandela and other valiant freedom fighters under detention. We are convinced that the struggle for a united, democratic and non-fragmented South Africa will, before long, find culmination in final victory. We reiterate to our brothers and sisters in South Africa the assurances of our total solidarity and support.
Equally, our hearts go out to the suffering people of Namibia who have now completed a century under oppressive colonial occupation. The same abhorrent regime that persecutes its own people persists in its illegal occupation of Namibia, now close to two decades after the United Nations assumed direct responsibility over the Territory. The attempts by that regime to set up another puppet administration in Namibia through the so-called Multi-Party Conference, have met with the universal contempt and repudiation that they deserve. The Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement on Namibia, held in New Delhi from 19 to 21 April this year, reaffirmed the clear and consistent support of the Non-Aligned Movement for the cause of Namibia and set out a concrete Program of Action to advance that cause. During that historic meeting, India took an important step forward by according full diplomatic status to the representative of the South-West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO) in New Delhi, thereby reaffirming its firm support for the Namibian cause. The United Nations Security Council, convened in response to thQ call made by the non-aligned countries at New Delhi, has once again called for immediate and unconditional implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978), which constitutes the only basis for a peaceful settlement of the
Namibian question. Once again. South Africa has spurned that call. It is incumbent on the Council to meet again.
It is clear that South Africa could not have persisted in its defiance of the will of the international community for so long but for the diplomatic and moral support and the wide-ranging collaboration in the economic, military, nuclear and other fields that-it has been receiving from its friends and allies. The pursuit of apartheid, the occupation of Namibia, and the repeated acts of aggression against independent African States, jointly and severally, all constitute threats to peace. Yet the Security Council has, time and again, been paralyzed into inaction on account of vetoes cast by one or more of its permanent members against mandatory measures aimed at the total isolation of South Africa. The Pretoria regime is beyond persuasion. Clearly, policies such as those of "constructive engagement" have failed. Comprehensive mandatory sanctions under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter are the only answer. Meanwhile, States have a moral duty to sever all links with Pretoria. The recent upsurge of public opinion in many parts of the world for more resolute action against South Africa is a welcome development. My country is proud to have led the way in 1946, when we became the first voluntarily to impose comprehensive sanctions against South Africa.
Nearer to our own shores, the destabilizing and escalating great-Power military presence in the Indian Ocean causes us great concern. Only the elimination of such presence can enable the nations of the area to shape their own destinies without hindrance or military tutelage from beyond their territorial boundaries. The 1971 Declaration adopted by the United Nations laid down the objective of a zone of peace in the Indian Ocean area, which is universally supported by all non-aligned States of the region. These States now call for the early convening in 1986 of a conference on the Indian Ocean in Colombo in order to achieve the realization of the objectives of the Declaration. The participation of all the great Powers at such a conference is crucial, indeed indispensable, to its
all the great Powers at such a conference is crucial, indeed indispensable, to its success. The presence of military bases, command structures and other forms of military presence against the express wishes of the countries of the area only add to the tensions already prevailing in the Indian Ocean littoral and should be progressively reduced and eliminated.
Meanwhile, in our own neighborhood, the countries of South Asia have embarked on a process of regional co-operation which holds out significant prospects for the betterment of our peoples. It is important that these developments are not adversely affected by the political and military factors involving the introduction of sophisticated arms serving external strategic interests. As we have repeatedly stressed, it is necessary that the existing thresholds are not crossed or new elements of controversy introduced which could adversely affect the security environment in our neighborhood. We, for our part, are committed to promoting good neighborliness and harmonious relations in the area. It is in this spirit that we look forward to the first summit meeting of the South Asia Regional Cooperation organization in December this year in Dhaka.
Our solidarity with the struggle of the Palestinian people under the leadership of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to secure the establishment of an independent State in Palestine and the return of the Palestinian and Arab territories occupied by Israel has been a well-recognized plank in the non-aligned platform. The plight of the Palestinians today is indeed one of the supreme tragedies of history. Few people have been more systematically brutalized, oppressed or humiliated in their own lands. The dispersal of the heroic Palestinians will not weaken their will to fight for their inalienable rights. Nor will it bring peace to the area. Occupation of land belonging to its neighbors will not guarantee Israel its security. There is now an increasing understanding of the fact that no comprehensive solution of the problem in the Middle East is attainable without the active involvement of the PLO, the sole and authentic representative of the Palestinian people. A comprehensive solution of the question can only achieved by a forward-losing approach based on a recognition of the realities of the Palestinian right to an independent State and the right of all the States of the region to live in peace within secure international frontiers. Any such solution must comprise the total and unconditional withdrawal of Israel from all Arab territories occupied since 1967 and the exercise by the Palestinian people of their inalienable national and human rights, including the right to establish an independent State in their homeland. The situation does not brook delay.
We underscore once again the importance of the early convening of the proposed international conference on peace in the Middle East, under the auspices of the United nations and with the participation of all parties concerned, for securing a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the region in accordance with well-established principles. India is ready to extend its full support and co-operation in this connection, and is appreciative of the efforts being undertaken by the Secretary-General.
The tragic conflict between Iran and Iraq, two valued members of the non-aligned fraternity, continues to be a matter of concern and anguish. India, along with other non-aligned countries, has taken repeated initiatives to resolve this conflict. Our efforts continue, along with the efforts of the Secretary-General and others.
In spite of the valiant efforts of the Contadora group to bring about a peaceful negotiated solution to the problems in Central America, the situation in the region continues to be marked by instability, tension and conflict. Policies of interference and intervention and the threat of the use of force imperil peace and security in the region, complicating its serious social and economic problems. The Government and the people of Nicaragua live under constant threat, harassment and intimidation. The problems of Central America can be resolved only by peaceful means, through political dialog and negotiation. The Contadora group must intensify its efforts to overcome the obstacles in its bid to bring lasting peace to the region. We are distressed by the last-minute impediments which prevented the signing of the revised draft Contadora Act for Peace and Co-operation in Central America of 7 September 1984. However, we have noted with satisfaction the presentation of a further revised draft, following the meeting in Panama earlier this month. It is our earnest hope that the meeting of plenipotentiaries scheduled for next month will finally pave the way for durable peace to return to this troubled part of the world. The endeavors of the newly constituted Lima group will no doubt strengthen Contadora's hand.
We have always affirmed the inadmissibility of interference in the internal affairs of States, as also of the introduction of foreign troops into any country. The situation in South-West Asia can be resolved only through an overall political settlement based on the principles set out in the New Delhi Declaration. India's own efforts have been directed towards this end. We support the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and non-aligned status of Afghanistan. We have closely followed the efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, which deserve the fullest support of all concerned.
Tension, conflict and instability afflict other parts of the world, including South-East Asia. Cyprus continues to face travail and threats to its sovereignty, independence, unity, territorial integrity and non-aligned status. Tension continues to prevail in the Mediterranean, the South Atlantic and the Pacific region.
Colonialism, as I observed earlier, persists in its most virulent form in Namibia. In other parts of the world as well, the task of decolonization remains incomplete. In this twenty-fifth year of the United Nations Declaration on decolonization, tribute is due to the commendable role the United Nations has played in the field of decolonization. We must also reaffirm our Lesolve to eliminate the colonial phenomenon altogether.
The world economic environment continues to cause grave concern. At the Seventh Summit Conference of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi in March 1983, our Heads of State or Government stressed that
"the international community cannot be assured of durable peace so long as the economic disparities between nations are widening". 
The Foreign Ministers of non-aligned countries, meeting at Luanda earlier this month, were constrained to point out that the world economic situation had not improved since 1583.
The limited and fragile recovery achieved in some of the industrialized countries, whose spread has remained uneven even amongst; them, is now faltering, because it has been based on unsustainable macro-economic policies. The projections for the rate of growth of the economies of industrialized countries for 1985 and 1986 remain low. The 1985 rate of growth may not exceed 2.8 per cent; it may well be lower.
At the same time, the economies of the developing countries remain under heavy pressure. Their overall growth rates remain well below levels which would offset population growth, let alone secure development gains. Combined with the severities of the adjustment process which marked the first three years of this decade, this decline in growth rates has brought into sharp focus the constraints on their economies, threatening wider social and political strife. The developing countries have been making adjustments without any parallel improvement in the world economic environment and in the face of serious resource constraints, the growing menace of an increasingly intolerable debt burden, reverse transfer of financial resources and intensifying protectionist barriers against their exports to developed countries. Against this background, the weakening of the commitment to the spirit of international economic co-operation and an erosion of the multilateral system is a deeply disturbing trend. It is paradoxical that this should be happening when there is an increasingly wider recognition that the world economy has become more interdependent, calling for a greater need to sustain and further the international consensus in favor of development.
We have also seen with growing concern the increasing resort to bilateralism or selective multilateralism with the adoption of policies and practices which run counter to the agreed goals and objectives of international economic co-operation. This is a negation of the consensus which the developed countries themselves had helped to achieve.
It is apparent that the prevailing international economic crisis cannot be explained away as a cyclical phenomenon. It has its origin in structural inadequacies which have been working to the particular detriment of the developing countries. It calls for a fundamental review of the existing structures.
It is essential that the international community renew at this fortieth anniversary session its commitment to the resumption of international negotiations with the objective of stimulating world economic recovery and ensuring sustained growth, particularly of developing countries. This requires in particular an integrated approach in the interrelated areas of money, finance, debt and trade, and a restructuring of international economic relations.
The Luanda Ministerial Conference of the Non-Aligned Countries reaffirmed the strategies for international economic negotiations adopted by the Seventh Summit at New Delhi. The Conference also defined a framewoiU for the commencement of a dialog.
I would like to suggest that our immediate efforts should concentrate on the following:
First, rectifying through appropriate measures and actions the "inadequacies and malfunctioning" of the international monetary and financial system.
Secondly, the adoption of policies and actions to implement the agreements on rollback and standstill with a widening o! the access to exports from developing countries and the removal of all infringements on principles, rules and regulations of the international trading system.
Thirdly, the adoption of methodologies which would ensure multilateral co-ordination of macro-economic policies pursued by developed countries and the placing of their monetary and financial policies within the purview of international discipline.
Fourthly, the increase of financial flows to the developing countries, in particular concessional flows to the low-income countries.
Fifthly, making the international adjustment process symmetrical and equitable.
I would also like to propose that during this session high-level discussions be undertaken to achieve understandings that would commence the process for the convening of an International Conference on Money and Finance for Development.
The critical economic situation in Africa and the drought and famine conditions have evoked a spontaneous response from the international community, including many non-aligned countries. The leaders of the African countries at the twenty-eighth summit Conference of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) have adopted a bold and courageous Declaration in which they have expressed Africa's determination to deal with the challenge of development. It is incumbent on the international community fully to support their efforts. As a token of solidarity, the Non-aligned Movement has adopted a Plan of Action. India has, on its own part, made a contribution of 100,000 tons of wheat, followed by another contribution of $US 10 million to the OAU Special Fund. Under the Plan of Action, India has already identified nine agricultural projects in Africa. Our participation in these projects, which is in an advanced stage of preparation, shall assist in priority areas for the rehabilitation of the agricultural infrastructure. The efforts by India that I have mentioned are additional to the bilateral program that my country has on an ongoing basis with the African countries as a part of which a large number of African experts are undergoing training in Indian institutions, and Indian experts are working in several areas with their African brethren in African countries. This, too, is a contribution to the priority areas of socio-economic development in Africa.
As one of the original signatories of the United Nations Charter, India has remained steadfast in its commitment to the values and ideals enshrined therein. To quote once again the words of India's first Prime Minister,
Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, from a speech he made in 1946 even before we attained our independence:
"Towards the United Nations, India's attitude is that of whole-hearted co-operation and unreserved adherence, in both spirit and letter, to the Charter governing it. To that end, India will participate fully in its various activities and actively play that role in its Councils to which her geographical position, population and contribution towards peaceful progress entitle her."
By the same token, the United Nations and its system of specialized agencies have been a valued partner for India in the task of nation building and economic development. For the assistance and co-operation that the United Nations has given us, we are deeply grateful. That, however, is not the only vindication of the trust, hope and confidence that we repose in the United Nations. The importance and utility of the United Nations for us, for the non-aligned and other developing countries, indeed for the entire international community, is to be measured not only by the material assistance the United Nations provides in bettering the quality of life on this planet, but by the higher and more noble aspirations of humanity embodied in this remarkable institution. The greatest tribute that we can pay to the United Nations on this occasion is therefore to rededicate ourselves to the Purposes and Principles of the Charter and to reaffirm our commitment to give them full effect. As this Assembly proclaimed last year, let 1985 "mark the beginning of an era of durable global peace and justice, social and economic development and progress and independence for all peoples". We hope indeed that we are on the threshold of such an era.
Sir, at the outset I should like to congratulate you on your election to the high position of President of the General Assembly for the fortieth session. I am convinced that your wealth of diplomatic experience and proven skills will contribute to the enrichment of the deliberations during this special session.
This year we are commemorating the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations, which was established with many hopes and expectations in the aftermath of a world distraught by death, destruction and the plunder of war.
Like many other peoples, but significantly different from them, the Jewish people underwent an ordeal which will leave its eternal mark not only in the long annals of its history but also in its deeper spiritual and psychological experience. This was, of course, the horrendous Holocaust which was wrought upon us by nazism and anti-semitism. For this reason the emergence of the United Nations provided a source of inspiration and light for us at the end of a very dark era in our history.
Indeed, what could be more stirring than the unequivocal declarations of principle appearing in the opening paragraphs of the United Nations Charter, such as: "We the peoples of the United Nations, determined to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war" and the call "to practice tolerance and live together in peace with one another as good neighbors"? To my great regret, however, this Organization has had a part in shattering these aspirations and noble ideals.
The slander of anti-semitism has also been propagated in the guise of anti-zionism. In this context, we sadly note the tenth anniversary of the passing of the infamous General Assembly resolution falsely equating the Jewish National Liberation Movement - Zionism - with an outrageous phenomenon totally alien to the most fundamental and spiritual values of the Jewish heritage. That resolution, 3379 (XXX), of 10 November 1975, will be remembered in the history of the United Nations as a terrible blot on its record and a discredit to the Organization and to those irresponsible Members that supported it.
Other international forums have also been exploited for the purpose of propaganda and political warfare against Israel, distorting the real purposes for which they were established. It would, therefore, be appropriate and timely to strive for what I would call "political disarmament" in these bodies, in order to guarantee that they maintain their integrity and credibility in the exercise of their legitimate functions.
Israel was established in 1948 against the background of a United Nations resolution calling for the establishment of a Jewish State in Palestine. The United Nations, however, did nothing to implement its resolution, and the State of Israel came into being through the will, the toil and the sacrifice of its people. Nor, I might add, did the United Nations alleviate the immense threats and dangers that Israel had to face since its establishment.
Since the founding of the State we have made every possible effort towards the achievement of peace and the normalization of relations with our neighbors. Peace for us is a natural and integral part of our national heritage. The Jewish people is a small, democratic and free people, striving to rebuild its renewed nationhood in its ancient homeland. We cherish peace and we teach its blessings to our children. Indeed, after a prolonged period of strife and hostility forced on us by our neighbors, we found a way to build a bridge of peace with one of our Arab neighbors.
Egypt and Israel have demonstrated clearly that face-to-face negotiations and direct dialog are the most constructive and beneficial ways of achieving peace. This was brought about on the basis of the Camp David Accords, which established a just and effective framework for the settlement of conflicts. It is for this reason that Israel is so insistent on applying this framework to the further extension of the peace process. We hope that in the near future we shall be able to negotiate with Jordan, our neighbor to the East. It is crucial that the peace treaty with Egypt should not remain the sole example of peace with our neighbors, and therefore we earnestly seek to widen and deepen that peace by extending the process to include the rest of our Arab neighbors.
From this rostrum I once again urge King Hussein of Jordan to enter into direct negotiations with Israel - not in some vague, deflecting international forum, but in direct, bilateral discussions. An international conference is a means of evading direct negotiations. It will be a stage for hostile and extreme propaganda and will not serve the cause of peace. Our aim should be the achievement of a bilaterally negotiated peace treaty between our countries. There is no change in our deep commitment to the Camp David accords, and we stand ready therefore to meet a Jordanian delegation, which may include Arab Palestinians from Judea, Samaria and Gaza, or other Arab Palestinians to be mutually agreed upon.
Israel firmly believes that there is no way to solve the problems of our region except through negotiations and peace. If King Hussein has finally decided to offer his hand in peace, let him act the way the late President Sadat did. He should not drown the quest for peace in a sea of conditions that nullify any chance of peace - conditions such as an international conference and the participation of terrorist organizations in the peace process. I should also like to urge King Hussein to free himself at this eleventh hour, from the clutches of the PLO. King Hussein has been caught in their clutches before and it seems that he has failed to learn from his own experience. Only after freeing himself from his dangerous association with the PLO terrorists will it be possible to achieve progress towards peace between Israel and Jordan. Indeed, the recent marked increase in terror attacks against Israelis stems, among other things, from Hussein's partnership with the PLO. Jordan cannot extend the olive branch of peace on the one hand and play host to terror at the same time. The two are mutually exclusive.
Our position in this regard is clear and decisive. We are firmly against any contacts or dealings with terrorists or their representatives - and, in this case, with an organization whose declared purpose is the liquidation of Israel. PLO leaders have been intimating that they are engaged in the political process of peace. However, they have been waging cruel and murderous terrorist activity all along. According to their declared program, political action and terrorist activities should go hand in hand until they achieve their goal, the elimination of Israel. He are not ready to negotiate with terror. There is no place for its self-proclaimed representatives at a table where peace, security and tranquility are to be negotiated. Acknowledging that organization would be tantamount to legitimizing terror, and should be rejected by all those who value peace.
To protect our people and territory from terror, we were obliged to act against the PLO terrorist infrastructure in Lebanon, which posed an intolerable threat to our people in the Galilee region.
Meanwhile, terror continues to wreak havoc in Lebanon. The latest outrage was the kidnapping of four Soviet diplomats in Beirut. Kidnapping and the holding of hostages for ransom is only one of the manifestations of international terrorism, whose linchpin is the PLO, which we roust fight and stamp out. This is another example of the fact that terror knows no bounds, neither political nor any other.
The removal of the various threats from Israel's northern border continues to be an important priority for us. We will do all in our power to defend and protect the population of the north. This objective has become no less important in the wake of the withdrawal of the Israel Defense Forces from Lebanon, in accordance with the decision of the Government of Israel of 14 January 1935.
Yesterday Israel took action against terror bases, this time in Tunisia. Israel's air force acted against the terrorists only after it became evident that the terrorists were mounting attacks from Tunis with impunity. Only last week, PLO terrorists, who were directed and commanded from Tunis, attacked an Israeli boat in Larnaca, Cyprus, and murdered three Israeli civilians in cold blood. In recent months, those headquarters were responsible for a number of seaborne attempts
against our people, which were prevented by Israel's navy. We had no intention of attacking Tunisia, although that country has permitted terrorist bases to exist on its soil. We acted against murderous criminals in order to prevent the continuation of their criminal acts.
The United Nations has been sadly remiss in meeting the challenge of international and PLO terror. It could and should have come out resolutely against this evil phenomenon of our time and placed it outside the pale of civilization. Instead, it has equivocated and, worse, legitimized terror in terms that have provided encouragement to the terrorists and their supporters.
I regret to state that, in spite of numerous outrages and continuing attacks by PLO terrorists, this issue has never been seriously addressed by the Security Council or other United Nations and international forums. Israel cannot be expected to ignore this double standard. In spite of this, Israel is willing to act with other free nations to curb, if not stamp out, terrorism. Similarly, we urge joint international action against terrorists and their sponsors.
Among the most distressing and oppressing phenomena of our international experience is racism. The very word evokes dark and brutal memories of the long history of the Jewish people. Apartheid is a system of discrimination which the Jewish faith and the State of Israel totally reject and repudiate. The Government of Israel, on 11 August 1985, reiterated that it is unconditionally opposed to the policy of apartheid in South Africa and to any discrimination on grounds of race, religion or color or on any other grounds.
Israel has diplomatic relations with some of the African States and we are ready to renew our relations with those with which we do not have them. This is, of course, up to them. We believe that many have by now seen who the real friends of Africa are: it is not those who use high-flown words but will not lend a helping hand in time of need and distress, or those who remember Africa only when they need its votes at the United Nations. The State of Israel, in contrast, was one of the first to reach out to the nations of Africa, in their early years of sovereignty and statehood and in their current travails, and we are ready to increase our efforts.
In the area of disarmament the nations of the Middle Bast are confronted with three main challenges. These are the reduction of conventional arms, the prevention of the proliferation of nuclear weapons and the eradication of the use. of chemical warfare. My Government believes that concerted regional action on all three issues is a moral imperative of the highest priority.
Concerning the accumulation of conventional arras, Israel voices its concern over the accelerated supply of large quantities of weapons to a number of belligerent Arab Governments in our region. These regimes do not need these arms for their defense, but are stockpiling them to use against Israel. This can only serve to undermine the chances for peace in the Middle East.
On the subject of nuclear weapons, we believe that the most effective and credible barrier to proliferation in so sensitive an area as the Middle Bast is a freely and directly negotiated convention establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone, based on a system of obligations binding' on all States concerned. Israel stands ready to begin such negotiations without delay or preconditions.
While Israel is conscious of the necessity to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons, we are also aware of the substantial contribution which the peaceful use of nuclear energy can make to the well-being of the world and the right of all countries to benefit from such uses. We support those international agreements that would ensure the status and inviolability of nuclear facilities dedicated to peaceful purposes.
Another issue that arouses the deepest anxiety is the repeated use of chemical weapons in the Iran-Iraq war and the danger that such use may spread in a manner that could not easily be reversed, if at all. It is tragic that the sixtieth anniversary of the 1925 Geneva Protocol forbidding the use of such weapons should be commemorated in this manner. This total disregard for solemn international legal obligations by Iraq demonstrates the difficulty of achieving genuine disarmament. But we must not despair; we must continue our efforts in this vital field of human endeavor.
The deteriorating situation of the Jews in the Soviet Union obliges us once again to speak out in defense of their elementary rights. Our concern relates especially to the hundreds of thousands of Soviet Jews who have indicated their desire to join their people in Israel. The Soviet authorities, however, in flagrant violation of the Helsinki Final Act and many other international obligations assumed by the Soviet Government, refuse them permission to leave.
Many of those Jews who have been denied permission to leave are forced to live as outcasts from Soviet society, subject to all manner of official harassment and persecution, while being effectively deprived of the means of legal redress. Increasing numbers have been engulfed in recent months in an accelerating wave of arrests, trials and savage sentences of imprisonment on trumped-up criminal charges. Jews seeking to disseminate knowledge of the Hebrew language have been prominent among these recent victims of judicial repression. These Jews are in no way violating Soviet law, nor are they involved in any form of anti-Soviet activity. Their real crimes, in the eyes of the authorities, are their persistent demand to leave for Israel and their efforts, in the face of strenuous official opposition, to perpetuate their Jewish heritage, culture and religion.
All of these outrages are taking place against the background of a relentless campaign of anti-semitic incitement, usually camouflaged as anti-zionism, in the officially controlled media - a campaign designed by the authorities to encourage an attitude of suspicion, hatred and contempt towards Soviet Jews on the part of the Soviet population.
We call upon all persons of goodwill and all Governments in the civilized world to join us in our protests and in urging the Soviet authorities to conform their policies towards Soviet Jewry to the international obligations solemnly undertaken by the Soviet Government.
Israel seeks good relations with all States including, naturally, the Soviet Union. We have looked to the new Soviet leadership for signs of change in its attitude towards Soviet Jewry. Regrettably, so far we have seen no positive changes whatsoever. .We therefore have no choice but to continue to expose energetically and protest vigorously these flagrant violations of the rights of our fellow Jews seeking to join their people in Israel. He shall continue to do so untiA every Soviet Jew who so wishes is free to exercise this basic right.
There is also the problem of the Jews of Syria, who are subjected by the Syrian regime to discrimination and restrictive policies and are not free to choose to live wherever they wish. This is a flagrant violation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, of which Syria is a signatory. Jews who wish to travel abroad must leave their families behind as living hostages to ensure the travelers return.
Several hundred young Jewish women remain unmarried because of the depleted male Jewish population in Syria. The Syrian Government has cruelly refused to allow those women to leave the country in order to be able to marry within their faith and establish families.
tJe are also concerned about the small, ancient Jewish community left in Ethiopia, because of its isolation and suffering and the latest disasters that have befallen that country. Some of these Jews have already returned to their historic homeland and have been received as long-lost brothers and sisters who have finally returned home.
The people of Israel and its Government have expressed their solidarity with the Ethiopian people, which has undergone much suffering as a result of the recent famine and other difficulties. We appeal to the Ethiopian Government to respect the cultural and religious rights of the Jewish community and to enable it to continue to maintain its heritage and religion and, on humanitarian grounds, to permit those among them who so desire to be reunited with their families in Israel.
The fortieth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations may be a fitting occasion for a review and reappraisal of its activities, in frank and constructive self-criticism.
The United Nations should not merely celebrate its past but also plan for its future.
Some may feel disheartened by the fact that, after so many years of United Nations preoccupation with the problems of the developing countries, we still remain so distant from the goal of bridging the gap between the poor and the rich nations of the world. Poverty, hunger, malnutrition and disease still characterize the conditions of life in many parts of the world.
One inescapable conclusion is that progress has too often been hampered by a tendency to substitute slogans for serious plans of action. Meeting the world's pressing economic and social problems will require new dimensions of international co-operation. The danger of famine continues to afflict developing countries. There is dire need for urgent action by the world community. The peoples of Africa are struggling to free themselves from the curses of poverty and hunger, and the rest of the world must help them in this struggle.
The vital element of developing traditional agriculture has been sorely neglected. Israel is now preparing an aid proposal for more efficient food delivery systems that would provide better nutrition and would link such aid with land and water development programs.
The success of integrated rural development has been proved in Israel's own rapid agricultural development. Israel has much experience in the proper use of soil and water, marketing organization, agro-industrial systems appropriate for developing countries, and the integration of populations and development projects. He are ready to share our know-how in these fields with other developing countries. The benefits of this experience can contribute to raising living standards in many societies.	4
Israel has presented to international organizations, both within and outside the United Nations, a development proposal entitled "Transitional Economy". It seeks to break the vicious circle of poverty by improving the productivity and quality of life in developing countries. The proposed program seeks to combine a comprehensive development process with decentralized planning and implementation.
In the 26 years of Israel's involvement in international development efforts, Israel has co-operated with more than 100 countries and trained over 50,000 men and women in agriculture, in rural development and in health and education. During Israel's development it encountered some of the same problems that are now facing African countries and has successfully overcome them.
The United Nations may recapture some of its prestige and authority if it gives priority to these pressing social and economic issues. The magnitude of the tasks before us will require unprecedented international co-operation.
Unfortunately, the United Nations record is not very encouraging. At its last session the General Assembly had 143 items on its agenda. It passed no less than 38 resolutions relating to the Middle East, out of which 37 were negative, even hostile, in their reference to Israel. Such resolutions have long ceased to attract any attention or carry any weight. Yet the General Assembly did not see fit to address itself to such danger-spots as the Iraq-Iran war and Afghanistan, or to many of the socio-economic problems which plague our society.
Let us put aside the political differences that beset our world and join forces in an effort to find solutions for the ordinary man, woman and child, who are too often ignored in the heat of political debate. Let us work together in the spirit of the ancient prophets who gave to the world the concept of the brotherhood of man, a concept which has been the basis for the great ideals of mankind.
In the present age of unprecedented opportunities, Israel calls upon all Governments, international agencies and non-governmental organizations to rise to the challenge offered by science and technology. Let us share the fruits of scientific and technological advances to improve our lives. Let us build a moral and prosperous future to achieve justice and dignity for all. Let the United Nations become, truly, a "United Nations for a better world".
I must begin by expressing the profound regret of the New Zealand people at the terrible earthquakes in Mexico. Our thoughts are with the people of Mexico. New Zealand is a country which is subject to earthquakes - we know the devastation they can cause.
It is a privilege and a pleasure for me to address the Assembly over which Ambassador de Pinies presides. I first came to the United Nations as a student intern in the 1960s. By then Ambassador de Pinies had already been a prominent figure here for some years. It is entirely appropriate that he should now have been elected to the Assembly's highest office. I offer him my congratulations, and the full support of my delegation for his efforts to make this fortieth session a fruitful and memorable one.
As we celebrate this fortieth anniversary of the United Nations, the thoughts of all of us must turn to reflect on the aspirations and objectives that were pursued with such energy and confidence when the Charter of this Organization was drawn up. For a New Zealand representative it is natural to remember with pride that our Prime Minister of the day, the Right Honorable Peter Fraser, contributed to this original process with statesmanlike vigor. Today especially I wish to recall and pay homage to the leading role he played in seeking to assert the rights of small countries to the maximum possible protection under the Charter against the vicissitudes of international life and in the aftermath of two World Wars.
Now, forty years on, this is no less cogent a problem. My Government, by irony of fate, finds itself at this rostrum again concerned to see maintained, in difficult circumstances, the sovereign rights of a small state against the increasingly complex and sophisticated pressures that are generated from larger
countries within the international community.
It continues to be ray Government's apprehension that, forty years on, the atomic weapon has kept its malign pace along with the existence of the United Nations. No less than in 1945, the horrific atomic shadow still falls across all
our proceedings.
In saying that, I am not expressing a platitude. My point is that the continued development of this weapon over the lifetime of our organization has in fact succeeded in distorting the fabric of international life. In our own experience it conditions the sovereign freedoms we had thought in 1945 were once and for all assured to us. At the very least as policies of power are pursued it has impinged on standards or international morality and behavior.

In such a political climate, it is natural that smaller countries may turn to the possibilities of collective self-help that the Charter of the United Nations encourages. It is indeed to the advantage of the United Nations that each country contributes the perspective of that part of the world in which it finds itself -the South Pacific - there has over recent years been a growing perception that great Power rivalries could start to extend to our region. The fact is, however, that the strategic circumstances of the South Pacific are not those of the northern hemisphere; nor has the South Pacific so far been an area of great-Power confrontation. It need never be; and our own security is best served by keeping it so.
Against that background the countries in the region have acted. We have set in being the best practical measure of agreed arms control available to us to guard against the emplacement of nuclear weapons in our midst. As was announced earlier this year, the South Pacific Forum countries endorsed and opened for signature on 6 August, the anniversary of Hiroshima Day, a treaty establishing the world's second nuclear-weapon-free zone in a permanently inhabited area. This South Pacific nuclear free zone Treaty signals in no uncertain terms the deeply anti-nuclear sentiments of our peoples, and their desire to live in peace and independence and to run their own affairs in accordance with their own wishes.
It is basic to their peace of mind that there should be no use, testing or stationing of nuclear explosives in the South Pacific, and that the activities of the South Pacific countries themselves should fully respect and fulfill the aims of such applicable international measures as the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
To these ends, all parties to the South Pacific nuclear free zone Treaty undertake not to possess, manufacture or acquire nuclear explosive devices anywhere, nor allow them to be stationed on their territory. They also undertake to prevent the diversion of fissionable material to non-peaceful purposes, and not to dump radioactive waste at sea in the zone.
Under the Treaty, South Pacific countries retain their unqualified sovereign rights to decide for themselves, consistently with their support for these objectives, their security rights, and such questions as the access to their ports and airfields by vessels and aircraft of their countries. The Treaty is not, therefore, some sort of disguised attempt to undermine existing military alliances. It is a determined effort to ensure that the South Pacific is not riven by the tensions which have overshadowed so many other parts of the world.
To the South, the Zone borders the area of another and much older agreement -the Antarctic Treaty. We value that Treaty not just because of the nuclear-free and demilitarized zone it establishes for Antarctica but because for 25 years it has effectively guaranteed the stability of the region to the South of New Zealand. It remains the only possible guarantee that that region will continue to remain free from international rivalry and conflict.
To the East, the new zone borders the area covered by the Treaty of Tlatelolco. The joining of the areas covered by that Treaty and the Antarctic Treaty with the vast area covered by the new Treaty means that a large part of the Southern hemisphere has declared its determination to be free of nuclear weapons. As my own Prime Minister said last year to this General Assembly:
"This initiative represents, I believe, a major advance for the region. It would not, we know, spare us from the consequences of nuclear war but, when in place, it would significantly strengthen the existing measures, both global and regional, to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons." (A/39/PV.7, p. 11) Now in 1985, with the Treaty concluded and awaiting in due course its entry into force, we see it as a fitting contribution to this anniversary of the United Nations that we are celebrating.
I should add that the South Pacific Forum countries hope that the five nuclear States will, after consultation with them, sign the relevant Protocols to this Treaty. Thereby they would agree not to use, or threaten to use, nuclear explosive devices against any country or territory in the zone. They would also undertake not to test nuclear explosive devices there.
In this anniversary year of the United Nations, it is painful to have to point out once again that one of the nuclear-weapon states continues to test nuclear explosives in the South Pacific, against the manifest and long-established wish of all the countries in the area that this activity should cease.
These nuclear testing activities have this year led to a new turn of events in the region which, because of its gravity, I am bound to bring to your attention.
Politically motivated offenses and terrorism have been virtually unknown in New Zealand in the past. But the scene has changed as a result of the incident in July 1985 in which the Greenpeace vessel "Rainbow Warrior" was sunk at its berth in Auckland, New Zealand, by a bomb attack which killed a crew member. The circumstances indicated international terrorism. It was well known that the vessel was intended to sail to French Polynesia to protest against the continuation of nuclear explosions at Mururoa Atoll. The incident has gained world-wide attention, and the New Zealand Government has made known its determination to bring those responsible to full account for this outrage. Large scale investigations by the New Zealand police are still under way. Within New Zealand, two French nationals have been arrested and charged with murder, arson and conspiracy, and are due to come before the court in New Zealand in November this year.
I shall not expand upon this notorious incident in detail, except to note that the latest public pronouncement by the Prime Minister of France, after the French Government's own most recent investigations, has acknowledged that agents of the French secret services did indeed sink the "Rainbow Warrior", acting under orders to that effect. It had earlier been established that, for the purpose of surveillance of the Greenpeace fleet, elements of French military forces had been deliberately introduced into New Zealand, under orders from their Government, without the permission of the Government of New Zealand and in derogation of our sovereignty.
Small States must place reliance on international law and we must rely on the protection which the international community, through the United Nations, can give us in circumstances of this serious nature.
Inquiries into the "Rainbow warrior" incident are still being pursued, and the Government of New Zealand is concerned that a traditionally good and highly valued relationship with the Government of France should continue. I am bound to note that the New Zealand Government addressed on 6 September 1985 a formal communication to the Government of France.
In that message New Zealand has reserved its legal position and its rights of action under international law, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, with respect to matters arising from this unfortunate incident. That is a clear enunciation of our position in relation to an issue which is shown to implicate the responsibility of the French Government.
It is certainly my Government's hope that the most recent statement by the French Prime Minister will provide a basis for resolving outstanding questions . between the two Governments arising out of the affair. And I am very pleased to report to the Assembly today that only last evening I met with the French Minister for Foreign Relations, Mr. Dumas, at the New Zealand Mission to the United Nations. He began to discuss possible ways to find solutions to problems arising from the Rainbow Warrior incident, and we have agreed to have another meeting within the next few days.
By virtue of their vulnerability, smaller States have often felt that they must take additional steps to preserve their Charter rights. In the years following the Second World War, a number of countries, including New Zealand, moved, consistently with the Charter, into defensive treaty alliances. This has not meant, however, that countries such as New Zealand have forsaken their right to think for themselves or have abandoned significant sovereign rights. That was not intended.
New Zealand, for example, as a party to the Non-Proliferation Treaty, has forgone the possession of nuclear weapons. We have also declared unambiguously that we do not want any country to defend New Zealand with nuclear weapons. In short, my Government does not seek to be part of any calculation that involves the accumulation of nuclear weapons. We will not have any nuclear weapons on our territory. We will not allow any to be brought in. And ships that are nuclear armed will not come into New Zealand ports.
As will be clear from what I have already said in relation to the South Pacific nuclear-free-zone Treaty, we have taken our own stand on principle, because in the South Pacific there is no need for a build-up of nuclear armaments - indeed, the reverse is true.
The stand we have taken is fully consistent with New Zealand's active membership of the Western community. We see our participation in that community, our partnership with our friends and neighbors in the South Pacific and our support for this world Organization as cumulatively strengthening the fabric of peace in our part of the world.
In practical terms, the effect of the re-evaluation of our interests that we have undertaken will be a new concentration of New Zealand's efforts on our immediate neighborhood. This will involve an expansion of New Zealand's political, economic and defense activities in the South Pacific region and the assertion of an increasingly active role there. This new and strengthened regional approach should provide the basis for a continued, sound and stable relationship with Australia and the United States based on a clear definition of New Zealand's interests and a policy of self-reliance.
Events of recent years lead one to ponder whether the reiteration of the ideals of our Charter over the past 40 years has not bred a measure of easy familiarity, even of complacency, against which we should be very much on our guard in the period ahead. Even those States which themselves generated the great national revolutions - revolutions which inspired the League of Nations and our Charter - have only imperfectly acknowledged in practice the full implications of the existence of newly independent States and the democratic rights those States are perfectly entitled to see maintained and protected.
I hope that our ocean region will not be vulnerable in that respect. It certainly need not be, and it is already organized in regional ways to assert its own distinctive voice internationally*
Here, the United Nations can take its due credit in helping a tide of decolonization which has changed the political map of the Pacific dramatically. In 1945 no island country was independent; in 1985 12 are. United Nations stewardship has often been instrumental in the peaceful achievement of self-determination. The Charter, as well as the 1960 Declaration on decolonization, provided the guiding beacons for the navigators who plotted the course towards independence, and the Special Committee of 24 has monitored progress. It still continues to do so, and New Zealand will be happy to receive next year a Visiting Mission from the Committee to the last remaining overseas responsibility which New Zealand has - the island community of Tokelau.
Decolonization in the South Pacific is not yet complete. In Micronesia to the north, lengthy negotiations per many years with the United States have produced Compacts of Free Association which have the support of the relevant peoples of the Trust Territory. We do not believe that unilateral changes should be made now to the agreed definition of the future relationship between the United States and the Marshall Islands and the Federated States of Micronesia. We will, however, look for and support an early termination of the Trusteeship Agreement in respect of those parts of the Trust Territory, in accordance with the expressed wishes of the peoples. We look forward to welcoming the Federated States of Micronesia, the Marshall Islands and Palau into membership of the South Pacific Forum before too long.
Further south, the region watches anxiously the difficulties faced by the people of New Caledonia in building a consensus for independence in that country. The rights and aspirations of the indigenous Kanak people must be met in the context of New Caledonia's multiracial society. We regret the violence and loss of life which have occurred over the past year. New Zealand supports the present plan for the establishment of regional councils and a congress, leading to a referendum on self-determination before the end of 1987. We welcome the recognition by the administering Power, France, that independence is the logical outcome of this process. It will be important to ensure that the steps outlined are adhered to. The Kanaks have been disappointed too often in the past. Only by following a predictable and short pathway to independence can further disruption and violence be avoided.
I have already noted that political emancipation and the assertion of a say in their own destiny have led the South Pacific countries to early recognition of the desirability of co-operation with each other. Political independence in the Pacific, as elsewhere, is not automatically accompanied by economic self-determination, but acting together has strengthened the voice of the region in international forums. And it can assist in tackling some of the intractable problems arising from smallness, isolation and a scarcity of resources. The island States depend heavily on external assistance. The international price of copra and sugar has a profound affect on people's daily lives. Some significant regional efforts have been made under the auspices of the South Pacific Forum to improve trade access, shipping, telecommunications and the knowledge and control of marine mineral and fishing resources.
Distant water fishing nations have been less respectful of the region's main resource in the past. This situation is improving, largely as a result of the evasiveness of the Pacific Forum nations, and important multilateral negotiations with the Government of the United States on a treaty regulating fishing are currently under way. A successful conclusion will make possible control of purse seiner activity within the 200-mile economic zones of Pacific signatories, and eliminate an area of serious friction. New Zealand looks to the United Nations and other international bodies to continue to help is overcoming the problems of economic security for the very small island States, in support of the region's own efforts to do so.
One issue on which the countries of the South Pacific are united is that of racial discrimination. We all have multiracial societies; we are all committed to making racial harmony the foundation for our nation-building. It follows that we are all totally opposed to the systematic racial discrimination that is practiced in South Africa under the name of apartheid. Since my Government came to office last year we have demonstrated our commitment to that cause: the South Africans have closed their consulate in Wellington, and a proposed rugby tour of South Africa has been canceled. All New Zealanders are appalled the rising tide of violence that is threatening to engulf South Africa. The South African Government must be persuaded to institute the necessary reforms before it is too late. It must be brought to realize that it cannot maintain apartheid by force. It must talk unconditionally to the leaders of the black majority. It must accept that racial partnership offers the only hope for the future of that tormented country. All of us must do whatever we can in a concerted way to produce this result. New Zealand's contacts with South Africa, whether economic or otherwise, are now minimal. I need hardly say that we shall readily comply with any additional sanctions imposed by the international community;
I have focused on practical issues of importance to our Pacific neighborhood - because it is in workable solutions to those issues that the elements lie for continued stable and peaceful development in the South Pacific. He are aware of the larger dimensions to all these problems, and notably of the tensions that impede the prospect of achieving genuine disarmament in our time.
Implicit in what I said earlier is that my part of the world is by no means impressed either with the speed of the global disarmament process or with the failure of the nuclear Powers to read an agreement on limiting their nuclear arsenals.
In the General Assembly last year my Government gave expression to the conviction amongst New Zealanders, as amongst peoples everywhere, that nuclear weapons expose to annihilation those whom they purport to protect; that each new development in nuclear weaponry opens up a more alarming and a potentially more destabilizing prospect than the last. There are already more than enough nuclear weapons to destroy us all many times over. Yet the number goes on increasing. The dilemma is recognized universally. TO control the spread of nuclear weapons and eventually to eliminate them completely are goals of the greatest importance. Where those who have them and those who do not seem to differ is in the sense of urgency. And it is to the United Nations that smaller countries such as my own must look to express that agonizing conviction, which has so recently been voiced by the vast majority of countries assembled at the Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference just concluded in Geneva. 
A year age the Soviet Union agreed to take up the offer of the United States to resume bilateral arias control negotiations, with the goal of leading to the complete elimination of nuclear weapons everywhere. My Government greatly welcomed that move. The issues are complex. We know only too well that there will be no easy or necessarily quick solutions. But solutions are not beyond the skills of negotiation if the political will is there. New Zealand calls on the negotiating parties to pursue their task with good faith and the utmost urgency. The time is past for picking around the edges of the agenda or for diversionary proposals -time-bound and shrouded in propaganda.
We would view with the deepest concern any prospect of competition between the major Powers extending into yet another environment - outer space. But we do not accept that there can be no progress in the talks on strategic weapons and intermediate-range nuclear forces as long as there is no agreement on outer space. The talks must not be held hostage in this way.
Much hangs on the meeting that will take place shortly between President Reagan and General-Secretary Gorbachev. We most earnestly hope for a successful outcome. We do not for a moment underestimate the complexities of the issues the two leaders must deal with. But we urge them to set a framework for a new co-operation from which the negotiations in Geneva may derive the momentum they need to reach agreements to stop the arms race.
At the same time, the efforts of the international community towards meaningful international arms control agreements must continue. The Conference on Disarmament addresses many important issues. No task is more difficult than to forge reliable instruments of international law. But progress in the Conference on Disarmament is, at best, haltingly slow. We urge it to get on with its tasks with commitment and determination.
This Assembly considers many disarmament and arms control proposals in the course of its deliberations. Many of these recommend what is practical and achievable. Some are symptomatic only of an ideological divide.
One of the most serious proposals before the Assembly will again be the draft resolution, jointly sponsored by New Zealand end Australia, urging the conclusion of a comprehensive test ban. A comprehensive test ban, banning all testing in all environments permanently, is regarded by virtually all States as the most immediate and practical step that can be taken to halt and then reverse the arms race. Balanced, practical, verifiable, it will be a major restraint on the spread of nuclear weapons. It will straitjacket the development of new types of weapons without undermining existing strategic balances. It will inhibit compulsive competitiveness among the nuclear Powers.
On two occasions, in the early sixties and in the late seventies, agreement was almost achieved on a comprehensive test ban. We have been disappointed by the setbacks which have prevented such a prohibition from being put in place. My delegation will again seek the means to encourage and speed up this work.
We are celebrating the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations. Time has not produced universal contentment with this Organization. Some of the criticisms which have been made arise from exaggerated and unrealistic expectations. As the Secretary-General reminds us in his latest annual report, the United Nations is not a super-State. It cannot do more than its Members will allow it to do. The policies of Member States have so far prevented the Organization from exercising some of the powers given it by the Charter. They have also prevented it from achieving some of its fundamental purposes. Those are facts.
It is also a fact that the Charter remains the only universally accepted basis of international order. The principles it enshrines are generally recognized today, as they were 40 years ago, to be essential for world peaces and those principles are the foundations of the international regime under which we all live - a regime which, with all its failings, gives individual countries and peoples more freedom than they have ever had before. The United Nations is today the beacon of hope for all small nations. It is their democratic voice by which they can express their fears and their aspirations.
The essential function of this Organization is to uphold the principles of the Charter. First in importance is the principle that "all Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force". Living, as we do, under the threat of nuclear annihilation, we have as strong a common interest as ever in supporting the United Nations and helping to achieve this, its most elusive, but its moat vital, objective.
Sir, permit me first of all to congratulate you upon your election to the high post of President of the united Nations General Assembly for the fortieth session and to wish you success in your work.
I should like to address the delegation of Mexico, whose country has suffered such a terrible natural disaster, entailing heavy loss of life and tremendous destruction, On behalf of the Soviet leadership and on behalf of all the Soviet people, we should like once again to convey to the Government and people of Mexico our most profound condolences.
Four decades have gone by since the victory of the freedom-loving peoples over German fascism and Japanese militarism. The United Nations, whose birth was the natural result of that great victory and whose work has represented the world's major hope for preventing new wars, has now been in existence for 40 years.
Today it can be stated with great satisfaction that those have been 40 years without a world war. In that period truly gigantic changes have taken place in the world. These changes include the establishment and development of the world socialist system - a system of States whose very political and social nature excludes the possibility of any interest in war. All the practical activities of the countries of the socialist community in the international arena are based on the policy of the peaceful coexistence of States with different social systems. The role of socialism in world affairs has been steadily increasing.
Over an extremely short historical span of time the hurricane of the peoples' liberation struggle has destroyed and eliminated from the face of the earth the colonial system of imperialism. Over 100 new States have emerged from its ruins. Today they are full-fledged Members of the United Nations.
The forces that are at work to strengthen peace and prevent war are constantly growing. At present their struggle involves people of all continents, of all generations and occupations, and with the most diverse political beliefs.
The past 40 years have been a period of rapid progress in the scientific and technological revolution, which is not only drastically changing our concepts of the structure of the universe and of matter itself but is also creating ever broader opportunities for meeting the spiritual and material needs of every individual and of all mankind. Even today the achievements of science, if they are used for constructive purposes, make it possible to resolve almost any economic problem. However, they can also generate unprecedented dangers whenever they are used for developing means of annihilation and destruction.
In the complex and rapidly changing world of today, which is the scene of a continuing struggle between the forces of progress and the forces of reaction, between the forces of the future and those of the past, the development of relations among States, including the major Powers possessing the greatest military potential, has followed s changing and at times zigzag course. Aggravations of international tension have alternated with periods when that tension abated; international crises have sprung up and have been overcome, some of them being so acute as to bring mankind to the verge of catastrophe. It would be fair to say that many a time when the international barometer has forecast a storm the United Nations has raised its voice in warning and has been able to take practical steps to reduce the threat.
The greatest hopes for stable peace emerged in the 1970 s, which went down in history as the decade of detente. Detente was based on the general recognition that it was inadmissible in the nuclear age to seek to attain political and ideological goals by means of war and that the policy of achieving the military superiority of some states over others or of one social system over another was wrong and dangerous.
The countries of the socialist community and many other States have every right to take pride in having been the architects and engineers of detente. Yet in the late 1970s and early 1980s the world once again witnessed a stepping up of the activities of the forces which never supported the policy of detente and are now seeking to undo its most important accomplishments. As a result, much of the system of international relations is out of joint and the risk of war has sharply increased.
My delegation wishes to set forth the views of the soviet Union regarding the reasons for the current unfavorable development of the situation in the world and ways of remedying the existing state of affairs. It can be remedied only if there is an understanding, as has been pointed out by Mikhail S. Gorbachev, of the "realities and the dangers which we will inevitably face tomorrow if today those who can and must take the only correct decision evade the responsibility incumbent on them".
We perceive the greatest peril in the fact that the nuclear arms race has, at it were, made a fresh start and is forging ahead. Added to this there is the threat of the arms race spreading to outer space. There is a great possibility of the arms race acquiring an uncontrollable and irreversible character. In the final analysis, this is the road leading to a nuclear catastrophe.
It is also alarming that of late it has not been possible to settle a single regional conflict or to eliminate .a single hotbed of military tension. In the meantime the flames of "local" wars, more often than not undeclared, have been responsible for the deaths of tens of thousands, and indeed hundreds of thousands. Mankind is suffering through being denied the opportunity to deal with such urgent problems as those relating to food, ecology, energy, population and the constantly widening economic gap between the developed and the developing countries. It has been denied that opportunity because the intellectual and material resources needed to find a radical solution to these problems common to all mankind are being squandered on the arms race.
Not a single twist in the arms race spiral was initiated by the Soviet Union. It is only in response to actions of the other side and out of legitimate concern for our own security and that of our allies and friends, concern for international security as a whole, that we have developed or are developing this or that weapon system.
Moreover, as early as 1946, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics proposed that nuclear weapons should be banned for all time. We have been advocating this ever since, and this remains our position now. we have been proposing and continue to propose that agreement should be reached on renouncing all weapons of mass destruction, reducing and totally eliminating their existing stockpiles, and cutting down armed forces and conventional armaments. Our country has come out with a proposed on general and complete disarmament under strict international control.
These radical proposals have yet to be implemented, and it is the United States and some other NATO countries, rather than the soviet union, that are to blame for this fact.
It is precisely because of their refusal to follow the example of the Soviet Union and the People's Republic of China, which has also unilaterally pledged not to be the first to use nuclear weapons, that the threat of nuclear war continues to hang over the world.
None the less, due to the vigorous efforts of the Soviet Union and other peace-loving States a number of treaties and agreements limiting the arms race in major areas have been concluded. These are the 1963 Moscow Treaty Banning Nuclear-Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under water, the 1968 Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear weapons, the Treaty on the Limitation of Anti-Ballistic Missile Systems and the SALT I Agreement, signed in 1972, and the 1979 SALT II treaty. All these treaties, which have served in large measure to reinforce strategic stability, became possible because political realism was also displayed by the then leaders of the united States and other western countries.
It is not the fault of the Soviet Union that local conflicts break out and are raging in various regions of the world. The only thing that we could be "guilty" of is that we have invariably been and remain on the side of the peoples threatened by imperialism and of the States upon whose sovereignty and generally recognized rights imperialism is encroaching.
As regards the increasingly acute economic problems common to all mankind, the Soviet Union has consistently been in favor of uniting the efforts of all States and peoples with a view to finding a rational solution to those problems. This is the thrust of the proposals made by our country, by all Warsaw Treaty member countries, for a drastic reduction in the military expenditures of States, and above all of the major Powers.
These are all facts, which cannot be disputed.
Responsibility for the current critical state of international relations rests with another group of countries, namely, the United States and some of its closest allies.
It was they who, in the early 1980s, wrecked the structure of negotiations which had taken such an effort to build, negotiations which had shown signs of progress towards agreements in many areas ranging from complete and general prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests to the limitation of sales and supplies of conventional armaments, from banning the development of anti-satellite systems to limiting military activities in the Indian Ocean. It was the united States that refused to ratify the SALT II treaty designed to pave the way to further, ever more substantial cuts in strategic arms. It was the United States that in 1983 torpedoed the Soviet-United States talks on the limitation of nuclear arms in Europe by embarking on the deployment of its new nuclear missiles on the European continent.
And the new military programs which now cover not only the land, oceans and atmosphere of our planet but also outer space are United States programs too.
No particular perspicacity is needed to see clearly that precisely those States that are obstructing disarmament efforts are also set on fomenting local conflicts. They bear responsibility for the failure thus far to come to grips with problems common to all mankind.
All of this is being said not for the sake of polemics but in order that the United Nations may, on the basis of real facts and through concerted efforts, devise effective ways of radically improving international relations and strengthening universal security.
What are these ways as we see them?
It is said at times that all that is needed is that the two super-Powers should stop competing with each other for influence in the world. This proposition stems either from ignorance or from malicious intent. First, the Soviet Union has no intention of placing itself above other States and peoples, nor is it seeking opportunities to order them about or dictate its will to them. Secondly, the Soviet Union is not involved in any competition whatsoever, whether for markets, natural resources, control over sea or air routes, or the possession of outer space.
On the other hand, it is of course true that the Soviet Union is one of the world's two most powerful nations. But the whole point is what political aims are served by that Power. Those who invoke the concept of the "two super-Powers" would ' be well advised to ponder once in a while what would happen to their independence and what turn world developments would generally take if the USSR were weaker than it is and if the Soviet people were not investing so such of their effort, material resources and scientific endeavor in maintaining its economic and military potential at an adequate level.
In discussions about the ways of improving the situation frequent mention is also made of the need to restore, above all, confidence among States. This, it is said, would make it possible to resolve all major problems, including those of halting the arms race and settling regional conflicts. Indeed, confidence is an important factor in overcoming the current difficulties. We feel, however, that it is impossible to achieve a necessary and reliable degree of trust in relations among States unless the causes and the material roots of distrust are removed.
But work to restore confidence must be pursued, and that is what we are doing. In particular, at the Stockholm Conference of states participating in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, the soviet union is working for the adoption of a complex of large-scale, effective political, military and technical confidence-building measures. At Stockholm we are now prepared to proceed immediately, together with our negotiating partners, to the actual drafting of agreements to that effect. Our country attaches major importance to the pan-European process as a whole.
The Soviet Union is building and developing its relations with all States in strict compliance with the Final Act and on the basis of the 10 principles proclaimed therein. It attaches special importance to the factor of confidence in those relations, and it is pleased when it sees that this factor is present in its relations with various countries in Europe, America, Asia, Africa or Oceania.
In our relations with other States we have always given priority to the search for ways of easing international tension and averting the danger of war. Of great importance in this context is the forthcoming visit of Mikhail Gorbachev to France.
We also want to build normal, stable relations with the United States. We have never been the initiators of confrontation between the Soviet Union and the United States. We do not believe that the tensions today in Soviet-American relations result from an inevitable clash of national interests. We therefore believe that both sides have an interest in the successful outcome of the forthcoming meeting between the leaders of the Soviet Union and the United States. This is precisely how the Soviet Union approaches that meeting. It remains to be seen what will be the attitude of the other side in this matter.
We are convinced that the Soviet-American summit meeting should focus on the most important problem of the day, the problem upon whose solution truly depends on the possibility of decisively reducing the danger of war, restoring international trust and creating the conditions necessary for resolving many other pressing issues in relations among States. The problem I am referring to is that of preventing an arms race in cuter space and ending the arms race on earth, limiting and reducing nuclear arms and enhancing strategic stability. I will address this question in somewhat greater detail.
To begin with, it would appear indisputable that as long as States possess nuclear weapons the risk of the outbreak of nuclear war cannot be completely ruled out. It is equally true, however, that in conditions of strategic equilibrium, that risk is comparatively lower, for strategic equilibrium means essentially that each side, even if it became a victim of nuclear aggression committed by the other side, would retain sufficient strategic capacity to strike an equally devastating blow to the aggressor. Consequently, in conditions of strategic equilibrium there could be no winner in a nuclear war and starting one would be tantamount to committing suicide.
Yet the situation might change if one side should try to acquire such a nuclear potential as would encourage it to think that by a single strike it could deprive the other side of adequate retaliatory capacity against aggression, particularly if the potential aggressor should develop a space-based anti-missile shield and count on it to protect itself against a retaliatory strike. It is obvious that in such case the aggressor might be tempted to deliver or threaten to deliver a first "disarming" nuclear strike - as it is now known - counting on its immunity to retaliation. Hence the extreme danger inherent in any bid for military superiority in a nuclear age. Yet this is precisely the purpose of the new United States military programs, work on which has already begun or is about to begin.
It could be argued that this is a purely hypothetical danger since the Soviet Union has repeatedly stated that it would not allow the other side to achieve superiority and would take appropriate counter-measures to restore the balance.
But would that mean that the problem of the danger of nuclear war would simply disappear?
It is true that our country would not permit military superiority over it. The State and Party leadership of the Soviet Union has instructed me to reaffirm this once again in this United Nations forum. Those who may expect that the Soviet economy would not be able to stand up to the strain of the qualitatively new stage in the arms race which is currently being forced upon us are profoundly mistaken. Our country and the Soviet economy have had to withstand even greater pressures. Today, the economic might of the Soviet State and its scientific and technological potential are such as to leave no doubt whatever in anyone's mind concerning the ability and determination of our people to meet that new challenge.
However, it should not be forgotten that the higher the level of military confrontation in this nuclear and space age, the more shaky and the less secure, even if strategic equilibrium is maintained, become the foundations of world peace. Nuclear war in these conditions could result not only from a deliberate decision but also from attempts at blackmail or from miscalculation by one side as to the intentions or actions of the other. It could also break out as a consequence of someone's reckless behavior prompted by a sudden aggravation of the situation or because of malfunctions of computers, which are being increasingly relied upon in the operation of modern, sophisticated weapons systems.
Such is our understanding of the current strategic and political realities. It is based on grim facts that cannot be ignored.
It is precisely for this reason that the Soviet Union has been so persistent in seeking not merely the maintenance but a lowering of the existing level of strategic equilibrium and the early adoption of effective measures to stop and reverse the arms race. We know - and many other States now realize this too - that there is no more time to waste, for it may turn out to be too late.

We have gathered in New York in the final days of the first month of autumn. It is a time associated in many countries with the harvest, when farmers look to the coming winter with a feeling of work well done. This thought brings to mind another metaphor which, regrettably, has already taken root in the vocabulary of mankind - the metaphor of the "nuclear winter", we want the word "winter" in all the languages of the world to retain its one and only meaning, its original meaning and to be identified solely with the season of the year which is so beautiful and joyful.
In an attempt to establish a favorable climate for the resumption of the process of arms limitation and reduction, and, ultimately, the complete elimination of nuclear weapons everywhere, the Soviet Union has recently taken some substantial steps on a unilateral - I stress "unilateral" - basis. These steps include the decision not to place anti-satellite weapons in outer space so long as the United States does not do so. Unfortunately, however, the united States, disregarding the interests of political and military stability, recently tested an anti-satellite weapon against a target in space. Those steps also include the suspension of further implementation of our counter-measures in Europe consequent upon the deployment of united States medium-range nuclear systems on the territories of some Western European countries. Finally, there is our moratorium on nuclear explosions.
It is clear that by their very nature such unilateral steps could not be taken as measures of unlimited duration; but they could be of unlimited duration if the United States followed our good example. That would constitute significant progress towards a relaxation of military tension in the world. If, however, the United States fails to heed the voice of reason, no one will be able to blame us when the unilateral moratoriums we have declared come to an end as their terms expire. It is not for us but for the United States to make the choice.
Notwithstanding the importance of such steps as moratoriums designed to curb the arms race, the peoples of the world have every right to demand that radical measures be taken to reduce and eventually eliminate nuclear - and not only nuclear - weapons.
From the very beginning of the Geneva negotiations on nuclear and space weapons our country has been determined to achieve a radical solution to these interrelated problems and has taken a constructive position. The Soviet delegation had brought to the current round of negotiations substantial, large-scale and far-reaching proposals, we believe that agreement to ban space-strike weapons and to bring about truly radical reductions in nuclear arms would today have the most positive effect. Such an agreement could bring about a turn for the better in the entire course of world events, avert the threat of nuclear catastrophe and open up for the peoples of the world the prospect of a world free from fear for tomorrow. Mankind would be moving towards the new millennium which is already almost with us, confident that civilization would continue to advance.
The Soviet Union has put forward proposals on the whole range of issues relating to the cessation of the arms race. I am not going to mention each of those proposals for all of them will, in one way or another, become the subject of an exchange of views at the General Assembly. Let me just say that they cover the nuclear field, including the cessation of nuclear tests, as well as chemical weapons, conventional weapons and the numerical strength of armed forces. In some cases it is a question of a freeze; in others of a reduction. The Soviet Union continues resolutely continues to support proposals to establish nuclear-weapon-free zones, chemical-weapon-free zones and zones of peace in various parts of the world. It favors a limitation of naval activities and naval armaments and resolutely opposes the development of any new weapons of mass destruction.
In the context of the proposed arms limitation and reduction measures, the Soviet Union believes it necessary to provide for adequate measures of verification and control, in some cases national, and in others national combined with international, whenever there is an objective necessity for this. We have as great an interest as anyone in effective verification of compliance by all States with their obligations in connection with disarmament measures. We call upon the States represented in the united Nations General Assembly, both members of politico-military alliances and non-aligned and neutral countries, to support this approach, which we are convinced is constructive and at the same time realistic.
I would now like to offer some ideas as to what might be done to eliminate, through our collective efforts, local wars and conflicts, which result in untold suffering and innumerable casualties.
Viewed in a purely United Nations context, the solution to this problem may seem simple. All that is needed is to compel all States to comply fully and scrupulously in their actions with their commitments under the United Nations Charter and equally firmly to deny support to those who violate those commitments.
For instance, it is hard to imagine that any delegation would venture to assert here that the monstrous crimes of the Israeli aggressors on the ravaged soil of Lebanon and in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip are consistent with the principles of the United Nations Charter or that the financing, arming, training and infiltrating into Nicaragua of thousands upon thousands of
counter-revolutionaries - contras, as they are called - are consistent with those principles.
Only chauvinistic arrogance could lead anyone to deny the Palestinian people their right to independent statehood while recognizing that right for the people of Israel. All peoples and nations have equal rights.
Who is unaware of the brutal record of the South African apartheid regime, which is executing hundreds of the country's indigenous inhabitants and jailing thousands of others? Who is unaware of the acts of aggression it is constantly committing against Angola - as we see today - as well as against Mozambique, Botswana and Lesotho? It would indeed be blasphemous even to think that this inhuman regime acts in accordance with the provisions of the United Nations Charter. But it is a fact that the Pretoria racists receive support, and that this support comes from a major Power that 40 years ago was among the founding Members of the United Nations.
Of course, expressing indignation at the crimes of the racists and condemning the aggressor does not in itself mean that those crimes will be eliminated. The peaceful settlement of any given conflict with full and just regard for the legitimate interests of all sides requires a political basis for a settlement which would not be prejudicial to those interests, as well as a negotiating mechanism appropriate to each specific conflict situation.
Such political platforms for the just settlement of all or nearly all existing regional conflicts have already been or are being formulated. Suitable negotiating mechanisms either already exist or can be established.
Let us now turn to the situation in the Middle Bast. The main parameters for solving the Middle Bast problem in a manner that would take into account the legitimate interests of all parties have long ago been defined. They include the return to the Arab States of all their territories occupied by Israel since 1967, the exercise of the right of the Arab people of Palestine to establish an independent State of their own and ensuring the right of all States in the Middle East, including Israel, to live in peace and security. A negotiating mechanism for such a settlement has long ago been proposed as well, namely, an international conference on the Middle East under the auspices of the United Nations with the participation of all the parties concerned, including the Palestine Liberation Organization, and a number of other countries, including the Soviet Union and the United States.
There may, however, be some people who think that the Middle East knot can be untied by separate deals, but experience has already shown that such actions can only result in aggravating the conflict instead of settling it. We believe that this year the Genial Assembly will take an even firmer stand in favor of an early and just political settlement in the Middle East, and will demand that those who continue to resist such a settlement should stop their sabotage.
I should like to recall, in this connection, that Israel ewes its very existence to a decision of this organization, a decision which also called for the establishment in Palestine of an Arab State. It was a dual decision. The Soviet Union actively supported precisely that decision and, incidentally, it was among the first to recognize the State of Israel.
In principle, a negotiating mechanism also exists for settling the situation in Central America which was indeed conceived by the Latin American countries themselves. I am referring to the Contadora group^ with which several more South American States, recently expressed solidarity. There is also a draft act of peace in Central America drawn up by the Contadora members. It is widely supported by the States and peoples of the region, including the Government and the people of Nicaragua, the country which is the target of the spearhead of imperialist aggression. It is important for the United Nations to support the efforts of the Contadora group and contribute to overcoming the resistance of those who, instead of peace, seek to restore their domination in Central America.
It is also possible to break the deadlock in the Cyprus problem provided that an end is put to interference by imperialist forces and that the recognition of the independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Republic of Cyprus is laid down as a firm basis.
I should like to make some specific comments about Afghanistan. A political settlement of the situation that has arisen around that country is also possible. What is necessary for this is that everyone should recognize the right of the Afghan people to build their life as they wish and that armed and other forms of outside interference in the internal affairs of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan should be ended. When such interference is ended, and if there is a guarantee that it will not be resumed, it will then become possible to withdraw from Afghanistan, by agreement with the Afghan Government- the Soviet military contingent. The sooner a political settlement is achieved, the better it will be for everyone.
The proposals of Viet Nam, Laos and Kampuchea provide a good political framework for building good-neighborly relations between all the States of South-East Asia, particularly between the countries of the Association of South-East Asian Nations and the States of IndoChina. The basis for such relations is gradually taking shape and the countries concerned are perfectly capable of establishing a negotiating mechanism. What is important is that no one should stand in the way of their wish to read agreement with each other.
We support the efforts of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea designed to bring about the peaceful reunification of Korea and the demand for the withdrawal from South Korea of all foreign troops as well as the proposal to make the Korean peninsula a nuclear-free zone.
The question of the situation in southern Africa is an urgent one today. What needs to be done here is for the Security Council finally and fully to exercise its authority with regard to the racist South African regime, which, in violation of the United Nations decisions on the subject, refuses to transfer power to the Namibian people and poses a threat to the security of African States and global security.
A quarter of a century has gone by since the United Nations adopted, on the initiative of the Soviet Union, a decision which has contributed substantially to changing the face of the world today, namely, the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. The work that was started then has now been almost completed - almost, but not entirely. There should be no room on our planet for the remaining fragments and hotbeds of colonialism. In this matter, too, the United Nations should speak out unequivocally and definitively. It is important that the newly free countries and peoples should be given assistance in ensuring their genuine political and economic independence.
The United Nations quite rightly can and should raise its voice against the exploitation of developing countries by imperialist Monopolies, against the plundering of their natural resources and the strangling of their economies with the noose of indebtedness. Cuba and some other States Members of the United Nations have proposed ways of solving the problem of financial indebtedness.
We support the demands of the newly free States for the establishment of a new international economic order on a just and democratic basis in accordance with earlier decisions of the United Nations and we also support their apposition to what is known as cultural and information neo-colonialism and all other forms of neo-colonialism.
It is inadmissible that the States of Asia, Africa and Latin America should be regarded as a sphere of someone's "vital" interests, as an arena for confrontation with socialism. Those States are the influential Non-Aligned Movement and actively support disarmament, detente and the peaceful settlement of conflicts, which has mice again been convincingly demonstrated at the recent Conference of Foreign Ministers of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Luanda.
The rights and freedoms of the individual are inextricably linked with the rights of peoples. The unique experience of our country eloquently testifies to this. Socialism has not only ensured that each and every citizen enjoys equal rights to work, housing, rest and pensions, has not only made it possible to obtain all kinds of education and medical services free of charge, but has also provided comprehensive guarantees of those rights. The standards of social justice were established in close co-ordination with the realization of the principles of self-determination of all nations and nationalities, including the preservation of their identity and the development of such national phenomena as language, literacy, literature and the arts.
Thanks to the advantages of the socialist system, the peoples of the Soviet Onion, oppressed in the past, backward and divided, now stand together, united and therefore strong, and have over a historically short span of time reached the most advanced frontiers of economic development and created a flourishing spiritual culture and attained the heights of human civilization.
We believe that this is the path that not only leads to economic and spiritual prosperity but also contributes to the building of trust between peoples and, on this basis, to bringing them closer together and concerting their efforts in order to attain the goals common to all mankind. That is how we understand the essence of the question of the rights and freedoms of the individual and peoples.
The United Nations, by virtue of its Charter, must play an important role in encouraging and developing respect for human rights throughout the world. This provision, which laid the groundwork for international co-operation in the field of human rights, was included in the United Nations Charter on the initiative of the Soviet Union. Forty years have gone by since that time but, regrettably, to this very day flagrant, massive violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms are taking place. This is an inherent characteristic of a society where the power and wealth of a minority exist at the expense of the majority of the population. Such violations have become a norm of life in those States whose leaders are trying so hard to depict themselves as champions of human rights.
I should like once again to draw members' attention to a problem, the solution to which will largely shape the world of our children, grandchildren and great grandchildren. I am referring to the problem of the peaceful exploration of outer space.
Until only recently, space was the realm of science fiction, but it has now become a theater of man's practical activities. The peaceful exploration of space holds out for mankind truly limitless prospects of utilizing scientific and technological achievements to promote the economic and social progress of the peoples of the world and to solve the tremendous problems facing mankind on Earth.
However, these truly cosmic dimensions - and here I am not speaking figuratively but literally - also present new requirements to the inhabitants of the Earth and above all to the leaders of States.
There should be no repetition of the mistake made four decades ago when states and the peoples of the world were unable to prevent the great intellectual achievement of the mid-twentieth century - the release of the energy of the atomic nucleus - from becoming a means of mass annihilation of human beings. This is a folly which should not be allowed to recur at the end of this century when mankind, having filled the first pages of its space history, is facing a choice: space will either help to improve the living conditions on our planet or it will become the source of a new and deadly danger.
In wishing to contribute to man's progress towards new heights of civilization, our country has taken a new initiative by proposing the inclusion in the agenda of this session of the General Assembly of an item entitled "International co-operation in the peaceful exploration of outer space in conditions of its non-militarization".
At the same time, the Soviet Union has submitted to the General Assembly specific proposals regarding the main directions, areas and principles of broad international co-operation in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes. Outer space is indivisible and all States should be able to take part in its peaceful exploration.
This means that progress should be made by joint efforts in both basic and applied areas of space exploration, so that all peoples can benefit from space research. It is our view that such co-operation could best be carried out within the framework of a world space organization. And this could become a reality provided that all channels for the militarizing of the boundless regions of outer space are blocked off.
To counter the sinister plans of "star wars", the Soviet Union is placing before the international community the concept of "star peace".
The Soviet union hopes that its proposals will be carefully examined by the General Assembly.
The Soviet delegation has set forth the views and proposals of the Soviet Union which we have found it necessary and timely to submit for the consideration of the United Nations. It is our hope that they will be regarded with understanding by all States represented in this Hall and by all the peoples which make up a united mankind.
Much useful work for the benefit of peace and international co-operation has been done by the United Nations over the past 40 years. However, the united Nations has still a great deal more to do since it appears that we are now altering upon a most crucial period in the history of mankind, when it will have to take a decision on this question of paramount importances whether to live in peace or perish in nuclear war.
In this regard, I should like to quote the following policy statement by Mikhail S. Gorbachev:
"Our goal as we see it is to resolve together - for no one is able to do it alone - the major problems which are essentially common to us all: how to prevent war, how to end the arms race and embark on disarmament, how to settle existing conflicts and crises and prevent potential ones, how to create a world climate that would allow every country to focus attention and concentrate resources on finding solutions to its own problems - show me a country that has no problems - and how to join efforts in resolving global problems."
Let me start by joining the President of Brazil in conveying to the people and Government of Mexico our deep sympathy over the devastation wrought by earthquakes and our solidarity with them as they work to recover and rebuild. We admire the way the Government and people of Mexico are dealing with their problem. For our part, we a?.9 responding rapidly to Mexico's request for assistance with medicine, blankets and equipment to help in removing rubble, searching for survivors and fighting fires. But these are Mexico's short-term needs. The long-range impact and cost of the earthquakes are still being determined, but one thing is clear - they will be enormous. Here, too, the United States is prepared to respond to Mexico's plight.

As I look at the devastation - and, perhaps, as you do on your television screens and you see the pictures, you cannot help but be struck by the thought that Mexico City in some ways looks war-torn. Of course, an earthquake is not a man-made event. When the earth shook in Mexico there was nothing anyone could do about it. But our task here at the United Nations is to see to it that man does not cause the earth to shake. So let us devote ourselves to the cause of peace and freedom.
Three years ago, when I addressed this body for the first time, I stressed the need for realism. There is probably no other quality so appropriate and necessary for this Organization. But realism does not mean cynicism, or even pessimism. It means a clear-sighted appreciation of the opportunities we face, as well as of the obvious problems. It means remembering the many challenges that the world community has overcome, and drawing lessons from that. It means understanding that idealism and the yearning for human betterment are themselves part of reality, and thus have enormous practical significance.
The founding fathers of the United Nations are sometimes accused of naive Utopianism. Supposedly they ignored the realities of power politics in attempting to create a global system of collective security. I doubt it. The men and women who set up this Organization 40 years ago were among the great statesmen of the century. They drafted the Charter as a set of standards for international conduct - knowing full well that the world's nations probably would fall short of those standards, but knowing also that the setting of high goals is a necessary precondition to their pursuit and attainment.
The lofty goals of the Charter have a concrete, practical meaning today. They not only point the way to a better world? they reflect some of the most powerful currents at work in the contemporary world. The striving for justice, freedom, progress and peace is an ever-present and powerful reality that is today, more than ever, impressing itself on international politics.
Our political thinking must catch up to this reality. The policies of nations must adapt to this basic human striving. This Organization, too, must adapt to reality; it cannot afford to consume itself in political warfare and unrealistic posturing. There is work to be done. Let us do it.
The world community faces enormous challenges in three areas: in satisfying mankind's yearning for democracy, freedom and justice; in preserving and perfecting global peace and stability; and in spreading economic prosperity and progress.
First, the guest for democracy and freedom. Since the end of the Second World War, modern communication has opened the eyes of most of the world's peoples to the realization that they do not have to live their lives in poverty and despair; that, on the contrary, the blessings of prosperity and liberty known in the past only by a relative few can be theirs as well. The ideals for which the war was fought, and the spread of democracy and of prosperity in the industrialized world since, created an explosion of expectations.
The result has been in recent years a revolution of democratic aspirations sweeping the world. At the time of the San Francisco Conference in 1945, most of the nations represented in this hall today were not independent States but possessions - colonies of European empires. The vast number of languages, cultures and traditions that I can now see before me testify to the revolution in the world order. The old empires eventually had to accept the post-war reality of self-determination and national independence.
Much of the conflict in the world today stems from the refusal of some governments to accept the reality that the aspirations of people for democracy and freedom simply cannot be suppressed for ever by force.
 In South Africa, these aspirations on the part of the bLack majority have as never before, drawn global attention and support. Change is inevitable. The issue is not whether apartheid is to be dismantled, but how and when. And then, what replaces it: race war, bloodbath, and new forms of injustice? Or political accommodation and racial coexistence in a just society? The outcome depends on whether and how quickly the South African Government can accept the new reality, and on whether men and women of peace on both sides can seize the opportunity before it is too late.

This such is clear; there must be negotiation among South Africans of all races on constitutional reform. True peace will come only when the Government negotiates with, rather than locks up, representative black leaders. The violence will end only when 311 parties begin a mutual search for a just system of government.
One area where the future has brightened in the past five years as the aspirations of the people to democracy have been met in country after country is Latin America - as President Sarney just said so eloquently. In contrast to only 30 per cent in 1979, today more than 90 per cent of the people of Latin America live under Governments that are either democratic or clearly on the road to democracy.
In Central America, El Salvador, under the courageous leadership of President Duarte, has shown that democracy can take root and thrive even in the most difficult terrain. Its citizens have braved extremist violence to participate overwhelmingly in four free elections since 1982. Their President's current personal ordeal only serves to underscore the sacrifices thousands of Salvadorians continue to make as they fight to realize the ideals of the United Nations Charter. For this commitment they should be applauded by all Members. Ironically, El Salvador is today the only democracy subject to the scrutiny of a special rapporteur for human rights.
Among El Salvador's neighbors, Costa Rica has long been the region's beacon of representative government; Honduras is about to replace one freely-elected government with another; and Guatemala is about to join them as a democratic nation with the election of a president in November. These developments should enhance regional co-operation for economic development, which the United States supports through our Caribbean Basin initiative and President Reagan's initiative for peace, development and democracy.

But regional peace in Central America is threatened by the rulers of Nicaragua and their Soviet and Cuban allies. Behind a cloak of democratic rhetoric, the Nicaraguan communists have betrayed the 1979 revolution and embarked upon a course of tyranny at home and subversion against their neighbors. Brave Nicaraguans are fighting to restore the hope for freedom in their country and the other nations of the region are working together in collective self-defense against Nicaraguan aggression.
How can this crisis be resolved? The Central American nations, together with their nearest neighbors, the members of the Contadora Group, have subscribed to a document of 21 objectives. These include non-interference in the affairs of one's neighbors, serious dialog with domestic opposition groups, free elections and democracy in each country, the removal of foreign military personnel and a reduction of armaments. My Government supports a verifiable treaty based on full and simultaneous implementation of the 21 objectives. We welcome the resumption of talks next month in Panama and hope they lead to a final agreement. Contadora is the best forum for pursuing a settlement.
In El Salvador, President Duarte, true to his pledge to the Assembly last year, has pursued a dialog with the guerrilla opposition. Would that the rulers of Nicaragua would make,- and honor, a similar pledge to the Assembly this year. In San Jose on 1 March of this year the Nicaraguan democratic resistance called for internal dialog, moderated by the Roman Catholic Church, to end the killing.
The people of the region are waiting for a positive answer from the rulers of Nicaragua. Can it be that, never having been chosen by their people in a truly free election, they lack the confidence to face opponents they cannot silence or lock up, as they have so many others? The united Nicaraguan opposition deserves to participate in Nicaraguan political life and has an important role to play in the diplomatic process. Regional peace will not come without it.
The reality of democratic revolution is also demonstrated by the rise of national liberation movements against communist colonialism: in Afghanistan, Cambodia, Angola and other lands where, as in Nicaragua, people have organized in resistance to tyranny. Unlike the old European empires that came to accept the post-war reality of self-determination and national independence, the new colonialists are swimming against the tide of history. They are doomed to fail.
In Afghanistan the almost six-year-old Soviet invasion has inflicted untold suffering on a people whose will to resist and to free themselves from a pitiless tyranny cannot be broken. Hundreds of thousands of Afghans are dead or maimed, millions more make up the largest refugee population in the world and countless villages, schools and farms lie in ruins. Nowhere in the world has the carnage wrought by Soviet imperialism been greater than in Afghanistan and nowhere has the resistance been more determined and courageous.
The withdrawal of Soviet forces, as the General Assembly has noted on six occasions, would lead to solution of the Afghanistan problem. A solution must also encompass restoration of the country's independence and non-aligned status, self-determination for the Afghan people and the return in safety and honor of the more than 3 million refugees, unless and until the Soviet Union permits such a solution the national liberation struggle in Afghanistan will continue, the world-wide effort to provide succor to a beleaguered people will go forward and Soviet protestations of peace on this and other issues will not ring true. My Government, together with others concerned, stands ready to implement a just solution to this problem.
Cambodia, as we all know, stands as one of the worst examples in history of a totalitarian ideology carried to its bloodiest extreme. Today, courageous freedom fighters under the leadership of Prince Norodom Sihanouk and Son Sann struggle to reclaim their country. He continue to support the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) program for a peaceful solution; Vietnamese forces must withdraw completely, and Cambodia's independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity must be restored under a Government chosen in free elections.
In other countries where the apparatus of repression is well developed, countless thousands of men and women wage private struggles for freedom, armed only with their consciences and their courage. Some suffer for their political convictions, others for their religious beliefs: solidarity trade unionists in Poland; Jews, Baptists, Roman Catholics, Pentecostalists and others in the Soviet Union; Baha is in Iran. With all the men and arms at their disposal, what are these Governments afraid of?
These brave and often nameless prisoners of conscience struggle to achieve for men and women in every corner of the world the promises of this Organization. He are with them, and we call on all States as Members of this body to honor their solemn commitments. As Thomas Jefferson once said,
"The opinions of men and women are not the rightful object of any Government, anywhere."
The quest for peace continue on many fronts. And for all the obstacles confronting it, there are examples of success - such as the treaty on Antarctica, which recently marked a quarter century of effective international co-operation. We can learn from problems overcome as we tackle the formidable problems ahead.
In the Middle Bast, 10 or 15 years ago, peace between Israel and any Arab State seemed a remote, if not impossible, dream. Finally, after untold suffering and four wars, a courageous leader, Anwar El-Sadat, abandoned the old ways of thinking and took the step no other Arab leader had been willing or prepared even to contemplate: he recognized that the State of Israel was here to stay and, with Prime Minister Begin, vowed there would be no more wars. Peace and normal relations were established, and the Sinai was returned.
The past year has seen major efforts toward new negotiations between Israel and its Arab neighbors. The United States is committed and engaged in support of those efforts, in accordance with President Reagan's initiative of three years ago. Yet the lesson of the past is clear: progress can be achieved only through direct negotiations, based on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). There is no other way, and evasion of this reality only prolongs suffering and heightens dangers. Nothing positive will ever be achieved by chasing illusions of so-called armed struggle; but much can be accomplished by parties who are committed to peace and engaged in serious dialog. The moment is at hand - this year - to make major progress and to begin direct negotiations.
To the east, we have the continuing failure of reason to prevail and end the devastating war between Iran and Iraq. Prolonged by Iran's refusal to come to terms with its inability to achieve victory, this war has now entered its fifth year, with no end in sight. We again call on both parties to negotiate an end to the fighting.

On the Korean peninsula we see the first tentative steps being taken to get away from the mode of thinking that has characterized the pa at years. A decade ago, there seemed little hope for a significant reduction of tension. Yet last year both Koreas began a multifaceted, direct dialog, which the United States supports as the key to a solution. While the animosities of a lifetime are not resolved quickly, a start has been made. We also believe that membership in the United Nations for both the Republic of Korea and North Korea, in accordance with the principle of universality, would help reduce tensions.
Perhaps the most dramatic problem that requires new ways of thinking is international State-sponsored terrorism. Terrorism is every bit as much a form of war against a nation's interests and values as a full-scale armed attack. And it is a weapon wielded particularly against innocent civilians, against free nations, against democracy, against moderation and against peaceful solutions. It is an affront to everything the United Nations stands for.
Progress has been made against the terrorist threat through co-operation in the United Nations system. Many nations subscribe to The Hague, Tokyo and Montreal Conventions to make air travel safer and to suppress hijacking and sabotage. Progress has also been made in providing protection for diplomats, and some nations have agreed on how to handle hostage situations. Just this month, participants at the Seventh United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, held at Milan, adopted a strong, broad-ranging resolution urging all States to adhere to these agreements and to strengthen international actions against terrorism.
Much more remains to be done. The United States and other nations, for example, are working with the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) to improve standards of security. Over this past year, so far 90 potential terrorist actions against United States facilities or citizens have been deterred or prevented. But the fight has only begun, and it cannot be won by one Government alone. The civilized world must put the terrorists and their supporters on notice: we will defend ourselves in any and every way we can.
The reality of the nuclear age has spelled the United States and the Soviet Union to engage in a dialog, of varying intensity, for the past 40 years. This dialog has been an unprecedented attempt by two rivals to manage their competition and avert war. We know that we share a responsibility for maintaining peace, not just for our peoples, but for all the earth's peoples.
Despite all the difficulties, let us remember what has been accomplished. After the two most destructive wars in history, the super-Powers, joined with others, have averted world war for four decades. We have had some success in limiting nuclear testing. Working together with other nations since the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in 1968, we have succeeded in restricting the proliferation of nuclear weapons. Twenty years ago it was conventional wisdom that there would be 15 to 25 nuclear-weapon States by today; yet the number of States acknowledged to possess nuclear weapons has held at five for the past 20 years. The United States remains committed to all the goals of the Treaty, whose Third Review Conference just concluded successfully in Geneva. And the United States and the Soviet Union have taken practical steps to avoid conflict. Our navies have long agreed to work together to prevent incidents at sea. And we have set up and improved the "hot line" for crisis communications.
In the nuclear and space arms talks in Geneva, the United States has advanced far-reaching proposals: a reduction by almost one-half in the most destabilizing weapons, strategic ballistic missile warheads, and the elimination of the whole class of the United States and Soviet longer-range intermediate-range nuclear forces missiles worldwide, all leading ultimately to the complete elimination of nuclear arms. We repeatedly have stressed our readiness for give and take and to
 consider alternative proposals. Each of our proposals has been followed up by further attempts to find common ground with the Soviet Union. He have offered trade-offs and have made clear our readiness to take account of legitimate Soviet concerns to obtain an agreement that would enhance strategic stability and strengthen deterrence..
Progress at Geneva has been slow. Thus far the Soviet Union has not negotiated with the responsiveness that the talks require. None the less, our determination to reach an equitable agreement has not wavered.
In this spirit, President Reagan last June decided to continue our policy of taking no action that would undercut the limits of previous agreements, to the extent the Soviet Union shows comparable restraint. Despite serious reservations about those agreements, and serious concerns about the Soviet record of non-compliance.', the President made this decision to foster a climate of truly mutual restraint to facilitate progress in arms control.
While the most direct path to a safer world is through equitable, verifiable reductions, we also see value in verifiable limitations on nuclear testing. For that reason, President Reagan, in his speech to this body last year, proposed that the United States and the Soviet Union exchange visits of experts at test sites to measure directly the yields of nuclear-weapon test. This would significantly improve confidence in the verifiability of proposed treaty limits on underground testing. The Soviet Union rejected this offer. Nevertheless, last July, the President issued an unconditional invitation for a Soviet team to observe and measure a nuclear test at the Nevada Test Site. We again call on the Soviet Union to take up this offer, which is a concrete, positive step toward verifiable restrictions on nuclear testing.
 When the Anti-Ballistic-Missile Treaty was signed in 1972 it was assumed that tight limits on defensive systems would make possible real reductions in strategic offensive arms. But the Soviet Union has never agreed to any meaningful reductions in offensive nuclear arms. Instead, it has continued an unprecedented military build-up - particularly in heavy intercontinental ballistic missiles with a first-strike capability - which is eroding the basis on which deterrence has rested for decades. The strategy of reliance on offensive retaliation to preserve deterrence and prevent war thus is being called into question by Soviet actions.
The answer is, first, for us both to agree that strategically significant, verifiable reductions in the numbers and destructive potential of offensive weapons. But there are additional ways to redress the problem. President Reagan has directed our scientists and engineers to examine, in the light of new technologies and fully in accord with the Anti-Ballistic-Missile Treaty - the feasibility of defense against ballistic-missile attack. Strategic defense could give our children and grandchildren a safer world. We would continue to rely on deterrence to prevent war, but deterrence would be based more on denying success to a potential attacker and less on threatening massive mutual destruction. Such a means of deterrence should be safer and more stable. Our goal is not to achieve superiority but to add to the security of both sides. As former Soviet Premier Kosygin said, an anti-missile system "is intended not for killing people but for saving human lives". The Soviet Premier was right.
We want to co-operate with the Soviet union in making progress on these most important of all issues. Progress requires - it demands - good will, realism and honesty. Behind the curtain that encloses Soviet society, free from the open debate we see in the West, a major strategic defense program has proceeded for decades. The current Soviet leaders know that. In the past 20 years the
 Soviet Union has spent about as much on strategic defense as on its offensive nuclear forces. The Soviets know that. The Soviets have the world's most active military space program, last year conducting about 100 space launches, some 80 per cent of which were purely military in nature, compared to a total of about 20 United States space launches. The Soviets know that, too. They deploy the world's only anti-ballistic-missile system, whose nuclear-armed interceptors and other components are undergoing extensive modernization. They are researching many of the same new technologies as we, and are ahead in some. And the Soviet Union has the world's only extensively tested and fully operational anti-satellite system. The Soviet leaders know full well their own efforts in these fields. Their propaganda about American programs is blatantly one-sided and not to be taken seriously.
So let us get down to real business, with the seriousness the subject deserves, and let us do so in the quiet of the negotiating room, where we can really make progress cm narrowing our differences.
Progress needs to be made in other arms-control areas as well. Restraints on chemical and biological weapons have eroded in recent years as international agreements have been violated by the Soviet Union and others. In April 1984 the United States proposed a comprehensive treaty for a global ban on chemical weapons. We will again introduce a draft resolution on chemical weapons in the First Committee. We must have talks on serious, verifiable proposals.
To reduce the risk of conflict through miscalculation we and our Atlantic allies have proposed significant confidence- and security-building measures at the Conference on Disarmament in Europe. To enhance security in Central Europe we have repeatedly sought ways to move the mutual and balanced force reduction talks in Vienna forward.
In sum, the United States and the Soviet Union now have a historic opportunity to reduce the risk of war. President Reagan looks forward to his meeting with General Secretary Gorbachev in November. We have a long agenda. The United States is working hard to make it a productive meeting and we want the meeting itself to give a further impetus to the wide-ranging dialog on which we are already embarked. Soviet acts of good faith and willingness to reach fair agreements will be more than matched on the American side.
Just as there is a democratic revolution in the world today, so there is also a revolution in economic thinking. Mankind is moving towards an ever greater recognition of the inescapable tie between freedom and economic progress. Command economies, in spite of all their pretensions, have not done very well in liberating people from poverty. In reality, they have served as instruments of power for the few rather than of hope for the many. Expectations of material progress and prosperity have been fulfilled in countries whose Governments have applied reason and fresh thinking to their problems, learning from experience rather than slavishly Allowing outworn dogma. The new way of thinking - economic freedom -actually is a return to old truths that many had forgotten or never understood.
Those developing countries in Asia relying on free market policies, for example, have enjoyed one of the most remarkable economic booms in history despite a relative lack of natural resources. The ASEAN nations and the Republic of Korea have grown at a 7 per cent a year rate over the past decade, the fastest rate in the world, and ASEAN has become a model of regional development and political co-operation. In recognition of the success of economic freedom the island nations of the South Pacific have continued to encourage the private sector as well. We are joining with them in a dedicated effort to negotiate quickly a regional fisheries agreement that will benefit all.

The success of these and other countries demonstrates that the laws of economics do not discriminate between developed and developing. For all nations equally the true source of wealth is the energy and creativity of the individual, not the State. After decades of fashionable socialist doctrine we see today on every continent efforts to decentralize, deregulate, denationalize and enlarge the scope for producers and consumers to interact in the free market. In India, China and elsewhere new policies are being adopted to unleash the creative abilities of talented peoples. At the Bonn economic summit last May the leaders of the largest industrial democracies acknowledged the same truth. The road to prosperity begins at the same starting point for all nations: freedom and incentives for the individual.
This truth should be our guide as we address today's economic challenges,.
In sub-Saharan Africa drought has placed perhaps 30 million men, women and children at risk. We do not know how many have already died. Along with other Western countries, the United States has undertaken one of the largest disaster relief programs in history. This year alone the United States has provided $1.2 billion for drought and famine relief and $800 million in other economic assistance. The nations that have been helping should continue to do so; those that have not borne their share should start to do so.
But we owe it to the suffering to ask this question: Why is food so scarce? Drought, without question, is part of the reason, but in some countries there are other, more important reasons. One is Government policies that have severely harmed agricultural productivity. These policies must be reversed. Those countries that have undertaken liberalizing reforms are reaping the benefits and can show the way for others. Another problem is lack of appropriate technologies. The United States is carrying out a long-term program to strengthen African agricultural research, which we hope will help to produce a green revolution on the continent.
 Elsewhere in the developing world, as in Africa, countries face the continuing problem of debt. Many have undertaken necessary, though painful, adjustment, taking courageous steps to cut Government spending, eliminate subsidies and price controls, permit currencies to adjust to the market, free interest rates to encourage saving and discourage capital flight and create conditions to attract new capital. Austerity, however, is certainly not an end in itself. The purpose of short-term adjustment is to get back on the track of long-term growth.
In all these efforts we must be careful that the heavy burden of servicing the historic debt levels of the developing nations of Latin America and Africa does not inhibit their future growth. Creative co-operation between borrowers and lenders, with continued constructive assistance from the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF), will be essential in achieving that goal.
Other nations too have a major part to play in helping these countries overcome their debt problem and resume sustainable growth. External financing to support effective adjustment has been and will continue to be important. Access to export markets is also necessary. Indeed, an open trading system is crucial to the hopes of all of us. Trade expansion has been an engine of post-war prosperity. It would therefore be suicidal to return to the protectionism of the 1920s and 1930s which helped bring on the great depression. Protectionism is not a cure; it is a disease, a disease that could cripple all of us. Trade must be free, open and fair. The United States will work to see that it is. But there must be a level playing field. We want open trading, but that means mutuality. Barriers erected against American products are just not acceptable to us.
As President Reagan is saying today in a major speech,
"The freer the flow of world trade, the stronger the tides for human progress and peace among nations."
 To preserve and strengthen the trading system may well be the central economic issue facing the world community today. For that reason it is essential that all nations join now in preparations for a new General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. (GATT) round next year; no nation, even one as large and as powerful as the United States, can by itself ensure a free trading system. All that we and others have done to provide for the free flow of goods and services and capital is based on co-operation* Indeed, it was that very spirit of co-operation that prompted the United States and four of the leading industrial nations yesterday to pledge firm resolve to work together in addressing the pressing economic issues of this decade.
Sound economic policies in every country are the key to strengthening the world economy. In the United States policies that have unleashed individual talent, reduced Government's role and stabilized prices have helped to produce more than 8 million new jobs since 1982 and lead the world out of recession. But many imbalances in the world economy remain, notably in trade accounts, exchange rates and capital flows. These must be corrected by the world community acting in concert if recent economic gains are to be preserved and hopes for progress sustained. For its part, the United States must restrain public spending, reduce its budget deficit and encourage saving. Others must do more to reduce rigidities and promote the private investment needed to facilitate adjustment and spur expansion.
I believe we can surmount our problems just as we succeeded in solving the energy crisis and bringing inflation under control. There was a time when those problems too seemed insurmountable. We can succeed again today if we have the honesty and courage to face our problems squarely and if our ways of thinking conform to reality.
Forty years ago the founders of the United Nations recognized that new ways had to be found to regulate conduct between nations. That remains true today. The
 Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights speak to us, not as different races, creeds and nationalities, but as human beings, men and women. Our task as we look at the next century is to learn that the things which unite us - the desire for peace, human rights and material well-being - as set down in those documents are far more important than the things which divide us.
The main obstacle to greater realization of the goals of the Charter is the lust of the few for power over the many, just as it has been the obstacle to human happiness since the dawn of history. But change is inevitable. And today change, technological change, holds out hope perhaps as never before. The revolution in communications and information may be the most far-reaching development of our time. Those political systems that try to stand in the way of the free flow of knowledge and information will relegate their citizens to second-class status in the next century. The future belongs to societies that can spread knowledge, adapt, innovate, tap the unfettered talents of well-informed citizens and thus fully exploit the new technologies; free societies clearly are best equipped for this challenge. The communications revolution will be a truly liberating revolution, for it threatens the monopoly of information and thought upon which tyrants rely for absolute control.
On every continent - from Nicaragua to Poland, from South Africa to Afghanistan and Cambodia - we see that the yearning for freedom is the most powerful political force all across the planet. The noble ideals of democracy and freedom are in the ascendant. Today, we can look with renewed hope to the day when the goals of the united Nations truly will be met.










At the outset I should like warmly to congratulate you. Sir, on your election to the presidency of the fortieth session of the General Assembly and to wish you every success, in your highly responsible post.
I wish also to take this opportunity to express my thanks to your predecessor, Mr. Lusaka, for his contribution to the work of the last session, for which he has won the respect of all of us.
Being convened during celebrations of the fortieth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations, the present session is more significant than the previous ones. The United Nations is the outcome of victory in the world war against fascism. The United Nations Charter laid down the purposes and principles for maintaining world peace, suppressing acts of aggression, ensuring international security, promoting international co-operation, respecting the equality of nations, large and small, settling international disputes by peaceful means and refraining from interfering in the internal affairs of any State. Facts show that these purposes and principles established 40 years ago are still of great immediate significance four the just handling of the problems facing the world today. The purpose of solemnly commemorating the fortieth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations is to reaffirm the unalterable principles of the United Nations Charter and further strengthen the functions of the United Nations so that it may play a greater role in the noble cause of maintaining world peace and increasing international co-operation.
In the past 40 years tremendous changes have taken place in the international situation and the world as a whole. The vigorous movement for national independence has made colonialism a thing of the past as a system. A number of countries have taken the road of socialist development. The emergence of the third world and the numerous small and medium-sized countries on the world political arena has brought a fundamental change to the pattern of international relations. With the rapid development of modern science and technology, mankind has achieved successes beyond the imagination of the past generations in the effort to conquer nature, expand productive forces and enhance its own welfare and has broadened the vistas of a better future before it.
The changes of the post-War world are reflected in the changing United Nations. The emergence of many newly-independent countries in Asia, Africa, Latin America, and Oceania and the consequent big increase in the membership of the United Nations have strengthened the universality of the Organization. Despite the twists and turns the United Nations has gone through, we should on the whole give a positive appraisal of its efforts for peace, international co-operation and the greater well-being of mankind. We congratulate the United Nations on its achievements over the past 40 years and are ready to work with all other Member States to strengthen the role of the Organization.
Compared with the preceding year there are certain signs of relaxation in the world situation. But the root cause of tension remains. There is a universal desire for a genuine relaxation of international tension. To this end it is imperative to stop the arms race and seek fair and reasonable solutions to regional conflicts. Here, I should like to speak on those two issues.
In the past four decades of discussions on disarmament have been going on every year, both inside and outside 'he United Nations. Regrettably, the arms race has never ceased for a single moment. On the contrary, it has kept escalating. That is an undeniable historical fact. One may ask several questions: How many nuclear weapons were there in the world in 1963 when the partial nuclear-test-ban Treaty was signed? How many nuclear weapons were there in 1972 when the interim United States-Soviet agreement on strategic arms limitation was signed? And how many more nuclear weapons are there today as compared with 20 years ago? The number of strategic nuclear warheads alone has increased several times. This trend cannot but cause general concern. The arms race cannot possibly be a unilateral affair. Although both sides have claimed only to maintain parity, each is in fact bent on gaining supremacy over the other. When one side declares that it has fallen behind and must catch up, the other side will do likewise on the same excuse. This inevitably leads to an alternating escalation of their arms race. In order to change the long-standing situation in the arms race, in which each side tries to outdo the other, it is imperative for the two nuclear Powers that possess 95 per cent of the world's nuclear weapons earnestly to consider taking the lead in drastically reducing their nuclear arsenals. They will still have enough left to destroy each other even if their nuclear arsenals are cut by half, let alone by a quarter. It must be pointed out that the arms race between the super-Powers has been extended from land, sea and air to outer space. If this trend of large-scale qualitative escalation is allowed to continue unchecked, it is bound to increase the danger of war and to pose a grave threat to world peace.
We welcome the resumption of disarmament talks in Geneva between the United States and the Soviet Union. The two countries will also hold a summit meeting in the near future. It is hoped that through serious talks they will reach a practical and effective agreement without prejudice to third countries. Of course, it would be unrealistic to pin our hopes for peace on their talks only.
In view of the grave threat to world peace posed by the continued escalation of the arms race and in view of the strong desire of the people of the world for nuclear and conventional disarmament, the Chinese delegation wishes to put forward to the General Assembly the following four-point proposal:
First, in order to reduce the danger of a nuclear war and to create the conditions for the complete elimination of that danger, all nuclear States - and the two big nuclear Powers, the United States and the Soviet Union, in particular -should undertake not to be the first to use nuclear weapons in any circumstances and should unconditionally pledge not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear states or against nuclear-free zones. Proceeding on such a basis, an international convention prohibiting the use of nuclear weapons should be concluded with the participation of all nuclear States.
Secondly, in order to avert the possible escalation of a conventional war into a nuclear war in areas with a high concentration of nuclear and conventional weapons; the two military blocs - the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Warsaw Treaty organization - should reach an agreement as early as possible on the drastic reduction of their conventional weapons.
Thirdly, outer space belongs to all mankind and ought to be used for peaceful purposes for the benefit of all. The United States and the Soviet Union should immediately stop the arms race in all its forms in outer space. All countries with a space capability should refrain from developing, testing or deploying outer space weaponry. An international agreement on the complete prohibition and destruction of outer space weaponry should be concluded as soon as possible.
Fourthly, in view of the fact that the arms race in the development of chemical weapons has not been checked, the 40-nation Geneva Conference on Disarmament is called upon to complete its negotiations at an early date and to conclude a convention on the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of chemical weapons. Pending that, all countries capable of manufacturing and producing chemical weapons should stop testing, producing, transferring and deploying chemical weapons and should pledge not to use such weapons.
The aforesaid points are all reasonable measures for resolving the most pressing issues of our time. We hope that the above proposal will be considered by the General Assembly in the interest of promoting disarmament and a relaxation of international tension.
China's position on disarmament is clear and firm. We are resolutely opposed to the arms race and stand for practical and effective measures to reduce armaments. China's military expenditure has long been kept at a low level. Although there has been a fairly rapid growth in China's economy in recent years, its military expenditure has not increased correspondingly.
The few nuclear weapons China possesses and the United number of nuclear tests it has conducted are solely for the purpose of self-defense. On the very first day we came into possession of a nuclear force, we declared that China would never be the first to use nuclear weapons. China has also undertaken not to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear States or nuclear-free zones.
Not long ago, China decided to reduce the size of its military force by 1 million. Part of China's military industry is being shifted to civilian production so as to meet the increasing daily needs of our people.
We have demonstrated our desire for peace and our policy of peace with actual deeds.
The existence of hot spots is an important source of world tension and turbulence. Where there are hot spots, there is a danger of expanded conflicts and crises and they deprive large parts of the world of tranquility. How to end conflicts and remove hot spots is a concern of us all. We are in favor of political settlement, but political settlement can only be achieved through peaceful negotiations on a fair and reasonable basis. In other words, there must be full respect for the sovereignty and independence of countries and strict observance of the international principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of any other country. Professed readiness for a political settlement with the intent to impose on others a fait accompli created by aggression, expansion and interference is nothing but a fraud. The Chinese Government has always maintained that international disputes should be settled through peaceful negotiations on an equal footing, in accordance with the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, without resort to the use or threat of force.
The Kampuchean question remains a matter of concern to the international community. While expanding the war in Kampuchea and incessantly violating the borders of Thailand and China, Viet Nam has resorted to political tricks by using "political settlement" as a means to split and destroy the Kampuchean patriotic forces one by one. But this attempt cannot possible succeed. The tripartite Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea, headed by Prince Sihanouk, has closed its ranks and persevered in the struggle against the aggressors, winning extensive support from the international community.
China is firmly opposed to Viet Nam's occupation of Kampuchea and any big Power's support for such acts of aggression. In our view, the key to the solution of the Kampuchean issue is the withdrawal of all Vietnamese troops from that country. The so-called complete withdrawal of troops from Kampuchea by 1990 is a sheer hoax, the aim of which is to eliminate the resistance forces and perpetuate Viet Nam's control over Kampuchea. China sincerely hopes that Kampuchea will become an independent, peaceful, neutral and non-aligned country. We appreciate the position taken by the countries of the Association of South-Bast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in support of the Kampuchean people's struggle against Vietnamese aggression, for national salvation and in the search for a just solution to the Kampuchean question. The proposal for a Kampuchean solution put forward by the recent ASEAN Foreign Ministers' meeting is reasonable, as are the position and steps taken by Democratic Kampuchea in regard to the present situation. Viet Nam should make a positive response to all this if it really wants a solution.
The Afghan issue is in essence one of armed aggression against, intervention in and occupation of a non-aligned country by large numbers of troops dispatched by a super-Power, which have not only grossly trampled on the norms guiding international relations but also posed a grave threat to the peace and security of neighboring regions. We condemn the intensifying military suppression of the Afghan people and demand the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan. We support the efforts made by the parties concerned to bring about a just solution to the Afghan question in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations.
We resolutely support the just struggle of the Palestinian and other Arab -peoples and strongly demand Israel's withdrawal from the Arab territories it has occupied since 1967. We maintain that all countries in the Middle East are entitled to exercise the right to independence and existence. We support the Arab countries and the Palestine Liberation Organization in their efforts to strengthen their unity and to attain their national goals through political negotiation and by other means. We are in favor of holding an international conference on peace in the Middle East under the auspices of the United Nations so as to seek a just and comprehensive solution to the Middle Bast question and bring about peace in the region.
We are opposed to any outside intervention in the affairs of the Central American countries. The internal problems of Central American countries should be solved by the people of the respective countries. We support the Contadora Group in its continued efforts to arrive at a peaceful settlement of Central American problems and hope that the parties concerned will take practical steps and hold consultations on an equal footing so as to ease the tension in the region.
Recently, the situation in southern Africa has deteriorated drastically. In defiance of opposition from the international public, the South African authorities have clung stubbornly to the system of apartheid and racial discrimination, openly declaring a state of emergency in some towns and cities, in ruthless suppression of the black people.
They have set up an interim government in Namibia to obstruct its independence and intensified their acts of aggression and provocation against neighboring countries. That racism and apartheid should exist now, in the 1980s, is a disgrace to mankind. We indignantly condemn the South African authorities for their crimes perpetuating racist rule, bloody suppressing the black people in South Africa and willfully invading and threatening neighboring States.
We sternly demand that the South African authorities immediately abolish the so-called interim government they have rigged up in Namibia and terminate their illegal occupation of the country so that it may attain independence at the earliest possible date, in compliance with Security Council resolution 435 (1978). We will, as always, unswervingly support the South African people in their struggle against racism, the Namibian people in their struggle for national independence and the other peoples of southern Africa in their struggle for national security, peace and stability.
We support the proposal put forward by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea for the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea - namely, the establishment of a confederate republic with two coexistent systems and the holding of parliamentary talks between the North and the South, as well as tripartite talks. United States troops should be withdrawn from South Korea. We support dialog between the north and the south and appreciate all efforts conducive to the relaxation of tension on the Korean peninsula.
While discussing the danger of war in the current international situation, we must not lose sight of the growth and development of forces for peace.
For the sake of survival and development, the third-world countries, whose aggregate population accounts for three quarters of the world's total, resolutely oppose war and the arms race, and demand world peace.
Many member States of the East and West military blocs, having suffered the catastrophe of two world wars, are unwilling to be dragged into another war.
The many small and medium-sized countries in Asia, Oceania and Europe do not want war. They demand independent and equal participation in international affairs and oppose big-Power domination of the world.
Hundreds of millions of people in the world, including intellectuals, artists, scientists and religious leaders of different races and creeds, all hate war and desire peace. Engaging in different forms of activity against the arms race and the threat of a nuclear war. they constitute a mighty and irresistible force for peace.
In a word, the people are the motive force of history and the masters of the world. They will take their destiny into their own hands. Popular desire for peace is the general trend of the world. Whoever undermines peace by resorting to an arms race and the threat of war will be opposed by the overwhelming majority of the people. Drawing a bitter lesson from the Second World War, they are determined to take preventive measures against the possible danger and avoid the recurrence of the historical disaster. Both the nuclear super-Powers have overkill capabilities and neither of them can afford to ignore the calamitous consequences of a nuclear war for itself, therefore, so long as the people of all countries continue their efforts, persevere in struggle and develop the peace forces against war, there are good hopes for the maintenance of world peace.
Development is a major issue closely related to world peace. World economic development has been characterized by growing imbalance and instability in recent years as a result of the widening economic gap between the developed and the developing countries. At present, many countries still face grave economic difficulties. Latin America groans under a crushing debt burden. Africa is not only plagued with drought and famine but also beset by the debt problem. And Asia is suffering greatly from trade protectionism. Moreover, they are generally faced with lack of development funds, a fall in the prices of raw materials and primary products and sharp fluctuation in the money and financial markets. All this greatly hinders the growth of the developing countries.
Since achieving political independence, the developing countries have scored marked successes and accumulated valuable experience in their strenuous endeavor to develop the national economy. Facts have shown that the important point for the third-world countries is how to formulate a development strategy suited to their actual conditions so as to alleviate the current economic difficulties and ensure a steady economic growth. As an old Chinese saying has it, "Poverty gives rise to a desire for change and change will work out a way leading to success and success tends to hold out." The developing countries should be able to lift themselves out of their backwardness. They have rich natural resources and industrious people who desire development. Provided they bring into play all positive factors, tap their own potentials and take part actively in South-South co-operation, they can gradually overcome their difficulties in the course of development.
Of course, the development of the third world is not a matter of concern to the third world alone. The international community should take effective measures to create an international economic climate favorable to the economic development of the third world. In a highly interrelated world, the economic stability and growth of the developed countries cannot be based on the stagnation and poverty of the developing countries. The existing international economic order is evidently out of step with the changed world economic and political pattern. To change it into a fair and just economic order benefiting the people of all countries is the call of our time. Besides, the economic stability and development of the South are an important factor making for world peace and stability. The developed countries should be farsighted enough to proceed from the overall interests of the world and give serious attention to the question of the North-South relations. At present, it is imperative in particular to take effective measures in favor of the developing countries by alleviating their debt burden, lowering interest rates, opening markets and providing them with funds and increased economic and technological assistance.
In the international economic field, trade, money, finance and debt are interrelated. It is necessary for the international community to seek a composite solution to these pressing issues facing the world economy. The United Nations and other international organizations should step up their role of co-ordination in improving North-South relations. China supports North-South dialog and South-South co-operation in the hope that the joint efforts of North and South will lead to a stable and balanced development of the world economy.
Here we wish to mention in particular the critical state of the African economy. The 21st Summit Meeting of the Organization of African Unity, held not long ago, gave expression to the eager desire of the African countries for closer unity and co-operation and the revitaligation of the African economy. We call on the international community and especially the developed countries to do their part in helping the African countries overcome their economic difficulties and improve their economic position.
China is both a socialist country and the largest developing country in the world. We have achieved great successes in all fields since the founding of the People's Republic of China 36 years ago. However, prolonged efforts are required before we can thoroughly eliminate backwardness in China and turn our large country of 1 billion people into a modern socialist country with Chinese characteristics. We are carrying out an economic reform to invigorate the domestic economy and open the country to the outside world. This is a great experiment. Experience in our reform over the past few years gives us full confidence in its success. To attain our goal we need peace not only for the rest of this century but in the next century as well.
In international affairs, we pursue an independent foreign policy of peace namely we oppose hegemonism and maintain world peace; strengthen China's solidarity and co-operation with the rest of the third world and support the other third-world countries in their just struggles to safeguard their sovereignty and independence and develop their national economies; develop normal relations with all other countries on the basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence irrespective of the differences or similarities in their social systems as compared with that of China; do not enter into alliance or strategic relationship with any big Power or line up with one against another; make our own independent judgment on international issues; and support whatever is in the interest of world peace, international co-operation and common development and oppose whatever is not.
Proceeding from the fundamental interests of the Chinese people, China's independent foreign policy of peace is also in the fundamental interests of the people of the whole world. Fully aware of our responsibility and weight in international affairs, we are determined to do all we can to help relax tension, maintain world peace and promote international co-operation. China will never do anything detrimental to world peace. We will not interfere in the internal affairs of other countries, nor seek spheres of influence or practice hegemonism. This is, and will remain, our position. China is a factor making for peace and stability. It is our hope that, with the growth of its economy and strength, China will be able to contribute more to the cause of peace and human progress.
Peace, co-operation and development are our goals. They are also our earnest aspirations, which we wish to reaffirm to the whole world on the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations. The Chinese Government and people are determined to make sustained and joint efforts together with the peoples of other countries for the realization of these lofty aspirations.Let me offer you my congratulations. Sir, on your election to the high office of President of the fortieth session of the United Nations General Assembly, in this jubilee year your long diplomatic experience with the United Nations will be of inestimable assistance to us.
Let me offer my thanks also to Ambassador Paul Lusaka for his successful work as President of the thirty-ninth session. He helped to ensure that during the last session of the General Assembly the major problems of Africa were dealt with pragmatically, realistically and in a genuinely sympathetic spirit.
Forty years ago, in founding the United Nations, the nations learned the lessons of the Second World War. The Federal Republic of Germany, though not a founding Member of the United Nations, has always, since it was constituted, worked for the fulfillment of the United Nations mission to preserve world peace. We do this by means of our policies in pursuit of peace in Europe and throughout the world.
For 40 years Europe has lived without war. In the North Atlantic Alliance, to which the Federal Republic of Germany as a liberal democracy has firmly hitched its destiny, a community of States was established which is a model of peaceful co-operation on a basis of equality and makes a contribution to peace and stability beyond its own frontiers.
In the European Community, friendship and co-operation have taken the place of centuries of rivalry and confrontation. From the original Community of six States the present Community has developed with its 10 members, and there will soon be 12 members. The forthcoming accession of Spain and Portugal to the European Community will bring great enrichment and new strength to the liberally and democratically constituted States of Europe. We want to put closer common foreign and security policies on a contractual basis. The way to European union is signposted. We regard an active policy in pursuit of peace as a historical duty to our own continent and to the world.
Europe is more than the States of the European Community. When we speak of Europe, we mean the whole of Europe. Peace in the world is particularly dependent on the relations between West and East in Europe. Through the partition of Europe, the German nation was torn apart. Tension between West and East affects us most acutely. For us, therefore, a policy on Germany is a policy in search of peace in Europe and a policy in the spirit of the United Nations. It is not possible to secure peace in Europe without a contribution by both German States. War must never again emanate from German soil. Joint efforts for peace are imperative. That is the essence of the community of responsibility in which both German States fulfill their special mission and duty to ensure peace. Our co-operation merits the support of all States sincerely interested in stability and genuine detente at the heart of Europe.
It is encouraging that on 12 March 1985 Federal Chancellor Helmut Kohl and the Chairman of the Council of State of the German Democratic Republic, Erich Honecker, jointly recognized the opportunity for a new phase of West-East relations presented by the resumption of the arms control dialog between the United States and the Soviet Union. The Federal Republic of Germany will do everything in its power to help improve relations between West and East. The treaties concluded during the seventies by the Federal Republic of Germany with its neighbors continue to be a solid basis for such improvement. The starting point was the 1970 Treaty of
Moscow, which put relations between the Federal Republic of Germany an<5 the Soviet Union on a new footing. Through the Treaty of Moscow and the treaties with the People's Republic of Poland and the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, as well as the Treaty on the Basis of Relations with the German Democratic Republic, we opened up,
out of a national and historical responsibility for peace, new long-term prospects for relations between West and East. We stand by these treaties. Our contractual
policy is not inconsistent with the political aim of the Federal Republic of Germany to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will regain its unity through free self-determination. That is the wording of the "Letter on German Unity" handed over by the Federal Government to the Soviet side
on the occasion of the signing of the Treaty of Moscow. These treaties and the Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin cleared the way for the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE).
On 1 August 1985, at the meeting marking the tenth anniversary of the signing of the Helsinki Final Act, all participating States affirmed their determination to continue the CSCE process and to implement all parts of the Helsinki Final Act. This Final Act is a realistic and balanced document. It is not a peace treaty but sets the course towards a future peaceful order in Europe. The CSCE process is intended to combine the precepts of peaceful coexistence between States and a wide range of co-operative options, on the one hand, with respect for the fundamental rights and interests of people regarding exchanges and information, on the other. It has encouraged States to pool their resources and creative powers. Co-operation is intended to check and reduce the potential for conflict inherent in the existing clashes of interests and differences between systems of values. The opportunities offered by international co-operation will become even more important in the light of the dawning technological revolution. A robust and enduring peaceful order that takes account of the legitimate interests of all concerned must be based on efforts to build confidence and establish co-operative security, combined with the participation of all in economic, scientific and technological progress. Cultural exchanges play a particularly important role in the creation of such an order.
Free and creative contacts and exchanges among all nations and presentation of cultural achievements on a reciprocal basis impart knowledge and deepen understanding of one another. In Europe the joint cultural heritage has always remained a unifying bond in spite of horrific wars, a bond transcending ideological frontiers.
Awareness of the cultural identity of Europe is growing, as is the realization on all sides that Europe will continue in future to have a common fate. The Cultural Forum to take place shortly in Budapest within the CSCE process will give all participating States the chance to substantiate their desire for cultural co-operation and exchanges.
The network of diverse connections developed between West and East in Europe has stood up in past years to serious strains. Our aim now must be to reach more extensive, more comprehensive results than in the seventies. The sound beginnings made in those days must be exploited.
We welcome the forthcoming summit meeting between the President of the United States and the General Secretary of the Soviet Communist Party. The Federal Chancellor, Helmut Kohl, has repeatedly advocated such a summit meeting. The meeting in Geneva is intended to become the new beginning of a top-level dialog. Above all, we hope for a significant impetus to the negotiations in Geneva.
On 8 January 1985 the United States and the Soviet Union agreed to resume negotiations. They began on 12 March. The document of 8 January is of great political importance. It creates new opportunities for arms control, dialog and co-operation within the West-East relationship. Far-reaching negotiating objectives are laid down in the document: to prevent an arms race in space and to terminate it on Earth? to reach effective agreements to limit and reduce nuclear weapons, both intercontinental and intermediate-range; and to strengthen strategic stability. The Federal Government unreservedly supports those negotiating objectives. They are in the interests of all nations.
We are well aware that results take time. The subjects under negotiation are intricate and complex. Each side must heed the security interests of the other. Tension and distrust must be reduced. Success depends on the negotiating parties endeavoring seriously and flexibly to reach co-operative solutions. They must consider themselves responsible for a common task. In the relations between West and East, no side must try to achieve a level of security that means less security for the other side.
Developments in the balance of military power between West and East since the 1970s are drastic evidence of that fact. The massive arms build-up by which the West has increasingly felt threatened since the period of detente in the 1970s has brought no major advantage to its originators; on the contrary, it has promoted the search for new types of space-based defensive options. Drastic and reliably verifiable reductions in nuclear offensive potential will therefore necessarily influence the need for, and the scope of, future defensive weapons. Both questions must be considered and resolved in their natural and political interrelationship, as was agreed on 8 January 1985.
The efforts to .achieve co-operative security are a key to the development of a stable relationship between West and East, on which world peace is largely dependent. If success is to be achieved during the present negotiations, existing arms control arrangements must be adhered to. The Federal Republic of Germany welcomes the decision made by President Reagan regarding continued observance of the SALT limitations. Co-operative solutions to the central security issues require a political environment marked by a minimum of mutual trust. A particularly important factor in that trust is predictability of the long-term intentions of the other side. That is why a sound and constructive relationship between the super-Powers is indispensable. But confidence-building and arms control are not a matter for the super-Powers alone: the medium-sized and small States, too, must endeavor to establish an enduring, stable basis for West-East relations. Distrust must be reduced wherever it exists.
Not only nuclear weapons, but also the other potential weapons must be reduced. That is why the multilateral negotiating forums remain for us indispensable components of the arms-control process.
It is an encouraging sign that the Third Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons has had a successful outcome. The Non-Proliferation Treaty has proved its worth as an important element of international arms control and of the peaceful use of nuclear energy. It has shown that multilateral arms control is possible.
The mutual and balanced force reduction negotiations in Vienna and the Stockholm Conference on Confidence and Security Building Measures and Disarmament in Europe concentrate on conventional forces and are an essential complement to the nuclear negotiations in Geneva. The aims of those negotiations, too, are stability at a low level of .forces, openness, transparency, predictability and the renunciation of force by means of specific confidence-building measures. Here in New York we launched an initiative aimed at drawing up guidelines for confidence-building measures that could be applied throughout the world.
Without reliable verification, arms-control agreements would be built on shaky foundations. The attempt to establish a universal prohibition of chemical weapons is still being hampered by the outstanding verification issues, which must now be tackled with vigor. It is high time that an end was put to the scourge for mankind constituted by those chemical weapons of mass destruction that have been outlawed for decades. Partial, regional solutions do not achieve that. They would make the question of verification even more complex. However, we welcome every effort by other States to bring about reliable verifiability. In that spirit, we are studying the suggestions made to us by the German Democratic Republic and the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic. The States at the heart of Europe have every reason to help resolve the verification question, thereby ensuring that chemical weapons are banned worldwide.
We know that a state of non-war through nuclear deterrence cannot be the ultimate method of securing peace. If deterrence against attack, deterrence against war - in other words the strategy of preventing war - should ever fail, there would be inconceivable consequences. The fortieth anniversary of Hiroshima renewed our awareness of that truth. In the nuclear age security can no longer be based solely on autonomous efforts. The long-term preservation of peace, however,
requires co-operative solutions; for that reason, disarmament and arms control are integral components of our security policy. We want to avoid any type of war, including war waged without nuclear weapons.
No one must reserve the option to make the first use of conventional weapons. Given the present state of technology, a conventional war would be a thousand times more dreadful than the Second World War. In Europe, with its high levels of armaments, even a conventional war would be a catastrophe. Our Alliance has declared that it will never be the first to use arms. We do not seek superiority. We do not wish to defeat or control anyone, nor do we wish to make any side arm itself to exhaustion.
The many trouble-spots in the world, the regional conflicts, must not be seen only from a European point of view; above all, they must not be fitted into the mold of the West-East confrontation. That is why we regard genuine non-alignment of the States in the Third World as a tremendously important contribution to world peace and to the realization of the purposes of the United Nations. The great idea of equal rights and self-determination of peoples must not remain empty words. Article 1 of the Charter of the United Nations makes it clear that all nations possess the same right to determine their own national life and political actions, including the political pursuit of peace. That right entails respect for the special needs of peoples in their own regions. No State and no power bloc has the right, or can usurp the right, to decide on issues vital to other nations.
We, along with the vast majority of the United Nations, therefore demand the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan. Striving for ideological supremacy means rejecting real non-alignment. That was recognized with the utmost clarity at the summit conferences of the non-aligned countries in Havana and New Delhi and most recently at the Foreign Ministers Conference in Luanda. Real solutions to the problems of the third world must come from the regions in question.
The European Community, our regional Community, is also an attempt to solve regional problems by means of an increasingly close association of the European democracies. Together with our European partners, we support regional co-operation and associations of States in all other parts of the world too. We actively support the peaceful settlement of conflicts among neighbors. That helps to keep East-^West confrontation out of the third world.
On the basis of this concept of regional co-operation, we support the Contadora process in Central America, a process initiated in the region itself. It is the only realistic way for Central Timerica to approach the solution of its problems. In Luxembourg, on 11 and 12 November, another conference is to take place between the Foreign Ministers of the European Community, Spain and Portugal and those of the Central American States and the Contadora group. We want to continue the dialog between the two regions of Central America and Europe; we seek close co-operation between them.
We also seek structured economic and political co-operation between the European Community and the Gulf Co-operation Council. In the Middle East we support regional efforts to increase the willingness of all parties to the conflict to negotiate and bring about peace. We acknowledge the positive elements of the Fez plan. We welcome the initiative of King Hussein and hope that it will help pave the way towards negotiations. Only through negotiations and the renunciation
of force can accommodation be found between the right of Israel to exist within secure and recognized boundaries and the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination.
We support the regional efforts for peace of the countries of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN). The European Community recognized from the very beginning that the economic and political co-operation pursued by the ASEAN States was an exemplary form of regional co-operation that pointed the way ahead. The ASEAN countries' Kampuchea initiative in the United Nations can count on our vote.
We are pleased that talks have been resumed between the two parts of Korea. We support all efforts to eliminate tension on the Korean peninsula. That should also open the way for accession to the United Nations.
To work for peace in the world also means to co-operate in order to meet together the economic and social challenges faced by mankind. North and South must co-operate to bring about successful development in the third world. North and South must also co-operate to come to terms with the global structural transformation that the third industrial revolution will cause once the transition has been made to the age of information and communication technology. This new age offers great opportunities to mankind. It will enable the world to grow even closer together and will extend the scope and the need for international co-operation. It will open up new opportunities for the individual responsibility and personal development of everyone.
The one world in which we live today cannot remain a peaceful world for long if it remains divided into rich and poor nations, into technically advanced and technically backward nations. The establishment of a truly peaceful world means overcoming hunger and poverty in all regions of the world.
Our look back at 40 years of the United nations is also a look back at 40 years of development co-operation. Despite all the problems that remain unsolved, the last 40 years have been a period of unprecedented economic growth, particularly for the third world. The gross national product in Asia, Africa and Latin America grew by 5.6 per cent annually during the 30 years from 1950 to 1980; that means that it increased fivefold. Between 1960 and 1982 life expectancy rose from an average of 42 to 49 years; infant mortality was cut in half; and whereas in 1960 only 50 per cent of the children received primary education, 94 per cent receive it now.
Two central themes of this sessions of the General Assembly are the debt crisis and the situation in Africa. Since 1982 we have made progress towards overcoming the debt crisis, but the crisis is far from having been mastered. It continues to tick like a time-bomb in the world economy and jeopardizes the growth and social stability of the developing countries, as well as the health of the banking system in the industrialized countries. What can be done?
First of all, we must find methods for restoring credit flows to a normal level and for enabling adequate resources to flow into the developing countries. However, the very volume of such funds means that this task cannot be fulfilled by the international financial institutions alone, nor even principally by them. Private banks and investors must continue to play the main role. I appeal to the commercial banks not to shirk this responsibility. For their part, the debtor countries must also make every possible effort during the coming years to reform their internal economic policies and to fight inflation. Only in that way can they strengthen their international creditworthiness, create a favorable climate for investment and terminate the flight of capital. He must, however, be aware also of the fact that the debt issue is not only an economic and financial
issue; it is also a political question. It is a question of the social peace and internal stability of the debtor countries. They must not be confronted with impossible demands. The servicing of foreign debt must not be paid for in the third world with recession, unemployment and hunger, or with a threat to freedom, democracy and independence.
Secondly, if the debt crisis is to be resolved, further interest-rate reductions are required. The industrialized countries must pursue an economic and financial policy that enables interest rates to be reduced further. They must reduce their budget deficits.
Thirdly, the markets of the industrialized countries must remain open to developing countries; they must be opened even wider. Protectionism is a danger not only in economic growth in the industrialized countries; protectionism is a deadly danger to the developing countries. Free world trade is of vital importance to the developing countries. Only if the industrialized countries open up their markets to exports of finished and semi-finished products from the developing countries can the latter be more firmly integrated into the world economy, whoever denies the third world access to its markets is denying it development. The Federal Republic of Germany supports open markets, particularly with regard to the third world. The high trading surpluses on our market, particularly those of the African and Latin American countries, bear witness to that fact. So that free trade can be secured and consolidated, we advocate that the next round of negotiations in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) be commenced as soon as possible. The acute danger to international free trade stems particularly from the great trade imbalances in the world. It would however be a fateful mistake to seek to overcome them by means of trade barriers. It would mean misunderstanding the roots of the problem.
An interdependent world economy does not permit any isolationist economic policies pursued with no regard to their effects on other countries. The stronger the economy of a country, the greater its responsibility.
The call to open up markets to the third world is also addressed to the socialist industrialized countries. They still continue to take less than 5 per cent of the finished products exported by the third world. That is in no way compatible with their international economic position and the responsibility that they also bear.
The second great task facing us at this session of the General Assembly is that of aid for Africa. After the last session of the General Assembly, the international community organized assistance to combat the threat of starvation. The Federal Government helped with food, transport and medicines. Innumerable people in my country gave generous donations. Assistance for Africa must continue and, indeed, be increased. Donors and recipients are agreed that external help alone cannot bring about the breakthrough. Africa knows that it needs economic reforms and that it must make agriculture the focal point of its development efforts. Good producer prices are essential as an incentive to farmers to increase production, but the reforms in Africa can be implemented only if they are supported by adequate help from outside. Acting on a mandate from the Bonn Economic Summit, the seven industrialized States represented there prepared proposals for the fight against hunger in Africa which were approved here in New York yesterday by the seven Foreign Ministers.
The Federal Republic of Germany regards development policy as part of its policy in pursuit of peace. We want the developing countries to become economically more self-sufficient and independent. We want to strengthen the economic foundations of genuine non-alignment. The Federal Republic of Germany has not concentrated its assistance on a few selected countries; on the contrary, we
have helped wherever the need was greatest. We have remitted the debt of the world's poorest countries to an extent unequaled by any other industrialized country.
The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany considers population policy to be a necessary component of a successful development strategy. We therefore also support the United Nations Population Fund. It has performed valuable work and played a considerable part in slowing down the rate of population growth. However, further successes are needed.
Worldwide interdependence is particularly clearly illustrated in the field of environmental protection. In that field "international home affairs" are becoming an element of international policy, and in that field mankind is making collective decisions regarding its own future. Our forests are in danger. Our agricultural land is being eroded; deserts and steppes are spreading; seas, lakes and rivers are becoming increasingly polluted; animal and plant species are becoming extinct. It is vital to preserve the natural sources of life on which we all together depend on the shrinking planet Earth.
In the field of North-South co-operation it is vital to begin dealing in good time with the questions raised by the new forms of technology, microelectronics and bioengineering. These forms of technology present great opportunities, particularly for the developing countries. Gene technology offers great potential for a solution to the world food problem. The new telecommunications and radio satellites offer the opportunity to equip entire regions of the third world quickly and relatively cheaply with a communications infrastructure. However, the opportunities are accompanied by risks. For instance, the new forms of information technology in the industrialized countries are accelerating automation. This poses
the danger to the developing countries that the advantage they derive from lower labor costs will be eroded. North and South must co-operation to take the opportunities offered to the third world by these new forms of technology and to avert dangers. What seems to me to be the greatest opportunity is, that the new technological revolution will permit many developing countries, at least in some sectors, to enter the new information age at practically the same time as the industrialized nations.
The United Nations has recognized the dignity of man as the supreme principle. All States must follow this principle at home and in their foreign relations. The United Nations has created a comprehensive system of universally binding standards to protect human rights. The 1984 Convention against Torture is a document directed against humiliation, inhumanity and cruelty. I hope that the next agreement in this sphere will be a further optional protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights concerning the abolition of the death penalty. We are faced with the task of putting human rights not only into words but a.J.so into practice. For this, we need international institutions that strengthen the protection of human rights. We call for the appointment of a high commissioner for human rights and for the creation of an international court of human rights at the United Nations.
In many parts of the world human rights are still violated. One special human-rights problem that depresses us all is that of apartheid in South Africa. We seek the peaceful elimination of apartheid in the Republic of South Africa. That is consistent with the ethical basis of our constitution, with the demands of the Christian churches and with the deep conviction of the people of my country. At issue are equal rights for all South Africans, irrespective of the color of their skin. The world watches with horror and outrage the escalation of the bloody clashes in South Africa. We appeal to the responsible authorities in South Africa to release each and every political prisoner, to end forced resettlement, to put a stop to arbitrary detention without trial and to terminate the state of emergency. Only in negotiators with the authentic leaders of all groups of the population can a permanent solution be found. The form that solution will take must be decided by the people in South Africa themselves; no one outside South Africa has the right to lay down how this should be done. The South African Government has recently given indications of specific reforms. These must now be implemented quickly. Further, increasingly extensive reforms are essential, until apartheid has been fully eliminated. We hope that the responsible leaders do not miss the last opportunity given them by history.
The right of peoples to self-determination must be the basis of the solution to the question of Namibia. Security Council resolution 435 (1978) remains for us the indispensable basis for any Namibian solution. We appeal to the Government of South Africa to make the way clear at last for the internationally recognized independence of Namibia. It is free elections that must decide which Government the majority of the people wishes.
The United Nations is 40 years old. This year, we shall rededicate ourselves solemnly to the principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations. Secretary-General Perez de Cuellar has called on us to pursue a new co-operative internationalism. We support his practical proposals. We do not need a new Charter, but we do need a new spirit in the United Nations. It is here, it is in this building, that the preservation of peace must begin. The United Nations was created to reconcile differing interests. It must not be abused for propaganda and for short-term voting successes, useful as they may be for domestic political purposes and votes. To be sure, the United Nations is a political Organization, and politics means struggles over power, influence, values, programs and personalities. And yet we must not forget that the United Nations is a precious instrument in our hands. Our war-scarred fathers have created it. We still have to learn to make the best possible use of the instrument offered us by the United Nations for the preservation of peace. History will not judge us by occasionally small tactical successes; it will judge us solely by whether we succeeded in avoiding the final catastrophe and enhancing the human dignity of all mankind. The dignity of man, his inalienable and fundamental rights, must remain the yardstick against which all our actions are measured.I should like first to congratulate the President on his election. I see it as a tribute not only to him personally but also to his country which holds a distinguished place in international co-operation. Everyone knows how much Spain means to France. In the very near future, our peoples will be together in the European Community. I am pleased that a common future now stands before them.
I should also like, before beginning my address proper, to add my expressions of sympathy to those already voiced by numerous speakers before me regarding the tragic events that have just occurred in Mexico.
The international community quickly demonstrated its solidarity, and my country joined in this widespread movement. I should also like to express here the respect that France has for the courage and dignity shown by the Government and people of Mexico in the face of their terrible ordeal. The catastrophe there reminds us that the happiness of men is uncertain and their destiny precarious. May they by their actions avoid compounding the suffering caused by nature.
This session of the General Assembly marks the fortieth anniversary of our Organization. It is the age of maturity, a time for reflection and for taking stock.
Speaking on behalf of France, a Founding Member of the United Nations and permanent member of the Security Council, I should like to refer to the three main ideals of this Organization which are the reason for its existence, namely, security, freedom and development.
With respect to security, the power of the atom is the dominating factor.
Peace through deterrence has so far prevented East-West conflicts from taking the form of direct confrontations between nuclear Powers. Maintenance of the balance of forces - nuclear as well as conventional - is of vital importance. This armed peace must be maintained for the future at a verifiable level of arms at the lowest possible level.	"	,
The Soviet-American talks in Geneva on nuclear arms and space should lead the two countries directly concerned to proceed to deep cuts in their most destabilizing offensive weapons while maintaining strategic equilibrium.
France welcomed the resumption of contacts between East and West and is particularly pleased that the General-Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Mr. Mikhail Gorbachev, is to visit Paris shortly.
New technologies have led some people to think that we could be turning a page of the nuclear era in 10 or 20 years, at the end of some ill-defined transitional period. This idea, which is attractive at first sight, merely reopens an old debate which has nurtured an illusion in mankind - the illusion that security can be achieved through invulnerability. Have we realized the extent to which a would-be aggressor could turn this risky situation to his own account?
At the Geneva Conference on Disarmament in June 1984, and then again this year, France made two proposals: first, that the two super-Powers limit the military uses of space at the same time as they reduce their offensive nuclear systems; and, secondly, that multilateral negotiations strengthen the international administration of the organization of space for peaceful uses.
The use of devices in space to see, listen and communicate contributes to security; satellites already constitute guarantees for peace and could fill this function even better if the international satellite monitoring agency my country proposed more than seven years ago were established. But, on the other hand, let us acknowledge that the deployment of new types of anti-missile or anti-satellite weapons on earth or in space would lead to a new race, with its risk of destabilizing effects. We see that possession of anti-missile and anti-satellite operational devices by one of the two super-Powers is viewed as justification for the other's efforts. It is high time that the two super-Powers agreed not to continue in this direction, they should distinguish very well between research, testing and development.
During the same time, the Conference on Disarmament should in our view set forth the rules limiting anti-satellite systems. It should also establish real confidence-building measures for space, strengthen the existing system of notification of launches of objects into space, and, lastly, extend to the satellites of other countries the bilateral commitments already made by the United States and the Soviet Union concerning the immunity of their observation satellites.
Those proposals are intended to be constructive and realistic. They take into account both the destabilizing nature of certain military activities in space and the difficulty of verifying the dismantling of systems already in place.
Let us therefore define the true nature of the challenge in space so as to avert the risk of a new arms race. But, in so doing, let us not forget the main objective: the reduction of the offensive nuclear weapons systems of the two most heavily armed countries.
As far as my country is concerned, the President of the French Republic defined in this very body two years ago the conditions in which France would be ready to participate in this undertaking. Our willingness on this score has not changed; it has not diminished.
It is in the context of such a process that France judges it necessary to raise again the question of nuclear testing designed to modernize its defensive force. I know that many delegations consider this a painful problem for which a solution is long overdue. We respect their concern, but in the case of issues like this we cannot settle for fine words or an imprecise assessment. So let us examine the facts.
To date, France has carried out less than one-tenth of the total number of nuclear tests carried out by the Soviets and the Americans. As of 1974 it ceased tests in the atmosphere. It takes every precaution in carrying out its tests, and this was confirmed, in particular, by the team of international experts that went to the site last year. No other nuclear Power did this before and none has done it since. Only recently, in Mururoa, the President of the Republic renewed the invitation he had extended to the countries of the South Pacific to see for themselves, at the actual site, the harmless nature of French nuclear tests.
Though not bound by any negotiated agreement, France has reduced the power of its tests below the threshold of 150 kilotons, a figure that the Soviet Union and the United States have presented to this Assembly for the past 10 years as a step deserving of the highest praise. At every opportunity, France demonstrates its goodwill, but it will never compromise its security interests; nor will it renounce the legitimate exercise of its sovereignty, whatever the cost to it. Continuation of the tests is in fact necessary to maintain the credibility of its forces. The limitation of tests could only be understood and be meaningful in the context of an eventual deescalation by the most heavily armed Powers.
But the debate on international security is not limited to the problems of nuclear disarmament.
The Stockholm Conference on Confidence- and Security-Building Measures and Disarmament in Europe is to cur mind very important. Thirty-five States are participating and are seeking to define concrete measures to establish confidence among all.
In addition to threats of conventional conflicts, the specter of the use of chemical weapons has also resurfaced recently. I should like to repeat strongly ray country's condemnation of any violation of the Geneva Protocol of 1925, wherever it takes place. France supports and will continue to support the efforts of the international community and, in the first place, those of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, to proceed without delay to an impartial establishment of the facts where allegations of the use of these weapons have been made. France has not hesitated to speak out in favor of the work of the Conference on Disarmament toward negotiating a convention banning the manufacture of chemical weapons and providing for the destruction of existing stockpiles under international supervision.
More generally, the deterioration of the security conditions in the world is a check to development when it does not wipe it out altogether. That is why we repeat that disarmament and development must be linked. The President of the French Republic made this point in 1983 from this very rostrum. France is ready to serve as host to an international conference on this subject in Paris.
The recent work of the preparatory committee of the United Nations conference on the relationship between disarmament and development has confirmed during the course of the summer the readiness of everyone. X am therefore pleased to state again here France's offer.
I come now to the second part of my statement.
France will speak out against all attacks on liberty, on the physical and moral integrity of the individual and the dignity of the human person, and will act indefatigably wherever these values are threatened.
We recently celebrated at Helsinki the tenth anniversary of the signing of the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe.
That anniversary reminds us of the great ambitions we had at that time: to formulate for the old continent rules other than those imposed by threat, force or ideology, building not only between States but also between their citizens, new and peaceful relations based on the sovereignty and equality of each State and on the right of peoples to self-determination, with respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Let us look back at the record of the past 10 years. It is mixed. Certainly, Europe has escaped the wars that are devastating so many other parts of the world, and its borders have been respected, and that is the main thing. But economic co-operation, cultural exchanges and contacts between people have not developed as they should. Human rights are still all too often, sometimes seriously, violated or ignored. Much still remains to be done, therefore.
Governments must win the confidence of their citizens. Let us earn that confidence by guaranteeing them the exercise of all their freedoms, without which there can be no genuine democracy.
Let us reunite families. Let us allow people to move and ideas to circulate without hindrance. Let us guarantee free exchanges. Let us agree to live in the diversity of our cultures.
How can I fail to mention under this heading one of the tragedies of our time - apartheid? The origin of the conflicts that are convulsing South African society is to be sought in that system, which is based on an odious doctrine and shameful practices.
Responses to our many appeals have been announced by Pretoria; they are not enough. Only by the speedy and total elimination of apartheid will there be salvation for South Africa.
The opening of genuine dialog between all the communities and recognition of the same civil and political rights for all South Africans constitute the only possible and acceptable basis for change. The current repression and violence can only lead to an impasse.
Faced with the deteriorating situation, France felt the time had come to take concrete initiatives. As early as May 1985 the Prime Minister announced the Government's intention to take measures against Pretoria if significant progress was not made within a reasonable period of time. Because of the worsening situation resulting from the imposition of a state of emergency, France recalled its Ambassador and decided on the immediate suspension of any new investment in South Africa. It then won adoption in the Security Council of resolution 569 (1985) , which recommends that States take voluntary measures against South Africa in order to induce its Government to engage in dialog. Since yesterday all the members of the European Community are taking actions to that end.
Since we took action other countries have joined us. That is what is most important. The freedom and dignity of a people are at stake.
The intransigence of the South African Government over Namibia is not acceptable either. After the withdrawal of South African troops from Angola in April 1985 there was some ground for hope. But the establishment of a so-called interim government in Windhoek, the action of South African military forces in Angola last May and again a few days ago and the raid on the capital of Botswana have shattered those hopes and helped to block negotiations. Despite those setbacks and difficulties, the international community must continue tirelessly to repeat that only Security Council resolution 435 (1978) constitutes an acceptable basis for a definitive settlement to the question of Namibia.
Toe many conflicts are causing bloodshed in the world, bringing suffering and death in their wake. In the Middle East the United Nations is endeavoring to secure respect for the principles enshrined in its Charter.
France supports all initiatives that will help lead to progress towards a solution to the Israeli-Arab conflict through dialog and negotiation. It approves the initiative of the King of Jordan last 11 February, in agreement with the leader of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), and will continue to provide assistance and support, just as it will encourage the Head of the Government of Israel in that regard.
My Government, as it has demonstrated on many occasions, is ready to support the efforts of those who sincerely desire to work for peace, which can be based only on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). In order to be lasting, that peace must take into account two principles that are indivisible: the right of Israel to exist in security and the right of the Palestinians to self-determination, with all that that implies.
As for Lebanon, which has been so sorely tried, it, too, has the right to peace and its inhabitants have the right to security, whatever the community to which they belong. France has continually asserted that the solution to the crisis in Lebanon must be based on the respect for the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and unity of that country. That in turn presupposes a genuine national reconciliation among all the Lebanese, My Government is working ceaselessly to that end, giving assistance and support to the lawful authorities of the country.
I wish also to mention here the fate of individuals, French and others, held hostage in Lebanon. The French Government condemns categorically that odious blackmail, and solemnly appeals to all those who may be able to help secure their release.
I turn to the conflict between Iran and Iraq. The international community has often expressed its extreme concern about that endless and bloody confrontation.
It is essential that there finally be a cease-fire and that the relevant Security Council resolutions, which have lost none of their value and relevance, be accepted at last by the two belligerents and implemented in their entirety.
In order to speed up the start of the necessary negotiations, France encourages and supports international initiatives - in the first place, naturally, the action taken by our Organization.
In Afghanistan, foreign intervention has been sustaining the war for almost six years. Far from abating, the fighting is spreading and growing in intensity, exacerbating the trials of a courageous people. There as elsewhere, justice is consistent with good sense. An answer is to be found only in a political solution that will secure simultaneously the withdrawal of foreign forces, the free self-determination of the population and the stability of the region.
We know that those are the principles that guide the good offices of our Secretary-General. France supports them, without overlooking the fact that their success depends first on the intentions of the occupying Power, which alone is in a position to remove one of the major causes of international tension. Did the head of the Soviet delegation, when he spoke the day before yesterday open the door to hope?
With regard to the distressing and dangerous situation in Cambodia, France reiterates its condemnation of the occupation of that country by foreign forces. It deplores the exacerbation of suffering inflicted on civilian populations by the recent military operations on the Khmer-Thai border. It stresses the urgency of a peaceful solution based on the withdrawal of foreign troops and the national reconciliation of the Khmer people.
The division of the Korean people - a tragedy that has been with us for 40 years - still continues. In the last few months a few encouraging signs have appeared. Recently, separated families were able to meet again for a few hours. I see in that reason for hope.
At this point I should like to mention the hope that is emerging from the changes in an entire continent: I refer to South America. Happily, democracy continues to be consolidated there. France welcomes that, especially as a difficult economic situation and the burden of considerable foreign debt have imposed difficult economic policies on Governments.
In Central America, clearly the conflicts cannot be resolved by military means. The countries of that region should be encouraged to find quickly among themselves the path to negotiation. The Contadora group therefore has our support and backing.
I now come to France's third priority in external policy - development. The overriding need for solidarity between the industrialized and the developing countries derives from the conviction - which has been repeated many times by the French Head of State - that the future of the North and the South is linked and that there can be no lasting growth for the developed countries if the developing countries are excluded. For the past two years the international community has accomplished a great deal towards helping these countries - first of all, during crisis situations.
Who could deny that Governments and public opinion responded rapidly and generously to the extreme hardships of the African countries? I should like to praise the initiatives taken by the Secretary-General, Mr. Perez de Cuellar, in particular the organization last March of a donors' conference in Geneva and the creation of the United Nations Office for Emergency Operations in Africa.
This aid drive is without precedent. Almost 7 million metric tons of grain have been collected for Africa - a considerable figure commensurate with the tragedy that is taking place. The European Community and France made a substantial contribution to that effort, as the representative of the presidency has indicated from this rostrum. But the main problem is to avoid a recurrence of such a situation, thereby ensuring a resumption of the development process on a permanent basis.
It is essential to maintain the flow of official development assistance. For its part, France will contribute more than 0.55 per cent of its gross national product in 1985, a figure close to its 1988 target of 0.7 per cent.
The poorest countries deserve priority attention, for without an increased flow of financial resources it will be difficult, if not impossible, for them to face a particularly unfavorable international economic climate. The establishment of the Special Fund for Africa under the auspices of the World Bank - to which France has made a decisive contribution - constitutes an important step in that direction.
It is also with the hope of eradicating famine that France has proposed to our industrial partners a "plan for Africa", which provides among other things for increased agricultural development and a co-ordinated program to combat desertification. We are pleased that that plan has been adopted and that work currently being carried out by experts will make it possible to implement it soon.
Finally, I should like to confirm here the French President's intention to convene an international conference on forest protection in Paris next February. That conference could, in conjunction with other international organizations concerned - primarily the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the Organization of African Unity (OAU) - propose concrete answers to the concerns of countries which see their forests disappearing and with them often all forms of life.
Those efforts were a response to the most critical situations. For the rest, this past year has seen a relative improvement in the situation of the third world.
But I should like to make two remarks on this subject. First of all, this progress is related to the economic improvement in the developed countries. The relative decline in real interest rates and the value of the dollar have accentuated this trend. But these phenomena, while positive, are primarily and essentially cyclical and short-term, and therefore remain precarious. Let us hope that the decisions taken here in New York last Sunday by the finance ministers of the five most industrialized countries will help to consolidate this trend.
The second point is that we must guard against excessive optimism. Admittedly, the problem of international debt has been brought under control for the time being, thanks to the joint action of the Paris Club, banks and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and especially the extremely austere and courageous adjustment policies adopted by the debtor countries and their peoples. But let us be careful.
The improvement in external accounts has come about at the cost of lowered income for populations - a situation that cannot continue for long.
Debt-servicing, principal and interest, still absorb often considerable amounts, if not all, of annual export earnings.
The fragile nature of this improvement is therefore blatantly obvious. An entire continent of which I have already spoken, Africa, remains on the sidelines of this progress and continues to become increasingly impoverished. The same danger will beset the other continents; and unless we manage steadily to channel capital from the developed to the developing countries, whose financing needs remain structural, the situation will be aggravated.
Here, we cannot be satisfied with the trend of these past few years which have seen a slow-down in direct investment, a reduction in bank credits and repayments to multilateral financial institutions of amounts greater than withdrawals. All this has led to an inversion of North-South capital flows. The developing countries are now paying more to those in the North than they receive from them.
It is essential to improve the existing mechanisms for debt management by providing developing countries with adjusted financing. This is the objective of France's repeated appeals to increase World Bank capital, issue additional special drawing rights, and more generally increase official development assistance.
It is also to be feared that in the months to come the slow-down in the American economy - inadequately compensated for by the growth in Europe and Japan -may have serious consequences for the developing countries; or that rising protectionist pressures in the North will stifle developing countries by limiting their export possibilities and therefore their ability to repay debts.
Certainly, as I said a moment ago, increased dialog among the main industrialized countries is leading to an improved international climate. That dialog should be stepped up in all existing forums and on all occasions. The time has come for a comprehensive and serious consideration of this subject.
Let us take another example - monetary affairs. France, on several occasions in particular when the President of the Republic addressed this Assembly two years ago - has called for an international monetary conference that would seek to define new guidelines, thereby making monetary fluctuations more stable. Industrialized countries and groups of developing countries, in particular the non-aligned countries, advocate a comparable move. It is only through such discussions that we can make the progress the world needs so urgently.

France for its part is ready for dialog and action. In the monetary, financial and commercial fields, its determination remains firm.
At one time the North-South dialog inspired much hope, in particular within our Organization. However, global negotiations never took place, and meetings between experts in international forums have yielded very few concrete results. Today, approaches based on sectoral strategies, integrating emergency aid and giving priority to rural development and training, are being launched and developed. My country approves these approaches, which meet today's needs. But it remains essential that we formulate without delay reforms that will bring about deep and lasting changes in relations between States for the benefit of peoples, their individual liberties and their rights.
In reviewing the principal tasks incumbent upon the United Nations I have been forced to recognize that the present state of the world is far from satisfactory. More than ever, we need the United Nations, the forum pat excellence for meetings and discussion. During the fortieth anniversary we shall have a special opportunity to underscore the need to make negotiation prevail in conflicts and solidarity triumph over selfishness.
This unfortunately gloomy picture does, however, have its bright spots and more encouraging prospects. I wish to conclude on a positive note by mentioning an undertaking on which my country sets great store. I refer to the construction of Europe.
Forty years ago Europe was a devastated battlefield. What has it become today? It is a community without precedent in history, a force for peace and equilibrium in the world, a community that has learned its lesson from its past and that practices, among its members and vis-&-vis the rest of the world, the peaceful settlement of disputes and solidarity with the very poor.
Our colleague from Luxembourg has reviewed the main lines of our action. A few words will suffice to recapitulate: the coming expansion of membership to include Spain and Portugal; the renewal of the Lome Convention with 66 countries in Asia, the Caribbean and the Pacific; the establishment of direct relations with the countries members of the Contadora Group and also the work now in progress to improve institutions and technological capacities with the Eureka project and to move towards a Europe of citizens, a political Europe. Indeed, European construction will be one of the great ventures of the second half of this century.
In conclusion, let me say that France wishes, together with others, to pursue its work for peace. It has heeded the message that has come to us from the depths of history. To those who are distressed by the future of the world, it hopes that we may respond together in the name of the principles that, 40 years ago, were the. cornerstone of our action.
Let me first join those who have congratulated Mr. de Pinies on his election to the presidency of the General Assembly. Our affairs could not be in better or more experienced hands. It is a source of pleasure and pride to my country that we should have as President at this fortieth session the representative of a country shortly to become a full member of the European Community.
It is in the same spirit that I express our thanks to the outgoing President, Paul Lusaka, the distinguished representative of a Commonwealth country, for the impartial and skillful way in which he conducted the Assembly's affairs over the past 12 months.
I should like also to renew my tribute to our Secretary-General. I salute his dedication and persistence in seeking solutions to the world's problems. His latest report, like its predecessors, is another eloquent and persuasive testimony to the importance of this Organization. We shall continue to lend his efforts our fullest support.
In a few weeks we shall mark the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations. In doing so we shall reaffirm the insight defined by the then British Prime Minister, Clement Attlee, at the first session of the General Assembly, in London, as follows:
"the realization by all nations that without co-operation for peace there can be no security for any nation". That thought is just as valid today as when he spoke to a world then riven asunder by the second global conflict in 30 years, a world in which war had brought the international trading system almost to a halt, a world in which many of the greatest cities lay in ruins, a world in which some of today's greatest nations had yet to be born.
In the years since then the membership of this Organization has grown dramatically. Together we can take credit for much of the progress that has been achieved, we have moved away from the sharpness and the savagery of world conflict and undertaken a massive task of reconstruction. We have managed a period of unprecedented economic growth alongside an enormous population explosion. We have welcomed and fostered the emergence of over 100 new sovereign nations. We have fashioned and developed a range of effective institutions for international co-operation.
Britain is proud, too, to belong to two very different groupings which each in its own way demonstrates the growing pattern of interdependence. This year in the Bahamas, Commonwealth Heads of Government representing 49 nations from all continents and outlooks will be meeting together. By the end of this year, too, the membership of the European Community will have expanded to 12 with the
accession of Spain and Portugal. It is now substantially the world's largest trading bloc, and its role on the world stage is becoming steadily store significant. In his statement yesterday the Foreign Minister of Luxembourg gave eloquent expression to the shared values and common approach of all the members of the European Community.
Tomorrow the commemorative meeting of the Security Council will give us a chance to take stock of all that has been achieved over the past 40 years. We should at the same time acknowledge the scale and complexity of the tasks that still challenge us. We must not underestimate the efforts the international community still has to make if our actions are to achieve the goals sat by the founding fathers.
We still live in a world wracked by continuing violence and conflicts, by economic and social hardships and by famine and disease. Last week's massive natural disaster which has brought such tragic suffering to the Mexican people is a grievous reminder of man's vulnerability to his environment. We all pay a tribute to the courage with which the Mexican Government and people have responded to this catastrophe.
In the Secretary-General's own words,
"We face today a world of almost infinite premise which is also a world of
potentially terminal danger." {A/40/1, p2), As he so rightly argues, the solution lies in our own hands, in our will and determination to decide the kind of world we wish to see in the years ahead and to take the steps necessary to achieve it. So this special anniversary is an occasion on which we should not just reflect on our past but, much more important, look ahead to the questions that will face us in the future and start shaping our policies now.

The need for such foresight applies with particular force to our economic agenda. The appalling famine in sub-Saharan Africa has shown how a series of problems - some natural, some man-made - can case together to bring unimaginable suffering: long-run degradation of the environment, progressive failure of agricultural production and prolonged drought. This disaster has evoked a dramatic response from many countries. The West has led the way, The United Kingdom alone last year contributed a quarter of a billion dollars. Almost half of that came from private donations, the gifts of individual men and women. Moreover, we have not stopped providing funds. We have made sure through the provision of aircraft of the Royal Air Force that our supplies reach those most in need as quickly as local conditions will permit.
But spontaneous generosity even on this scale offers no long-term solution because we live in a world of paradoxes. Some areas of the world still face acute hunger and are unable to feed themselves. Other parts - astonishingly more and more - face mounting problems of over-production. The pattern of this development is itself remarkable. The vast populations of China and India, despite all the prophecies of doom, are now more them self-sufficient in food. Increasing reliance on the enterprise of individuals and on the incentives of the market place has in many cases provided the spur to growing efficiency. By contrast, other countries, some of them better endowed with natural resources, still face the need to import food. And in some regions natural resources are being threatened or destroyed by over-exploitation while nearby, sometimes even in the same country, they are underdeveloped and under-used.
If we are to resolve these contradictions, ensure a more balanced development of the world economy and secure a rising standard of living for all our citizens, we must create a wider understanding of the reasons for success and failure.
We must identify ways to exploit and yet preserve our resources more effectively. We must train our people more imaginatively, deploy our common technological knowledge more skilfully. We must shape our institutions and societies so that the natural forces of economic change and growth are encouraged and not stifled. As has been shown in Ethiopia, the United Nations can play a vital role in matching resources to needs.
Sustainable economic growth is essential if we are to secure a reduction in the present crippling burden of debt in many countries. Last year the world economy grew by 4.3 per cent, the fastest rate for six years. Many countries have acted courageously in meeting the economic and social pressures of adjustment. We have heard in this debate why it is necessary for this difficult match of problems to be handled sensitively. That is why there is a duty on us all, as we respond through the international institutions on a case-by-case basis, to take account of the very real problems faced by debtor countries. We must try to create the stable framework that will enable them to pursue their policies of adjustment. That is the importance of the continuing need to reduce deficits in some of the industrialized countries.
Almost three years ago I had the privilege of presiding as Chairman of the Interim Committee of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) over a substantial increase in IMF quotas. Last year, at the Economic Summit in London, we were able to encourage the introduction of multi year rescheduling agreements where appropriate. We need new to address ourselves to the level of resources available to the World Bank. Britain would like to see early agreement in principle to a general capital increase for the World Bank and stands ready to play its part.
An urgent and continuing need is for us to support and strengthen the open trading system. This is essential if we are to resist protectionism and ensure that
our trade contributes to the prosperity of all countries, particularly those in the developing world. We welcome the forthcoming meeting of the Contracting Parties to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) to discuss a new round of negotiations. Without such a new round the forces of protectionism will gain in strength. Time is running out.
We need not simply preserve the open trading system but also see that it works more openly and more widely. Open trading needs to be broadened to include the service industries and the expanding economies of those countries that are' increasing their industrial base. Greater stability in world currency markets is essential. In particular, we need stability at rates that will promote the expansion of world trade rather than increase protectionist pressures. That is the importance of the agreement reached in this city only three days ago at the meeting of Finance Ministers and central bankers of the major industrialized countries.
But the need to look ahead is not confined to economic issues. We need the same approach in tackling the complex political and security issues that face us. The Secretary-General has reminded us of the extent to which the fundamental architecture of this Organization has been flawed by what he refers to as "the lack of that unanimity of the permanent members which was to have been its main driving force". Nowhere is this more evident than in the division between East and West. Perhaps the most important question facing this Organization during its fifth decade is whether we shall be able to record positive steps that will narrow this crucial gap.
I believe we can. The last two years have seen a considerable increase in contacts between East and West. I welcome that. Since becoming Foreign Secretary I have made a point bf visiting every one of the countries in Eastern Europe and getting to know their leaders. In the same spirit we welcomed Mr. Gorbachev's important visit to Britain at the end of last year. The first meeting between
President Reagan and Mr. Gorbachev will take place this November. That will be an important opportunity for searching and substantive discussions which can lay the
foundation for greater mutual confidence between East and West. It should demonstrate that the leaders of the world's largest Powers are serious in their desire to overcome the difficulties between them.
But contact alone is not enough. The true foundations of understanding cannot be laid in an atmosphere of mistrust. Mr. Gorbachev has said "there is no fatal inevitability of conflict between the Soviet Union and the United States". In that he echoes President Reagan's belief that "the Soviet leaders have much to gain from joining the West in mutual arms reductions and expanding co-operation". The Soviet Union and its leaders need have no doubt about the sincerity of the Western commitment. The people of Britain would like nothing better than a reduction in tension and an increase in co-operation. The task for statesmanship roust be to transform common aspirations into the substance of agreement.
The world needs this most urgently in the field of arms control. We warmly welcomed the resumption of the Geneva negotiation on nuclear and space arms between the United States and the Soviet Union. We support their aim of preventing an arms race in space and terminating it on earth.
Our overriding objective must be to obtain security at the lowest level of armaments. We do not believe that either side should strive for superiority. The aim must be mutual balance, taking account of current developments. The outcome of the process should enhance and not undermine deterrence. The negotiations must be on the basis of compliance with existing obligations. These talks present a forum for hope, a chance for constructive negotiations, and a potential for real and verifiable progress. It is only at Geneva that public declarations can be transformed into agreements that are seriously intended. Megaphone diplomacy leads only to a dialog of the deaf. But a genuine wish to serve the cause of peace will meet a swift response from our side.
Recently Mr. Gorbachev told the world that his country trusts the United States no more than the latter trusts the Soviet Union. Mrs. Thatcher made much the same point when she said that neither side looks at each other through rose-tinted spectacles. Verification provides one of the essential elements in any arms control agreement. In itself, it breeds the confidence essential to the preservation of a regime of arms control. Equally, verification requires a measure of confidence on both sides in the good faith of the other.
If that objective is to be achieved it is vital that countries comply with the treaties and commitments which they have undertaken. Particularly important are those treaties between the United States and the Soviet Union which govern strategic relationships: the strategic arms limitation agreements and the Treaty on the Limitation of Anti-Ballistic Missile System. These agreements form the foundation for the present structure of mutual security.
Concern for international stability was of course a prime motivating force behind the Non-Proliferation Treaty. For that reason, we were particularly pleased with the successful outcome of the recent Review Conference and the substantive final document agreed by consensus. We share fully the Conference's conviction that the Treaty is essential to international peace and security. We support unreservedly their determination to enhance its implementation and further strengthen its authority.
There is no doubt that this result reflects the renewed commitment of the international community to use the Non-Proliferation Treaty to prevent the further spread of nuclear weapons. We call upon those who remain outside the Treaty especially those with significant unsafe-guarded nuclear facilities - to accede to the Treaty is soon as possible and so help to protect the world against the potential horrors of nuclear war.
But equally we must not overlook the importance of the Non-Proliferation Treaty in promoting the safe use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, particularly in the developing world. We have announced our intention to double, between now and 1990, the funds we contribute to developing countries party to the Treaty through the technical assistance projects administered by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). By these actions we shall continue to demonstrate our commitment to check uncontrolled nuclear proliferation.
It is right that we should concentrate our attention on the global issues that threaten all nations' security. But in this world of close interdependence, more specific regional issues also affect our interests. I think in particular of southern Africa, where the growing crisis in South Africa and the continuing threats to her neighbors cause us grave concern.
We strongly condemn the incursion into Angolan sovereign territory by South African defense forces. We have joined with the rest of the Security Council in giving force to this condemnation. Such acts can only undermine the stability of the region and damage efforts to achieve Namibian independence. South Africa should be in no doubt of our determination that Namibia must be brought quickly to independence in accordance with Security Council resolution 435 (1978)j this resolution remains the only internationally accepted basis for a Namibian settlement.
Southern Africa has seen major changes in recent years with the coming to independence of Mozambique, Angola and Zimbabwe. It is essential that all the countries of the region should be freed from the present tensions and allowed to concentrate on building a peaceful and prosperous future in harmony with their neighbors.
In South Africa itself we deeply deplore the failure of the South African authorities to lift the state of emergency, the continuing repression of peaceful protest, and the detention of citizens without trial. More fundamentally, we reject the system of apartheid - which is so contrary to the values of the United Nations Charter and which undermines much of real value in South Africa. He call upon the South African Government urgently to move beyond mere words to actions which are long overdue: to end apartheid, and to establish a system of government acceptable to the people of South Africa as a whole.
Britain is united with other countries in its determination to see fundamental changes made. We have consistently brought pressure to bear on the South African Government to achieve this. We comply fully with the United Nations arms embargoes, we do not collaborate with the South Africans in the development of their nuclear program, civil or military. Our guidelines for the disposal of North Sea oil exclude sales to South Africa. We operate controls on a wide range of sensitive exports to South Africa. We fulfill our obligations to discourage sporting contacts. We have fully applied the European code of conduct to British companies operating in South Africa to ensure that they contribute as effectively as possible to the crucial changes we wish to promote.
Where we differ from some is not in our willingness to apply pressure but in our judgment of the likely effectiveness of mandatory economic and trade boycotts. I understand the passions that prompt calls for such measures. But we are not persuaded that measures of this kind would achieve the aims of those who call for them. They would diminish rather than increase effective pressures on the South African Government to introduce fundamental changes, and would bear most heavily on the weaker sections of the population and neighboring countries. We believe that all those with longstanding political, economic and diplomatic contacts with South Africa have a responsibility to use such links to promote fundamental change.
In keeping with this approach, we have reached agreement with our European partners on a number of measures which we believe will strengthen the forces for change in South Africa. I have today announced our adoption of all the measures agreed at Luxembourg on 10 September. These measures build on the recent visit of my three Community colleagues which clearly demonstrated European concern. In recent weeks there have been signs of movement by the South African Government. These must now be translated into firm decisions to dismantle apartheid. To this end there is now an urgent need for dialog with genuine representatives of the African majority.
In the Middle East tension has too often flared into violent conflict. It is a sad reflection that in no single year since the United Nations was founded has this area been at peace. Nowhere are negotiated settlements more urgently needed.
In Lebanon there can be no peace until the communities there themselves work together to rebuild their country free from outside interference. Israel must withdraw all its forces from Lebanese territory as soon as possible. And the Lebanese themselves must put an end to the appalling cycle of violence in that country. We condemn without reservation the kidnapping of innocent hostages, including the British United Nations official, Mr. Alec Collett. His kidnappers should release him without delay. In the Gulf, we are all appalled by the tragic and wasteful conflict between Iran and Iraq which has now lasted almost as long as the Second world War. We deplore the use of chemical weapons. And we entreat both sides to refrain from attacks on civilian targets - particularly those on merchant shipping in international waters. An early initiative to end the war is desperately needed. The Secretary-General's eight-point proposals offer the best way forward. We will continue to give him our full support.
A solution of the Arab/Israel dispute has been a major goal of this Organization almost from its foundation. That in itself testifies to the exceptional difficulties in securing a balanced settlement. But I believe that this year there are signs of readiness to seek peaceful solutions to the dispute. I think in particular of the constructive moves by King Hussein of Jordan, for v. \ch Mrs. Thatcher has recently reaffirmed our active support. The world community must give firm backing to all those who eschew violence in favor of patient diplomacy. That is the way towards a just and lasting peace based on the principles long espoused by the United Nations.

Only the parties directly concerned can negotiate such a peace. But if they are to have the confidence to enter what are bound to be difficult and delicate negotiations; they will need strong encouragement and support from the entire international community so fully represented here in the United Nations. This Organization is based on confidence in the power of diplomacy, negotiation and dialog. Hy Government shares that faith. The vital necessity is for the process of dialog to get urgently under way in this area where for so long minds have failed to meet.
I am conscious that it is only too easy for speakers addressing this Assembly to call on other countries to put their house in order. I should therefore like to turn to two issues where Britain is making a direct and positive contribution.
The tragic divide in Cyprus continues. The Secretary-General has shown skill and determination in seeking to bring the two parties together after the failure of talks in January. We wish his current initiative every success, and hope that President Kyprianou and Mr. Denktash will agree to meet as soon as possible. The British Government continues to do everything it can to assist the Secretary-General. An agreement has been tantalizingly close before. All the parties have a responsibility to see that it does not evade us again.
Over the past year we have kept up our active search for ways to restore more normal relations with Argentina. Since the conflict, we have removed financial restrictions, and offered talks on a series of practical issues. On several occasions we have pressed for the reciprocal lifting of restrictions on trade. In the absence of an Argentine response we took yet another unilateral step last July - to improve trading relations by lifting our ban on Argentine imports. Argentina has failed to reciprocate.
We shall continue to look for ways of improving relations with Argentina. At the same time we shall maintain our firm commitments to the people of the Falkland Islands.
By insisting that Britain must first commit itself to negotiations on sovereignty before there can be discussion of any aspect of our bilateral relations, Argentina has blocked progress. Ours is the sure realistic approach to the re-establishment of confidence between the peoples of the United Kingdom and Argentina and the reduction of tension in the South Atlantic.
There are many areas where mutually beneficial co-operation is possible, for example, in the increasingly urgent task of conserving the South Atlantic fisheries. Informal discussions in the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) have shown that an international effort will be required to deal with this. We are ready to give our support to the FAO's constructive initiative and hope that the Argentines will be equally prepared to work with the FAO.
This international approach to the conservation of fish stocks has been seen to be effective in other contexts. We were encouraged, for example, by the progress made at the recent meeting in Hobart of the Commission set up under the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources.
Fisheries are only one aspect of the complex task of managing the resources of the continent of Antarctica. This has been successfully achieved under the Antarctic Treaty for a quarter of a century. The Treaty has preserved the continent as a zone of peace, free from nuclear explosions and dumping, militarization, or active territorial disputes. We firmly believe that an attempt to apply a common heritage regime would upset this proven system, risk destabilizing the region and jeopardize the present close international scientific collaboration in Antarctica. We shall maintain our support for the Antarctic Treaty system.
In Central America there is widespread agreement on a number of objectives: the need for greater stability, for economic progress and for the reinforcement of democracy. These objectives are clearly set forth in the Con tad or a documents. The Contadora process has our firm support. The path to peace must lie through the strengthening of democracy and the limitation of arms; above all through the ending of cross-border subversion and interference. The present tense situation calls for the greatest possible restraint on all sides. The planned meeting in Luxembourg later this autumn between the Foreign Ministers of the Ten, plus Spain and Portugal, the Central American States and the Contadora countries will be a further demonstration of our support for peace efforts.
In recent months, there have been a number of direct contacts between North and South Korea, contacts which are continuing and broadening. It is my profound hope that these may lead to a peaceful and lasting solution to the Korean problem, and that the people of Korea may shortly be represented at this forum.
Viet Nam's illegal occupation of Cambodia is a continuing affront to international law. It jeopardizes regional stability. It flies in the face of international opinion. We give our firm support to the efforts of the members of he Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) to persuade the Vietnamese Government to reach a political solution based unequivocally on the principles approved by the United Nations.
The sixth year of Soviet occupation of Afghanistan has witnessed intensified Soviet efforts to subdue the Afghan people and to put pressure on Pakistan, where some 3 million Afghan exiles have found refuge. We hear much from the Soviet Government about its support for the oppressed peoples of the world. Yet in Afghanistan they are the oppressors. Why do they not honor their principles and signal their support for the admirable effort of the Secretary-General to achieve a solution, by agreeing to withdraw their troops? Only this concrete action will satisfy the demands of the world community and bring peace to Afghanistan.
It is clear that in founding the United Nations our predecessors were as much concerned to promote the interests of individuals as to further those of their Governments. It is therefore particularly deplorable that 40 years later the rights, liberties and well-being of so many individuals should be at risk: not just from poverty, hunger and disease, but also from the policies and actions of Governments.
We must all do everything we can to give force to our fine words about human rights. I said in Helsinki last July that while the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) had lit a beacon, the future strength of its light would depend entirely on the performance of the signatory States.
That holds good in the United Nations context as well. The United Nations Commission on Human Rights and other United Nations organizations have a major role to play in making the existing human rights instruments more effective. But to achieve their targets they must have the full co-operation of the Member States.
The United Nations finds itself today deeply involved in threats to our societies undreamed of by the founding fathers. The modern problem of drug abuse continues to take on new and more horrifying forms. This is a vice that particularly threatens our young people - and hence our future societies. Britain is increasing the resources devoted to the war against drugs and introducing new measures designed to strip those involved in drug trafficking of their ill-gotten rewards. Every Member State needs to take firm national action. But national efforts are only a part of the solution. Effective international co-operation to eradicate production, trafficking and the illegal harboring of offenders is urgently required. The Venezuelan initiative for a possible United Nations convention is a useful start. But we must all make a sustained and united attack on this vicious problem.
Equally effective co-operation is required if we are to halt the spread of terrorism. Every attack on an innocent individual, every hijacking and every bomb is an attack on us all. Britain has taken steps to tighten control of unacceptable activities by members of diplomatic missions. In order to reduce the scope for aircraft hijackings Britain has also put forward specific proposals for extra international action to take sore stringent security measures at airports and in civil aviation operations. As the Secretary-General has pointed out, many of the necessary international agreements are in place. They need to be enforced. We must all sake it clear that we will not submit to blackmail, that we will not tolerate terrorist acts and that we will not harbor terrorists.

The agenda of international problems is long and complicated. But if we are to take the right measures, we need to have the right mechanisms. On the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations, we should undoubtedly look again at the way in which this Organization works: to learn from its failures and to build on its successes.
There are many ways in which this Organization can be improved. We must get better value for money throughout the united Nations systems. We must look for more effective co-ordination. We must prevent politicization of the technical bodies. We must try to streamline and make more relevant the work of the political organs. Many sensible and practical suggestions have been made. I think in particular of the recent proposals put forward by past Presidents of the Assembly on how this body can be more effective. But we must act on them.
I have today concentrated on the challenges that still remain after the efforts of 40 years and on the dangers of complacency and inaction. But I am heartened by the evidence I see of a more practical and pragmatic approach to co-operation between our peoples. The General Assembly played a part with its economic declaration of last year. This year's human suffering in Ethiopia has prompted encouraging examples of international co-operation: British and Soviet aircraft worked side by side; united Nations and voluntary agencies pooled their efforts.
Most striking of all was the moving response of our young people. The Live Aid concerts touched the hearts of millions of young men and women around the world.
Their reaction showed that idealism and energy can rise above the barriers that divide us. It showed, too, the vigor of free societies, where individual initiative can still set a standard for Governments to match and can remind us of the real brotherhood of man.
We who hold the responsibility of political leadership have to show that we are capable of rising to that challenge.
Sir, I should like to begin by congratulating you on your unanimous election to the presidency of the United Nations General Assembly at the fortieth session. You are a distinguished son and eminent representative of a country with which India has close and cordial relations, and your association with the United Nations goes back many years. We are confident that you will provide this Assembly with able stewardship.
I should also like to place on record our appreciation of the effective and statesmanlike leadership given to the Assembly at the thirty-ninth session by your predecessor, Mr. Lusaka of Zambia.
I wish also to pay a tribute to our Secretary-General for his untiring efforts in the cause of peace and for his patience, perseverance and wisdom. He has won our admiration for his skillful handling of several crisis situations. We wish him continued success and reiterate to him our support.
Before proceeding further, allow me to express cm behalf of the people and Government of India our profound grief at the heavy toll in human and material terms claimed by the earthquakes which so tragically struck Mexico last week. We express our solidarity with and support for the people and Government of Mexico in their hour of travail and in their heroic efforts to overcome this unprecedented calamity.
Mr. President, you preside today over a historic session. The United Nations has completed 40 years of its existence. These have been years not only of tribulation but also of promise and even achievement. The world is surcharged with suspicion and uncertainty, with incipient as well as overt conflict, but the ideals of the United Nations continue to instill optimism. The dawn of independence and freedom for the overwhelming majority of mankind, particularly in the erstwhile colonial and imperial domains in Asia, Africa and Latin America, has been a significant and welcome development of our times.
The generation that launched the United Nations also saw the launching of the nuclear age. While conventional attitudes towards this world Organization are still shaped by the memories of the Second world War, there is today a new specter that haunts our civilization, the specter of a nuclear catastrophe. Hostile military blocs are poised against each other with an armada of nuclear weaponry that could wipe out all life on this planet many times over. Survival in this nuclear age has become the key issue of our times.
The United Nations today is the hub of diplomatic activity for the nations of the world. Whatever their divergence in political systems, economic structures or cultural mores, they come together in almost daily contact on a variety of bilateral, multilateral and global issues. Yet this so-called democratization of international relations is only part of the story. On the other hand, the pressures and divisions that characterize contemporary international relations seriously hamper the Organization and reduce its capacity for effective action. As Jawaharlal Nehru stated at the United Nations as early as 1948:
"We have got into a cycle of hatred and violence, and not the roost brilliant debate will get you out of it, unless you look some other way and find some other means. It is obvious that if you continue in this cycle and have wars which this Assembly was specially meant to avoid and prevent, the result will be not only tremendous devastation all over the world, but the non-achievement by any individual Power or group of its objective." In his thought-provoking report on the work of the Organization, the Secretary-General has very aptly characterized the United Nations as an essential element in the historic choice before humanity - between a world of technological promise and one of potentially terminal danger. He has rightly stressed the need to strengthen the concept of international authority embodied in the United Nations as one that should serve as a substitute for "unilateral action, exclusive alliances end spheres of influence" (A/40/1, p.2). His specific suggestions deserve careful study and reasoned application.
We in India and in the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries believe that the United Nations represents, in a real sense, the best hope of mankind. As the late Prime Minister, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, stated in her address to the United Nations General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session, "Firm faith in the United Nations is central to the non-aligned" (A/38/PV.9, p.3). Our affinity for the United Nations is rooted in our world view. We cherish peace. We believe in the equality, sovereignty and independence of States. We have a fundamental conviction in the dignity and worth of the human person. The United Nations embodies in itself these lofty principles and more. It constitutes a unique international forum where nations can resolve their differences and work together for the common good of humanity.
Throughout the years of India's freedom struggle, our leaders viewed independence not in narrow national terms but as part of the struggle of oppressed peoples everywhere for justice - political, social and economic. Following India's attainment of independence in 1947, our democratic institutions have stabilized and given to our people a deep sense of participation and commitment in determining the nation's priorities in the political and economic fields, as well as in the building up of its social and cultural ethos. In our international relationships, the commitment to the policy of non-alignment has been both instinctive and inevitable. As the Prime Minister of India, Mr. Rajiv Gandhi, has stated:
"We have inherited a well-tested and consistent foreign policy which serves our national interest. We have always believed in working for peace. Our policy is to be friends with all countries on the basis of reciprocity and mutual benefit. Our commitment to non-alignment and a new world economic order based on justice means a total dedication to the twin causes of peace and development. He also believe in safeguarding the independence of States and upholding the principles of non-interference and non-intervention."
Only a few weeks ago we marked the fortieth anniversary of the dropping of the first nuclear bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Memories of that catastrophe make us even more acutely aware of the devastating potential of nuclear arsenals today. As we begin this fifth decade of the nuclear age, the attitudes of nuclear-weapon States towards the possession and use of their nuclear weapons have not undergone any basic change. There is a wide gap between public fears of a nuclear war and the calculations of statesmen and strategists of the efficacy of the nuclear balance of terror. Ever increasing expenditures are being undertaken for the qualitative development of weapons. New generations of weapon systems have come into existence and the militarization of outer space appears imminent. Indeed a whole range of new strategic concepts are being built which seek to smother any sense of moral outrage that humanity may feel over the politics of nuclear confrontation among the most powerful States of the world.
All nations stand to suffer to a greater or lesser degree from the impact of the arms race. No one can predict with certainty the devastation that would be caused by a nuclear war. When the immediate effects of the blast and fire- are combined with the long-term effects of the fall-out, the erosion of the ozone layer and the damage to all our planetary life support systems, it is clear that another world war might well bring an end to human history.
It is time for us to go the roots of our predicament. If the States most responsible for creating this threat are as yet unprepared to suggest urgent measures for preventing the outbreak of a nuclear war, others should take the lead. There is clearly today a rising tide of protest all around the world against the wasteful and dangerous arms race. The political climate generated by the spontaneous popular movements against the accretion of armaments, against the testing of nuclear weapons and against the use of science and technology for
purposes inconsistent with humanitarian principles, makes it imperative for us to take bold action now.
The tendency towards the legitimization of nuclear weapons should be reversed. The process of reduction of nuclear arsenals should be commenced as the only way to build up confidence and trust among States. A commitment by leaders of the major nuclear-weapon States to follow a path of arms limitation rather than arms build-up is the need of the hour. The evolution of healthy national societies in the world can only be ensured if the pervasive influence of an armaments culture, particularly of a nuclear armaments culture, is curbed and the massive expenditure now being directed towards perfecting and modernizing the instruments of war is channeled towards securing more equitable and better conditions of livelihood for the peoples of the world. Even a token reduction in arms expenditure can produce dramatic results if channelized into the development of the less affluent sections of the world. In this context we welcome the convening of the International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development next year.
We have welcomed the resumption of negotiations in Geneva between the United States and the USSR on a complex of questions concerning space and nuclear arms, to be considered and resolved in their interrelationship, with the declared objective of working towards the complete elimination of nuclear arms everywhere. All nations have a stake in the success of the Geneva negotiations and it is, therefore, with some concern that we note that these talks have not produced any concrete results so far. We hope that the forthcoming summit meeting between the leaders of the two countries will give a significant impetus to this process.
I should like at this stage to refer to the Delhi Declaration issued at the end of the meeting of the Heads of State or Government of Argentina, Greece, India, Mexico, Sweden and Tanzania who, in January this year, issued a fervent appeal to the nuclear-weapon States to halt all testing, production and deployment of nuclear weapons and their delivery systems, to be followed by substantial reduction in their nuclear forces. The Delhi Declaration specified two steps for special attention - the prevention of an arms race in outer space and the early conclusion of a comprehensive test ban treaty. These leaders from five continents called for a continuing program of arms reduction leading to general and complete disarmament accompanied by measures to strengthen the United Nations system and to ensure the urgently needed transfer of substantial resources from the arms race to economic and social development.
In determining our international political and economic policies we, the non-aligned countries have consistently refused to tailor our responses to the dictates of cold-war predispositions. We do not mortgage our decisions to foreign dictates, we do not seek confrontation. But we urge the necessity of change as the key to the transformation of the world community. India does not believe, however, that such a transformation can be achieved merely by resort to strident rhetoric or by destructive criticism. The test for the international community consists in managing change by peaceful and co-operative means, recognizing the objective imperatives of our situation in the present-day world. Therefore, we seek the widest co-operation of all nations of the world. But we ask that such co-operation be based on equality, justice and a genuine recognition of our mutual interdependence.
As nations subjected to colonial domination and racial discrimination we stand firmly committed to the complete elimination of the pernicious practice of apartheid or racism in any form. The situation in southern Africa is an affront to the conscience of mankind. The policies of apartheid of the racist regime in Pretoria constitute a source of tension, instability and conflict, endangering both regional and international peace and security. The recent tragic developments in South Africa, as a result of the fresh wave of terror and repression unleashed by the racist regime following its imposition of a state of emergency, testify to Pretoria's determination to continue its repressive policies. Mr. Botha's statement in Durban of 15 August provided ample proof, if proof were indeed needed, that Pretoria remains wedded to apartheid, that it will continue to turn a deaf ear to the legitimate aspirations of the oppressed majority in South Africa and to the voice of the entire international community, that it will persist in its attempts to divide the struggling majority in South Africa, and that it will show no scruple in killing, maiming and detaining arbitrarily those who dare raise their voice in protest.
Recent events make it clear, at the same time, that the people of South Africa will not be cowed into submission. As the special communique on South Africa, adopted by the non-aligned countries at their recent ministerial Conference in Luanda, stated: "The countdown to the collapse of apartheid has started in earnest". We call once again for the immediate and unconditional release of Nelson Mandela and other valiant freedom fighters under detention. We are convinced that the struggle for a united, democratic and non-fragmented South Africa will, before long, find culmination in final victory. We reiterate to our brothers and sisters in South Africa the assurances of our total solidarity and support.
Equally, our hearts go out to the suffering people of Namibia who have now completed a century under oppressive colonial occupation. The same abhorrent regime that persecutes its own people persists in its illegal occupation of Namibia, now close to two decades after the United Nations assumed direct responsibility over the Territory. The attempts by that regime to set up another puppet administration in Namibia through the so-called Multi-Party Conference, have met with the universal contempt and repudiation that they deserve. The Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement on Namibia, held in New Delhi from 19 to 21 April this year, reaffirmed the clear and consistent support of the Non-Aligned Movement for the cause of Namibia and set out a concrete Program of Action to advance that cause. During that historic meeting, India took an important step forward by according full diplomatic status to the representative of the South-West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO) in New Delhi, thereby reaffirming its firm support for the Namibian cause. The United Nations Security Council, convened in response to thQ call made by the non-aligned countries at New Delhi, has once again called for immediate and unconditional implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978), which constitutes the only basis for a peaceful settlement of the
Namibian question. Once again. South Africa has spurned that call. It is incumbent on the Council to meet again.
It is clear that South Africa could not have persisted in its defiance of the will of the international community for so long but for the diplomatic and moral support and the wide-ranging collaboration in the economic, military, nuclear and other fields that-it has been receiving from its friends and allies. The pursuit of apartheid, the occupation of Namibia, and the repeated acts of aggression against independent African States, jointly and severally, all constitute threats to peace. Yet the Security Council has, time and again, been paralyzed into inaction on account of vetoes cast by one or more of its permanent members against mandatory measures aimed at the total isolation of South Africa. The Pretoria regime is beyond persuasion. Clearly, policies such as those of "constructive engagement" have failed. Comprehensive mandatory sanctions under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter are the only answer. Meanwhile, States have a moral duty to sever all links with Pretoria. The recent upsurge of public opinion in many parts of the world for more resolute action against South Africa is a welcome development. My country is proud to have led the way in 1946, when we became the first voluntarily to impose comprehensive sanctions against South Africa.
Nearer to our own shores, the destabilizing and escalating great-Power military presence in the Indian Ocean causes us great concern. Only the elimination of such presence can enable the nations of the area to shape their own destinies without hindrance or military tutelage from beyond their territorial boundaries. The 1971 Declaration adopted by the United Nations laid down the objective of a zone of peace in the Indian Ocean area, which is universally supported by all non-aligned States of the region. These States now call for the early convening in 1986 of a conference on the Indian Ocean in Colombo in order to achieve the realization of the objectives of the Declaration. The participation of all the great Powers at such a conference is crucial, indeed indispensable, to its
all the great Powers at such a conference is crucial, indeed indispensable, to its success. The presence of military bases, command structures and other forms of military presence against the express wishes of the countries of the area only add to the tensions already prevailing in the Indian Ocean littoral and should be progressively reduced and eliminated.
Meanwhile, in our own neighborhood, the countries of South Asia have embarked on a process of regional co-operation which holds out significant prospects for the betterment of our peoples. It is important that these developments are not adversely affected by the political and military factors involving the introduction of sophisticated arms serving external strategic interests. As we have repeatedly stressed, it is necessary that the existing thresholds are not crossed or new elements of controversy introduced which could adversely affect the security environment in our neighborhood. We, for our part, are committed to promoting good neighborliness and harmonious relations in the area. It is in this spirit that we look forward to the first summit meeting of the South Asia Regional Cooperation organization in December this year in Dhaka.
Our solidarity with the struggle of the Palestinian people under the leadership of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to secure the establishment of an independent State in Palestine and the return of the Palestinian and Arab territories occupied by Israel has been a well-recognized plank in the non-aligned platform. The plight of the Palestinians today is indeed one of the supreme tragedies of history. Few people have been more systematically brutalized, oppressed or humiliated in their own lands. The dispersal of the heroic Palestinians will not weaken their will to fight for their inalienable rights. Nor will it bring peace to the area. Occupation of land belonging to its neighbors will not guarantee Israel its security. There is now an increasing understanding of the fact that no comprehensive solution of the problem in the Middle East is attainable without the active involvement of the PLO, the sole and authentic representative of the Palestinian people. A comprehensive solution of the question can only achieved by a forward-losing approach based on a recognition of the realities of the Palestinian right to an independent State and the right of all the States of the region to live in peace within secure international frontiers. Any such solution must comprise the total and unconditional withdrawal of Israel from all Arab territories occupied since 1967 and the exercise by the Palestinian people of their inalienable national and human rights, including the right to establish an independent State in their homeland. The situation does not brook delay.
We underscore once again the importance of the early convening of the proposed international conference on peace in the Middle East, under the auspices of the United nations and with the participation of all parties concerned, for securing a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the region in accordance with well-established principles. India is ready to extend its full support and co-operation in this connection, and is appreciative of the efforts being undertaken by the Secretary-General.
The tragic conflict between Iran and Iraq, two valued members of the non-aligned fraternity, continues to be a matter of concern and anguish. India, along with other non-aligned countries, has taken repeated initiatives to resolve this conflict. Our efforts continue, along with the efforts of the Secretary-General and others.
In spite of the valiant efforts of the Contadora group to bring about a peaceful negotiated solution to the problems in Central America, the situation in the region continues to be marked by instability, tension and conflict. Policies of interference and intervention and the threat of the use of force imperil peace and security in the region, complicating its serious social and economic problems. The Government and the people of Nicaragua live under constant threat, harassment and intimidation. The problems of Central America can be resolved only by peaceful means, through political dialog and negotiation. The Contadora group must intensify its efforts to overcome the obstacles in its bid to bring lasting peace to the region. We are distressed by the last-minute impediments which prevented the signing of the revised draft Contadora Act for Peace and Co-operation in Central America of 7 September 1984. However, we have noted with satisfaction the presentation of a further revised draft, following the meeting in Panama earlier this month. It is our earnest hope that the meeting of plenipotentiaries scheduled for next month will finally pave the way for durable peace to return to this troubled part of the world. The endeavors of the newly constituted Lima group will no doubt strengthen Contadora's hand.
We have always affirmed the inadmissibility of interference in the internal affairs of States, as also of the introduction of foreign troops into any country. The situation in South-West Asia can be resolved only through an overall political settlement based on the principles set out in the New Delhi Declaration. India's own efforts have been directed towards this end. We support the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and non-aligned status of Afghanistan. We have closely followed the efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, which deserve the fullest support of all concerned.
Tension, conflict and instability afflict other parts of the world, including South-East Asia. Cyprus continues to face travail and threats to its sovereignty, independence, unity, territorial integrity and non-aligned status. Tension continues to prevail in the Mediterranean, the South Atlantic and the Pacific region.
Colonialism, as I observed earlier, persists in its most virulent form in Namibia. In other parts of the world as well, the task of decolonization remains incomplete. In this twenty-fifth year of the United Nations Declaration on decolonization, tribute is due to the commendable role the United Nations has played in the field of decolonization. We must also reaffirm our Lesolve to eliminate the colonial phenomenon altogether.
The world economic environment continues to cause grave concern. At the Seventh Summit Conference of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi in March 1983, our Heads of State or Government stressed that
"the international community cannot be assured of durable peace so long as the economic disparities between nations are widening". 
The Foreign Ministers of non-aligned countries, meeting at Luanda earlier this month, were constrained to point out that the world economic situation had not improved since 1583.
The limited and fragile recovery achieved in some of the industrialized countries, whose spread has remained uneven even amongst; them, is now faltering, because it has been based on unsustainable macro-economic policies. The projections for the rate of growth of the economies of industrialized countries for 1985 and 1986 remain low. The 1985 rate of growth may not exceed 2.8 per cent; it may well be lower.
At the same time, the economies of the developing countries remain under heavy pressure. Their overall growth rates remain well below levels which would offset population growth, let alone secure development gains. Combined with the severities of the adjustment process which marked the first three years of this decade, this decline in growth rates has brought into sharp focus the constraints on their economies, threatening wider social and political strife. The developing countries have been making adjustments without any parallel improvement in the world economic environment and in the face of serious resource constraints, the growing menace of an increasingly intolerable debt burden, reverse transfer of financial resources and intensifying protectionist barriers against their exports to developed countries. Against this background, the weakening of the commitment to the spirit of international economic co-operation and an erosion of the multilateral system is a deeply disturbing trend. It is paradoxical that this should be happening when there is an increasingly wider recognition that the world economy has become more interdependent, calling for a greater need to sustain and further the international consensus in favor of development.
We have also seen with growing concern the increasing resort to bilateralism or selective multilateralism with the adoption of policies and practices which run counter to the agreed goals and objectives of international economic co-operation. This is a negation of the consensus which the developed countries themselves had helped to achieve.
It is apparent that the prevailing international economic crisis cannot be explained away as a cyclical phenomenon. It has its origin in structural inadequacies which have been working to the particular detriment of the developing countries. It calls for a fundamental review of the existing structures.
It is essential that the international community renew at this fortieth anniversary session its commitment to the resumption of international negotiations with the objective of stimulating world economic recovery and ensuring sustained growth, particularly of developing countries. This requires in particular an integrated approach in the interrelated areas of money, finance, debt and trade, and a restructuring of international economic relations.
The Luanda Ministerial Conference of the Non-Aligned Countries reaffirmed the strategies for international economic negotiations adopted by the Seventh Summit at New Delhi. The Conference also defined a framewoiU for the commencement of a dialog.
I would like to suggest that our immediate efforts should concentrate on the following:
First, rectifying through appropriate measures and actions the "inadequacies and malfunctioning" of the international monetary and financial system.
Secondly, the adoption of policies and actions to implement the agreements on rollback and standstill with a widening o! the access to exports from developing countries and the removal of all infringements on principles, rules and regulations of the international trading system.
Thirdly, the adoption of methodologies which would ensure multilateral co-ordination of macro-economic policies pursued by developed countries and the placing of their monetary and financial policies within the purview of international discipline.
Fourthly, the increase of financial flows to the developing countries, in particular concessional flows to the low-income countries.
Fifthly, making the international adjustment process symmetrical and equitable.
I would also like to propose that during this session high-level discussions be undertaken to achieve understandings that would commence the process for the convening of an International Conference on Money and Finance for Development.
The critical economic situation in Africa and the drought and famine conditions have evoked a spontaneous response from the international community, including many non-aligned countries. The leaders of the African countries at the twenty-eighth summit Conference of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) have adopted a bold and courageous Declaration in which they have expressed Africa's determination to deal with the challenge of development. It is incumbent on the international community fully to support their efforts. As a token of solidarity, the Non-aligned Movement has adopted a Plan of Action. India has, on its own part, made a contribution of 100,000 tons of wheat, followed by another contribution of $US 10 million to the OAU Special Fund. Under the Plan of Action, India has already identified nine agricultural projects in Africa. Our participation in these projects, which is in an advanced stage of preparation, shall assist in priority areas for the rehabilitation of the agricultural infrastructure. The efforts by India that I have mentioned are additional to the bilateral program that my country has on an ongoing basis with the African countries as a part of which a large number of African experts are undergoing training in Indian institutions, and Indian experts are working in several areas with their African brethren in African countries. This, too, is a contribution to the priority areas of socio-economic development in Africa.
As one of the original signatories of the United Nations Charter, India has remained steadfast in its commitment to the values and ideals enshrined therein. To quote once again the words of India's first Prime Minister,
Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, from a speech he made in 1946 even before we attained our independence:
"Towards the United Nations, India's attitude is that of whole-hearted co-operation and unreserved adherence, in both spirit and letter, to the Charter governing it. To that end, India will participate fully in its various activities and actively play that role in its Councils to which her geographical position, population and contribution towards peaceful progress entitle her."
By the same token, the United Nations and its system of specialized agencies have been a valued partner for India in the task of nation building and economic development. For the assistance and co-operation that the United Nations has given us, we are deeply grateful. That, however, is not the only vindication of the trust, hope and confidence that we repose in the United Nations. The importance and utility of the United Nations for us, for the non-aligned and other developing countries, indeed for the entire international community, is to be measured not only by the material assistance the United Nations provides in bettering the quality of life on this planet, but by the higher and more noble aspirations of humanity embodied in this remarkable institution. The greatest tribute that we can pay to the United Nations on this occasion is therefore to rededicate ourselves to the Purposes and Principles of the Charter and to reaffirm our commitment to give them full effect. As this Assembly proclaimed last year, let 1985 "mark the beginning of an era of durable global peace and justice, social and economic development and progress and independence for all peoples". We hope indeed that we are on the threshold of such an era.
Sir, at the outset I should like to congratulate you on your election to the high position of President of the General Assembly for the fortieth session. I am convinced that your wealth of diplomatic experience and proven skills will contribute to the enrichment of the deliberations during this special session.
This year we are commemorating the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations, which was established with many hopes and expectations in the aftermath of a world distraught by death, destruction and the plunder of war.
Like many other peoples, but significantly different from them, the Jewish people underwent an ordeal which will leave its eternal mark not only in the long annals of its history but also in its deeper spiritual and psychological experience. This was, of course, the horrendous Holocaust which was wrought upon us by nazism and anti-semitism. For this reason the emergence of the United Nations provided a source of inspiration and light for us at the end of a very dark era in our history.
Indeed, what could be more stirring than the unequivocal declarations of principle appearing in the opening paragraphs of the United Nations Charter, such as: "We the peoples of the United Nations, determined to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war" and the call "to practice tolerance and live together in peace with one another as good neighbors"? To my great regret, however, this Organization has had a part in shattering these aspirations and noble ideals.
The slander of anti-semitism has also been propagated in the guise of anti-zionism. In this context, we sadly note the tenth anniversary of the passing of the infamous General Assembly resolution falsely equating the Jewish National Liberation Movement - Zionism - with an outrageous phenomenon totally alien to the most fundamental and spiritual values of the Jewish heritage. That resolution, 3379 (XXX), of 10 November 1975, will be remembered in the history of the United Nations as a terrible blot on its record and a discredit to the Organization and to those irresponsible Members that supported it.
Other international forums have also been exploited for the purpose of propaganda and political warfare against Israel, distorting the real purposes for which they were established. It would, therefore, be appropriate and timely to strive for what I would call "political disarmament" in these bodies, in order to guarantee that they maintain their integrity and credibility in the exercise of their legitimate functions.
Israel was established in 1948 against the background of a United Nations resolution calling for the establishment of a Jewish State in Palestine. The United Nations, however, did nothing to implement its resolution, and the State of Israel came into being through the will, the toil and the sacrifice of its people. Nor, I might add, did the United Nations alleviate the immense threats and dangers that Israel had to face since its establishment.
Since the founding of the State we have made every possible effort towards the achievement of peace and the normalization of relations with our neighbors. Peace for us is a natural and integral part of our national heritage. The Jewish people is a small, democratic and free people, striving to rebuild its renewed nationhood in its ancient homeland. We cherish peace and we teach its blessings to our children. Indeed, after a prolonged period of strife and hostility forced on us by our neighbors, we found a way to build a bridge of peace with one of our Arab neighbors.
Egypt and Israel have demonstrated clearly that face-to-face negotiations and direct dialog are the most constructive and beneficial ways of achieving peace. This was brought about on the basis of the Camp David Accords, which established a just and effective framework for the settlement of conflicts. It is for this reason that Israel is so insistent on applying this framework to the further extension of the peace process. We hope that in the near future we shall be able to negotiate with Jordan, our neighbor to the East. It is crucial that the peace treaty with Egypt should not remain the sole example of peace with our neighbors, and therefore we earnestly seek to widen and deepen that peace by extending the process to include the rest of our Arab neighbors.
From this rostrum I once again urge King Hussein of Jordan to enter into direct negotiations with Israel - not in some vague, deflecting international forum, but in direct, bilateral discussions. An international conference is a means of evading direct negotiations. It will be a stage for hostile and extreme propaganda and will not serve the cause of peace. Our aim should be the achievement of a bilaterally negotiated peace treaty between our countries. There is no change in our deep commitment to the Camp David accords, and we stand ready therefore to meet a Jordanian delegation, which may include Arab Palestinians from Judea, Samaria and Gaza, or other Arab Palestinians to be mutually agreed upon.
Israel firmly believes that there is no way to solve the problems of our region except through negotiations and peace. If King Hussein has finally decided to offer his hand in peace, let him act the way the late President Sadat did. He should not drown the quest for peace in a sea of conditions that nullify any chance of peace - conditions such as an international conference and the participation of terrorist organizations in the peace process. I should also like to urge King Hussein to free himself at this eleventh hour, from the clutches of the PLO. King Hussein has been caught in their clutches before and it seems that he has failed to learn from his own experience. Only after freeing himself from his dangerous association with the PLO terrorists will it be possible to achieve progress towards peace between Israel and Jordan. Indeed, the recent marked increase in terror attacks against Israelis stems, among other things, from Hussein's partnership with the PLO. Jordan cannot extend the olive branch of peace on the one hand and play host to terror at the same time. The two are mutually exclusive.
Our position in this regard is clear and decisive. We are firmly against any contacts or dealings with terrorists or their representatives - and, in this case, with an organization whose declared purpose is the liquidation of Israel. PLO leaders have been intimating that they are engaged in the political process of peace. However, they have been waging cruel and murderous terrorist activity all along. According to their declared program, political action and terrorist activities should go hand in hand until they achieve their goal, the elimination of Israel. He are not ready to negotiate with terror. There is no place for its self-proclaimed representatives at a table where peace, security and tranquility are to be negotiated. Acknowledging that organization would be tantamount to legitimizing terror, and should be rejected by all those who value peace.
To protect our people and territory from terror, we were obliged to act against the PLO terrorist infrastructure in Lebanon, which posed an intolerable threat to our people in the Galilee region.
Meanwhile, terror continues to wreak havoc in Lebanon. The latest outrage was the kidnapping of four Soviet diplomats in Beirut. Kidnapping and the holding of hostages for ransom is only one of the manifestations of international terrorism, whose linchpin is the PLO, which we roust fight and stamp out. This is another example of the fact that terror knows no bounds, neither political nor any other.
The removal of the various threats from Israel's northern border continues to be an important priority for us. We will do all in our power to defend and protect the population of the north. This objective has become no less important in the wake of the withdrawal of the Israel Defense Forces from Lebanon, in accordance with the decision of the Government of Israel of 14 January 1935.
Yesterday Israel took action against terror bases, this time in Tunisia. Israel's air force acted against the terrorists only after it became evident that the terrorists were mounting attacks from Tunis with impunity. Only last week, PLO terrorists, who were directed and commanded from Tunis, attacked an Israeli boat in Larnaca, Cyprus, and murdered three Israeli civilians in cold blood. In recent months, those headquarters were responsible for a number of seaborne attempts
against our people, which were prevented by Israel's navy. We had no intention of attacking Tunisia, although that country has permitted terrorist bases to exist on its soil. We acted against murderous criminals in order to prevent the continuation of their criminal acts.
The United Nations has been sadly remiss in meeting the challenge of international and PLO terror. It could and should have come out resolutely against this evil phenomenon of our time and placed it outside the pale of civilization. Instead, it has equivocated and, worse, legitimized terror in terms that have provided encouragement to the terrorists and their supporters.
I regret to state that, in spite of numerous outrages and continuing attacks by PLO terrorists, this issue has never been seriously addressed by the Security Council or other United Nations and international forums. Israel cannot be expected to ignore this double standard. In spite of this, Israel is willing to act with other free nations to curb, if not stamp out, terrorism. Similarly, we urge joint international action against terrorists and their sponsors.
Among the most distressing and oppressing phenomena of our international experience is racism. The very word evokes dark and brutal memories of the long history of the Jewish people. Apartheid is a system of discrimination which the Jewish faith and the State of Israel totally reject and repudiate. The Government of Israel, on 11 August 1985, reiterated that it is unconditionally opposed to the policy of apartheid in South Africa and to any discrimination on grounds of race, religion or color or on any other grounds.
Israel has diplomatic relations with some of the African States and we are ready to renew our relations with those with which we do not have them. This is, of course, up to them. We believe that many have by now seen who the real friends of Africa are: it is not those who use high-flown words but will not lend a helping hand in time of need and distress, or those who remember Africa only when they need its votes at the United Nations. The State of Israel, in contrast, was one of the first to reach out to the nations of Africa, in their early years of sovereignty and statehood and in their current travails, and we are ready to increase our efforts.
In the area of disarmament the nations of the Middle Bast are confronted with three main challenges. These are the reduction of conventional arms, the prevention of the proliferation of nuclear weapons and the eradication of the use. of chemical warfare. My Government believes that concerted regional action on all three issues is a moral imperative of the highest priority.
Concerning the accumulation of conventional arras, Israel voices its concern over the accelerated supply of large quantities of weapons to a number of belligerent Arab Governments in our region. These regimes do not need these arms for their defense, but are stockpiling them to use against Israel. This can only serve to undermine the chances for peace in the Middle East.
On the subject of nuclear weapons, we believe that the most effective and credible barrier to proliferation in so sensitive an area as the Middle Bast is a freely and directly negotiated convention establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone, based on a system of obligations binding' on all States concerned. Israel stands ready to begin such negotiations without delay or preconditions.
While Israel is conscious of the necessity to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons, we are also aware of the substantial contribution which the peaceful use of nuclear energy can make to the well-being of the world and the right of all countries to benefit from such uses. We support those international agreements that would ensure the status and inviolability of nuclear facilities dedicated to peaceful purposes.
Another issue that arouses the deepest anxiety is the repeated use of chemical weapons in the Iran-Iraq war and the danger that such use may spread in a manner that could not easily be reversed, if at all. It is tragic that the sixtieth anniversary of the 1925 Geneva Protocol forbidding the use of such weapons should be commemorated in this manner. This total disregard for solemn international legal obligations by Iraq demonstrates the difficulty of achieving genuine disarmament. But we must not despair; we must continue our efforts in this vital field of human endeavor.
The deteriorating situation of the Jews in the Soviet Union obliges us once again to speak out in defense of their elementary rights. Our concern relates especially to the hundreds of thousands of Soviet Jews who have indicated their desire to join their people in Israel. The Soviet authorities, however, in flagrant violation of the Helsinki Final Act and many other international obligations assumed by the Soviet Government, refuse them permission to leave.
Many of those Jews who have been denied permission to leave are forced to live as outcasts from Soviet society, subject to all manner of official harassment and persecution, while being effectively deprived of the means of legal redress. Increasing numbers have been engulfed in recent months in an accelerating wave of arrests, trials and savage sentences of imprisonment on trumped-up criminal charges. Jews seeking to disseminate knowledge of the Hebrew language have been prominent among these recent victims of judicial repression. These Jews are in no way violating Soviet law, nor are they involved in any form of anti-Soviet activity. Their real crimes, in the eyes of the authorities, are their persistent demand to leave for Israel and their efforts, in the face of strenuous official opposition, to perpetuate their Jewish heritage, culture and religion.
All of these outrages are taking place against the background of a relentless campaign of anti-semitic incitement, usually camouflaged as anti-zionism, in the officially controlled media - a campaign designed by the authorities to encourage an attitude of suspicion, hatred and contempt towards Soviet Jews on the part of the Soviet population.
We call upon all persons of goodwill and all Governments in the civilized world to join us in our protests and in urging the Soviet authorities to conform their policies towards Soviet Jewry to the international obligations solemnly undertaken by the Soviet Government.
Israel seeks good relations with all States including, naturally, the Soviet Union. We have looked to the new Soviet leadership for signs of change in its attitude towards Soviet Jewry. Regrettably, so far we have seen no positive changes whatsoever. .We therefore have no choice but to continue to expose energetically and protest vigorously these flagrant violations of the rights of our fellow Jews seeking to join their people in Israel. He shall continue to do so untiA every Soviet Jew who so wishes is free to exercise this basic right.
There is also the problem of the Jews of Syria, who are subjected by the Syrian regime to discrimination and restrictive policies and are not free to choose to live wherever they wish. This is a flagrant violation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, of which Syria is a signatory. Jews who wish to travel abroad must leave their families behind as living hostages to ensure the travelers return.
Several hundred young Jewish women remain unmarried because of the depleted male Jewish population in Syria. The Syrian Government has cruelly refused to allow those women to leave the country in order to be able to marry within their faith and establish families.
tJe are also concerned about the small, ancient Jewish community left in Ethiopia, because of its isolation and suffering and the latest disasters that have befallen that country. Some of these Jews have already returned to their historic homeland and have been received as long-lost brothers and sisters who have finally returned home.
The people of Israel and its Government have expressed their solidarity with the Ethiopian people, which has undergone much suffering as a result of the recent famine and other difficulties. We appeal to the Ethiopian Government to respect the cultural and religious rights of the Jewish community and to enable it to continue to maintain its heritage and religion and, on humanitarian grounds, to permit those among them who so desire to be reunited with their families in Israel.
The fortieth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations may be a fitting occasion for a review and reappraisal of its activities, in frank and constructive self-criticism.
The United Nations should not merely celebrate its past but also plan for its future.
Some may feel disheartened by the fact that, after so many years of United Nations preoccupation with the problems of the developing countries, we still remain so distant from the goal of bridging the gap between the poor and the rich nations of the world. Poverty, hunger, malnutrition and disease still characterize the conditions of life in many parts of the world.
One inescapable conclusion is that progress has too often been hampered by a tendency to substitute slogans for serious plans of action. Meeting the world's pressing economic and social problems will require new dimensions of international co-operation. The danger of famine continues to afflict developing countries. There is dire need for urgent action by the world community. The peoples of Africa are struggling to free themselves from the curses of poverty and hunger, and the rest of the world must help them in this struggle.
The vital element of developing traditional agriculture has been sorely neglected. Israel is now preparing an aid proposal for more efficient food delivery systems that would provide better nutrition and would link such aid with land and water development programs.
The success of integrated rural development has been proved in Israel's own rapid agricultural development. Israel has much experience in the proper use of soil and water, marketing organization, agro-industrial systems appropriate for developing countries, and the integration of populations and development projects. He are ready to share our know-how in these fields with other developing countries. The benefits of this experience can contribute to raising living standards in many societies.	4
Israel has presented to international organizations, both within and outside the United Nations, a development proposal entitled "Transitional Economy". It seeks to break the vicious circle of poverty by improving the productivity and quality of life in developing countries. The proposed program seeks to combine a comprehensive development process with decentralized planning and implementation.
In the 26 years of Israel's involvement in international development efforts, Israel has co-operated with more than 100 countries and trained over 50,000 men and women in agriculture, in rural development and in health and education. During Israel's development it encountered some of the same problems that are now facing African countries and has successfully overcome them.
The United Nations may recapture some of its prestige and authority if it gives priority to these pressing social and economic issues. The magnitude of the tasks before us will require unprecedented international co-operation.
Unfortunately, the United Nations record is not very encouraging. At its last session the General Assembly had 143 items on its agenda. It passed no less than 38 resolutions relating to the Middle East, out of which 37 were negative, even hostile, in their reference to Israel. Such resolutions have long ceased to attract any attention or carry any weight. Yet the General Assembly did not see fit to address itself to such danger-spots as the Iraq-Iran war and Afghanistan, or to many of the socio-economic problems which plague our society.
Let us put aside the political differences that beset our world and join forces in an effort to find solutions for the ordinary man, woman and child, who are too often ignored in the heat of political debate. Let us work together in the spirit of the ancient prophets who gave to the world the concept of the brotherhood of man, a concept which has been the basis for the great ideals of mankind.
In the present age of unprecedented opportunities, Israel calls upon all Governments, international agencies and non-governmental organizations to rise to the challenge offered by science and technology. Let us share the fruits of scientific and technological advances to improve our lives. Let us build a moral and prosperous future to achieve justice and dignity for all. Let the United Nations become, truly, a "United Nations for a better world".
I must begin by expressing the profound regret of the New Zealand people at the terrible earthquakes in Mexico. Our thoughts are with the people of Mexico. New Zealand is a country which is subject to earthquakes - we know the devastation they can cause.
It is a privilege and a pleasure for me to address the Assembly over which Ambassador de Pinies presides. I first came to the United Nations as a student intern in the 1960s. By then Ambassador de Pinies had already been a prominent figure here for some years. It is entirely appropriate that he should now have been elected to the Assembly's highest office. I offer him my congratulations, and the full support of my delegation for his efforts to make this fortieth session a fruitful and memorable one.
As we celebrate this fortieth anniversary of the United Nations, the thoughts of all of us must turn to reflect on the aspirations and objectives that were pursued with such energy and confidence when the Charter of this Organization was drawn up. For a New Zealand representative it is natural to remember with pride that our Prime Minister of the day, the Right Honorable Peter Fraser, contributed to this original process with statesmanlike vigor. Today especially I wish to recall and pay homage to the leading role he played in seeking to assert the rights of small countries to the maximum possible protection under the Charter against the vicissitudes of international life and in the aftermath of two World Wars.
Now, forty years on, this is no less cogent a problem. My Government, by irony of fate, finds itself at this rostrum again concerned to see maintained, in difficult circumstances, the sovereign rights of a small state against the increasingly complex and sophisticated pressures that are generated from larger
countries within the international community.
It continues to be ray Government's apprehension that, forty years on, the atomic weapon has kept its malign pace along with the existence of the United Nations. No less than in 1945, the horrific atomic shadow still falls across all
our proceedings.
In saying that, I am not expressing a platitude. My point is that the continued development of this weapon over the lifetime of our organization has in fact succeeded in distorting the fabric of international life. In our own experience it conditions the sovereign freedoms we had thought in 1945 were once and for all assured to us. At the very least as policies of power are pursued it has impinged on standards or international morality and behavior.

In such a political climate, it is natural that smaller countries may turn to the possibilities of collective self-help that the Charter of the United Nations encourages. It is indeed to the advantage of the United Nations that each country contributes the perspective of that part of the world in which it finds itself -the South Pacific - there has over recent years been a growing perception that great Power rivalries could start to extend to our region. The fact is, however, that the strategic circumstances of the South Pacific are not those of the northern hemisphere; nor has the South Pacific so far been an area of great-Power confrontation. It need never be; and our own security is best served by keeping it so.
Against that background the countries in the region have acted. We have set in being the best practical measure of agreed arms control available to us to guard against the emplacement of nuclear weapons in our midst. As was announced earlier this year, the South Pacific Forum countries endorsed and opened for signature on 6 August, the anniversary of Hiroshima Day, a treaty establishing the world's second nuclear-weapon-free zone in a permanently inhabited area. This South Pacific nuclear free zone Treaty signals in no uncertain terms the deeply anti-nuclear sentiments of our peoples, and their desire to live in peace and independence and to run their own affairs in accordance with their own wishes.
It is basic to their peace of mind that there should be no use, testing or stationing of nuclear explosives in the South Pacific, and that the activities of the South Pacific countries themselves should fully respect and fulfill the aims of such applicable international measures as the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
To these ends, all parties to the South Pacific nuclear free zone Treaty undertake not to possess, manufacture or acquire nuclear explosive devices anywhere, nor allow them to be stationed on their territory. They also undertake to prevent the diversion of fissionable material to non-peaceful purposes, and not to dump radioactive waste at sea in the zone.
Under the Treaty, South Pacific countries retain their unqualified sovereign rights to decide for themselves, consistently with their support for these objectives, their security rights, and such questions as the access to their ports and airfields by vessels and aircraft of their countries. The Treaty is not, therefore, some sort of disguised attempt to undermine existing military alliances. It is a determined effort to ensure that the South Pacific is not riven by the tensions which have overshadowed so many other parts of the world.
To the South, the Zone borders the area of another and much older agreement -the Antarctic Treaty. We value that Treaty not just because of the nuclear-free and demilitarized zone it establishes for Antarctica but because for 25 years it has effectively guaranteed the stability of the region to the South of New Zealand. It remains the only possible guarantee that that region will continue to remain free from international rivalry and conflict.
To the East, the new zone borders the area covered by the Treaty of Tlatelolco. The joining of the areas covered by that Treaty and the Antarctic Treaty with the vast area covered by the new Treaty means that a large part of the Southern hemisphere has declared its determination to be free of nuclear weapons. As my own Prime Minister said last year to this General Assembly:
"This initiative represents, I believe, a major advance for the region. It would not, we know, spare us from the consequences of nuclear war but, when in place, it would significantly strengthen the existing measures, both global and regional, to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons." (A/39/PV.7, p. 11) Now in 1985, with the Treaty concluded and awaiting in due course its entry into force, we see it as a fitting contribution to this anniversary of the United Nations that we are celebrating.
I should add that the South Pacific Forum countries hope that the five nuclear States will, after consultation with them, sign the relevant Protocols to this Treaty. Thereby they would agree not to use, or threaten to use, nuclear explosive devices against any country or territory in the zone. They would also undertake not to test nuclear explosive devices there.
In this anniversary year of the United Nations, it is painful to have to point out once again that one of the nuclear-weapon states continues to test nuclear explosives in the South Pacific, against the manifest and long-established wish of all the countries in the area that this activity should cease.
These nuclear testing activities have this year led to a new turn of events in the region which, because of its gravity, I am bound to bring to your attention.
Politically motivated offenses and terrorism have been virtually unknown in New Zealand in the past. But the scene has changed as a result of the incident in July 1985 in which the Greenpeace vessel "Rainbow Warrior" was sunk at its berth in Auckland, New Zealand, by a bomb attack which killed a crew member. The circumstances indicated international terrorism. It was well known that the vessel was intended to sail to French Polynesia to protest against the continuation of nuclear explosions at Mururoa Atoll. The incident has gained world-wide attention, and the New Zealand Government has made known its determination to bring those responsible to full account for this outrage. Large scale investigations by the New Zealand police are still under way. Within New Zealand, two French nationals have been arrested and charged with murder, arson and conspiracy, and are due to come before the court in New Zealand in November this year.
I shall not expand upon this notorious incident in detail, except to note that the latest public pronouncement by the Prime Minister of France, after the French Government's own most recent investigations, has acknowledged that agents of the French secret services did indeed sink the "Rainbow Warrior", acting under orders to that effect. It had earlier been established that, for the purpose of surveillance of the Greenpeace fleet, elements of French military forces had been deliberately introduced into New Zealand, under orders from their Government, without the permission of the Government of New Zealand and in derogation of our sovereignty.
Small States must place reliance on international law and we must rely on the protection which the international community, through the United Nations, can give us in circumstances of this serious nature.
Inquiries into the "Rainbow warrior" incident are still being pursued, and the Government of New Zealand is concerned that a traditionally good and highly valued relationship with the Government of France should continue. I am bound to note that the New Zealand Government addressed on 6 September 1985 a formal communication to the Government of France.
In that message New Zealand has reserved its legal position and its rights of action under international law, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, with respect to matters arising from this unfortunate incident. That is a clear enunciation of our position in relation to an issue which is shown to implicate the responsibility of the French Government.
It is certainly my Government's hope that the most recent statement by the French Prime Minister will provide a basis for resolving outstanding questions . between the two Governments arising out of the affair. And I am very pleased to report to the Assembly today that only last evening I met with the French Minister for Foreign Relations, Mr. Dumas, at the New Zealand Mission to the United Nations. He began to discuss possible ways to find solutions to problems arising from the Rainbow Warrior incident, and we have agreed to have another meeting within the next few days.
By virtue of their vulnerability, smaller States have often felt that they must take additional steps to preserve their Charter rights. In the years following the Second World War, a number of countries, including New Zealand, moved, consistently with the Charter, into defensive treaty alliances. This has not meant, however, that countries such as New Zealand have forsaken their right to think for themselves or have abandoned significant sovereign rights. That was not intended.
New Zealand, for example, as a party to the Non-Proliferation Treaty, has forgone the possession of nuclear weapons. We have also declared unambiguously that we do not want any country to defend New Zealand with nuclear weapons. In short, my Government does not seek to be part of any calculation that involves the accumulation of nuclear weapons. We will not have any nuclear weapons on our territory. We will not allow any to be brought in. And ships that are nuclear armed will not come into New Zealand ports.
As will be clear from what I have already said in relation to the South Pacific nuclear-free-zone Treaty, we have taken our own stand on principle, because in the South Pacific there is no need for a build-up of nuclear armaments - indeed, the reverse is true.
The stand we have taken is fully consistent with New Zealand's active membership of the Western community. We see our participation in that community, our partnership with our friends and neighbors in the South Pacific and our support for this world Organization as cumulatively strengthening the fabric of peace in our part of the world.
In practical terms, the effect of the re-evaluation of our interests that we have undertaken will be a new concentration of New Zealand's efforts on our immediate neighborhood. This will involve an expansion of New Zealand's political, economic and defense activities in the South Pacific region and the assertion of an increasingly active role there. This new and strengthened regional approach should provide the basis for a continued, sound and stable relationship with Australia and the United States based on a clear definition of New Zealand's interests and a policy of self-reliance.
Events of recent years lead one to ponder whether the reiteration of the ideals of our Charter over the past 40 years has not bred a measure of easy familiarity, even of complacency, against which we should be very much on our guard in the period ahead. Even those States which themselves generated the great national revolutions - revolutions which inspired the League of Nations and our Charter - have only imperfectly acknowledged in practice the full implications of the existence of newly independent States and the democratic rights those States are perfectly entitled to see maintained and protected.
I hope that our ocean region will not be vulnerable in that respect. It certainly need not be, and it is already organized in regional ways to assert its own distinctive voice internationally*
Here, the United Nations can take its due credit in helping a tide of decolonization which has changed the political map of the Pacific dramatically. In 1945 no island country was independent; in 1985 12 are. United Nations stewardship has often been instrumental in the peaceful achievement of self-determination. The Charter, as well as the 1960 Declaration on decolonization, provided the guiding beacons for the navigators who plotted the course towards independence, and the Special Committee of 24 has monitored progress. It still continues to do so, and New Zealand will be happy to receive next year a Visiting Mission from the Committee to the last remaining overseas responsibility which New Zealand has - the island community of Tokelau.
Decolonization in the South Pacific is not yet complete. In Micronesia to the north, lengthy negotiations per many years with the United States have produced Compacts of Free Association which have the support of the relevant peoples of the Trust Territory. We do not believe that unilateral changes should be made now to the agreed definition of the future relationship between the United States and the Marshall Islands and the Federated States of Micronesia. We will, however, look for and support an early termination of the Trusteeship Agreement in respect of those parts of the Trust Territory, in accordance with the expressed wishes of the peoples. We look forward to welcoming the Federated States of Micronesia, the Marshall Islands and Palau into membership of the South Pacific Forum before too long.
Further south, the region watches anxiously the difficulties faced by the people of New Caledonia in building a consensus for independence in that country. The rights and aspirations of the indigenous Kanak people must be met in the context of New Caledonia's multiracial society. We regret the violence and loss of life which have occurred over the past year. New Zealand supports the present plan for the establishment of regional councils and a congress, leading to a referendum on self-determination before the end of 1987. We welcome the recognition by the administering Power, France, that independence is the logical outcome of this process. It will be important to ensure that the steps outlined are adhered to. The Kanaks have been disappointed too often in the past. Only by following a predictable and short pathway to independence can further disruption and violence be avoided.
I have already noted that political emancipation and the assertion of a say in their own destiny have led the South Pacific countries to early recognition of the desirability of co-operation with each other. Political independence in the Pacific, as elsewhere, is not automatically accompanied by economic self-determination, but acting together has strengthened the voice of the region in international forums. And it can assist in tackling some of the intractable problems arising from smallness, isolation and a scarcity of resources. The island States depend heavily on external assistance. The international price of copra and sugar has a profound affect on people's daily lives. Some significant regional efforts have been made under the auspices of the South Pacific Forum to improve trade access, shipping, telecommunications and the knowledge and control of marine mineral and fishing resources.
Distant water fishing nations have been less respectful of the region's main resource in the past. This situation is improving, largely as a result of the evasiveness of the Pacific Forum nations, and important multilateral negotiations with the Government of the United States on a treaty regulating fishing are currently under way. A successful conclusion will make possible control of purse seiner activity within the 200-mile economic zones of Pacific signatories, and eliminate an area of serious friction. New Zealand looks to the United Nations and other international bodies to continue to help is overcoming the problems of economic security for the very small island States, in support of the region's own efforts to do so.
One issue on which the countries of the South Pacific are united is that of racial discrimination. We all have multiracial societies; we are all committed to making racial harmony the foundation for our nation-building. It follows that we are all totally opposed to the systematic racial discrimination that is practiced in South Africa under the name of apartheid. Since my Government came to office last year we have demonstrated our commitment to that cause: the South Africans have closed their consulate in Wellington, and a proposed rugby tour of South Africa has been canceled. All New Zealanders are appalled the rising tide of violence that is threatening to engulf South Africa. The South African Government must be persuaded to institute the necessary reforms before it is too late. It must be brought to realize that it cannot maintain apartheid by force. It must talk unconditionally to the leaders of the black majority. It must accept that racial partnership offers the only hope for the future of that tormented country. All of us must do whatever we can in a concerted way to produce this result. New Zealand's contacts with South Africa, whether economic or otherwise, are now minimal. I need hardly say that we shall readily comply with any additional sanctions imposed by the international community;
I have focused on practical issues of importance to our Pacific neighborhood - because it is in workable solutions to those issues that the elements lie for continued stable and peaceful development in the South Pacific. He are aware of the larger dimensions to all these problems, and notably of the tensions that impede the prospect of achieving genuine disarmament in our time.
Implicit in what I said earlier is that my part of the world is by no means impressed either with the speed of the global disarmament process or with the failure of the nuclear Powers to read an agreement on limiting their nuclear arsenals.
In the General Assembly last year my Government gave expression to the conviction amongst New Zealanders, as amongst peoples everywhere, that nuclear weapons expose to annihilation those whom they purport to protect; that each new development in nuclear weaponry opens up a more alarming and a potentially more destabilizing prospect than the last. There are already more than enough nuclear weapons to destroy us all many times over. Yet the number goes on increasing. The dilemma is recognized universally. TO control the spread of nuclear weapons and eventually to eliminate them completely are goals of the greatest importance. Where those who have them and those who do not seem to differ is in the sense of urgency. And it is to the United Nations that smaller countries such as my own must look to express that agonizing conviction, which has so recently been voiced by the vast majority of countries assembled at the Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference just concluded in Geneva. 
A year age the Soviet Union agreed to take up the offer of the United States to resume bilateral arias control negotiations, with the goal of leading to the complete elimination of nuclear weapons everywhere. My Government greatly welcomed that move. The issues are complex. We know only too well that there will be no easy or necessarily quick solutions. But solutions are not beyond the skills of negotiation if the political will is there. New Zealand calls on the negotiating parties to pursue their task with good faith and the utmost urgency. The time is past for picking around the edges of the agenda or for diversionary proposals -time-bound and shrouded in propaganda.
We would view with the deepest concern any prospect of competition between the major Powers extending into yet another environment - outer space. But we do not accept that there can be no progress in the talks on strategic weapons and intermediate-range nuclear forces as long as there is no agreement on outer space. The talks must not be held hostage in this way.
Much hangs on the meeting that will take place shortly between President Reagan and General-Secretary Gorbachev. We most earnestly hope for a successful outcome. We do not for a moment underestimate the complexities of the issues the two leaders must deal with. But we urge them to set a framework for a new co-operation from which the negotiations in Geneva may derive the momentum they need to reach agreements to stop the arms race.
At the same time, the efforts of the international community towards meaningful international arms control agreements must continue. The Conference on Disarmament addresses many important issues. No task is more difficult than to forge reliable instruments of international law. But progress in the Conference on Disarmament is, at best, haltingly slow. We urge it to get on with its tasks with commitment and determination.
This Assembly considers many disarmament and arms control proposals in the course of its deliberations. Many of these recommend what is practical and achievable. Some are symptomatic only of an ideological divide.
One of the most serious proposals before the Assembly will again be the draft resolution, jointly sponsored by New Zealand end Australia, urging the conclusion of a comprehensive test ban. A comprehensive test ban, banning all testing in all environments permanently, is regarded by virtually all States as the most immediate and practical step that can be taken to halt and then reverse the arms race. Balanced, practical, verifiable, it will be a major restraint on the spread of nuclear weapons. It will straitjacket the development of new types of weapons without undermining existing strategic balances. It will inhibit compulsive competitiveness among the nuclear Powers.
On two occasions, in the early sixties and in the late seventies, agreement was almost achieved on a comprehensive test ban. We have been disappointed by the setbacks which have prevented such a prohibition from being put in place. My delegation will again seek the means to encourage and speed up this work.
We are celebrating the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations. Time has not produced universal contentment with this Organization. Some of the criticisms which have been made arise from exaggerated and unrealistic expectations. As the Secretary-General reminds us in his latest annual report, the United Nations is not a super-State. It cannot do more than its Members will allow it to do. The policies of Member States have so far prevented the Organization from exercising some of the powers given it by the Charter. They have also prevented it from achieving some of its fundamental purposes. Those are facts.
It is also a fact that the Charter remains the only universally accepted basis of international order. The principles it enshrines are generally recognized today, as they were 40 years ago, to be essential for world peaces and those principles are the foundations of the international regime under which we all live - a regime which, with all its failings, gives individual countries and peoples more freedom than they have ever had before. The United Nations is today the beacon of hope for all small nations. It is their democratic voice by which they can express their fears and their aspirations.
The essential function of this Organization is to uphold the principles of the Charter. First in importance is the principle that "all Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force". Living, as we do, under the threat of nuclear annihilation, we have as strong a common interest as ever in supporting the United Nations and helping to achieve this, its most elusive, but its moat vital, objective.
Sir, permit me first of all to congratulate you upon your election to the high post of President of the united Nations General Assembly for the fortieth session and to wish you success in your work.
I should like to address the delegation of Mexico, whose country has suffered such a terrible natural disaster, entailing heavy loss of life and tremendous destruction, On behalf of the Soviet leadership and on behalf of all the Soviet people, we should like once again to convey to the Government and people of Mexico our most profound condolences.
Four decades have gone by since the victory of the freedom-loving peoples over German fascism and Japanese militarism. The United Nations, whose birth was the natural result of that great victory and whose work has represented the world's major hope for preventing new wars, has now been in existence for 40 years.
Today it can be stated with great satisfaction that those have been 40 years without a world war. In that period truly gigantic changes have taken place in the world. These changes include the establishment and development of the world socialist system - a system of States whose very political and social nature excludes the possibility of any interest in war. All the practical activities of the countries of the socialist community in the international arena are based on the policy of the peaceful coexistence of States with different social systems. The role of socialism in world affairs has been steadily increasing.
Over an extremely short historical span of time the hurricane of the peoples' liberation struggle has destroyed and eliminated from the face of the earth the colonial system of imperialism. Over 100 new States have emerged from its ruins. Today they are full-fledged Members of the United Nations.
The forces that are at work to strengthen peace and prevent war are constantly growing. At present their struggle involves people of all continents, of all generations and occupations, and with the most diverse political beliefs.
The past 40 years have been a period of rapid progress in the scientific and technological revolution, which is not only drastically changing our concepts of the structure of the universe and of matter itself but is also creating ever broader opportunities for meeting the spiritual and material needs of every individual and of all mankind. Even today the achievements of science, if they are used for constructive purposes, make it possible to resolve almost any economic problem. However, they can also generate unprecedented dangers whenever they are used for developing means of annihilation and destruction.
In the complex and rapidly changing world of today, which is the scene of a continuing struggle between the forces of progress and the forces of reaction, between the forces of the future and those of the past, the development of relations among States, including the major Powers possessing the greatest military potential, has followed s changing and at times zigzag course. Aggravations of international tension have alternated with periods when that tension abated; international crises have sprung up and have been overcome, some of them being so acute as to bring mankind to the verge of catastrophe. It would be fair to say that many a time when the international barometer has forecast a storm the United Nations has raised its voice in warning and has been able to take practical steps to reduce the threat.
The greatest hopes for stable peace emerged in the 1970 s, which went down in history as the decade of detente. Detente was based on the general recognition that it was inadmissible in the nuclear age to seek to attain political and ideological goals by means of war and that the policy of achieving the military superiority of some states over others or of one social system over another was wrong and dangerous.
The countries of the socialist community and many other States have every right to take pride in having been the architects and engineers of detente. Yet in the late 1970s and early 1980s the world once again witnessed a stepping up of the activities of the forces which never supported the policy of detente and are now seeking to undo its most important accomplishments. As a result, much of the system of international relations is out of joint and the risk of war has sharply increased.
My delegation wishes to set forth the views of the soviet Union regarding the reasons for the current unfavorable development of the situation in the world and ways of remedying the existing state of affairs. It can be remedied only if there is an understanding, as has been pointed out by Mikhail S. Gorbachev, of the "realities and the dangers which we will inevitably face tomorrow if today those who can and must take the only correct decision evade the responsibility incumbent on them".
We perceive the greatest peril in the fact that the nuclear arms race has, at it were, made a fresh start and is forging ahead. Added to this there is the threat of the arms race spreading to outer space. There is a great possibility of the arms race acquiring an uncontrollable and irreversible character. In the final analysis, this is the road leading to a nuclear catastrophe.
It is also alarming that of late it has not been possible to settle a single regional conflict or to eliminate .a single hotbed of military tension. In the meantime the flames of "local" wars, more often than not undeclared, have been responsible for the deaths of tens of thousands, and indeed hundreds of thousands. Mankind is suffering through being denied the opportunity to deal with such urgent problems as those relating to food, ecology, energy, population and the constantly widening economic gap between the developed and the developing countries. It has been denied that opportunity because the intellectual and material resources needed to find a radical solution to these problems common to all mankind are being squandered on the arms race.
Not a single twist in the arms race spiral was initiated by the Soviet Union. It is only in response to actions of the other side and out of legitimate concern for our own security and that of our allies and friends, concern for international security as a whole, that we have developed or are developing this or that weapon system.
Moreover, as early as 1946, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics proposed that nuclear weapons should be banned for all time. We have been advocating this ever since, and this remains our position now. we have been proposing and continue to propose that agreement should be reached on renouncing all weapons of mass destruction, reducing and totally eliminating their existing stockpiles, and cutting down armed forces and conventional armaments. Our country has come out with a proposed on general and complete disarmament under strict international control.
These radical proposals have yet to be implemented, and it is the United States and some other NATO countries, rather than the soviet union, that are to blame for this fact.
It is precisely because of their refusal to follow the example of the Soviet Union and the People's Republic of China, which has also unilaterally pledged not to be the first to use nuclear weapons, that the threat of nuclear war continues to hang over the world.
None the less, due to the vigorous efforts of the Soviet Union and other peace-loving States a number of treaties and agreements limiting the arms race in major areas have been concluded. These are the 1963 Moscow Treaty Banning Nuclear-Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under water, the 1968 Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear weapons, the Treaty on the Limitation of Anti-Ballistic Missile Systems and the SALT I Agreement, signed in 1972, and the 1979 SALT II treaty. All these treaties, which have served in large measure to reinforce strategic stability, became possible because political realism was also displayed by the then leaders of the united States and other western countries.
It is not the fault of the Soviet Union that local conflicts break out and are raging in various regions of the world. The only thing that we could be "guilty" of is that we have invariably been and remain on the side of the peoples threatened by imperialism and of the States upon whose sovereignty and generally recognized rights imperialism is encroaching.
As regards the increasingly acute economic problems common to all mankind, the Soviet Union has consistently been in favor of uniting the efforts of all States and peoples with a view to finding a rational solution to those problems. This is the thrust of the proposals made by our country, by all Warsaw Treaty member countries, for a drastic reduction in the military expenditures of States, and above all of the major Powers.
These are all facts, which cannot be disputed.
Responsibility for the current critical state of international relations rests with another group of countries, namely, the United States and some of its closest allies.
It was they who, in the early 1980s, wrecked the structure of negotiations which had taken such an effort to build, negotiations which had shown signs of progress towards agreements in many areas ranging from complete and general prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests to the limitation of sales and supplies of conventional armaments, from banning the development of anti-satellite systems to limiting military activities in the Indian Ocean. It was the united States that refused to ratify the SALT II treaty designed to pave the way to further, ever more substantial cuts in strategic arms. It was the United States that in 1983 torpedoed the Soviet-United States talks on the limitation of nuclear arms in Europe by embarking on the deployment of its new nuclear missiles on the European continent.
And the new military programs which now cover not only the land, oceans and atmosphere of our planet but also outer space are United States programs too.
No particular perspicacity is needed to see clearly that precisely those States that are obstructing disarmament efforts are also set on fomenting local conflicts. They bear responsibility for the failure thus far to come to grips with problems common to all mankind.
All of this is being said not for the sake of polemics but in order that the United Nations may, on the basis of real facts and through concerted efforts, devise effective ways of radically improving international relations and strengthening universal security.
What are these ways as we see them?
It is said at times that all that is needed is that the two super-Powers should stop competing with each other for influence in the world. This proposition stems either from ignorance or from malicious intent. First, the Soviet Union has no intention of placing itself above other States and peoples, nor is it seeking opportunities to order them about or dictate its will to them. Secondly, the Soviet Union is not involved in any competition whatsoever, whether for markets, natural resources, control over sea or air routes, or the possession of outer space.
On the other hand, it is of course true that the Soviet Union is one of the world's two most powerful nations. But the whole point is what political aims are served by that Power. Those who invoke the concept of the "two super-Powers" would ' be well advised to ponder once in a while what would happen to their independence and what turn world developments would generally take if the USSR were weaker than it is and if the Soviet people were not investing so such of their effort, material resources and scientific endeavor in maintaining its economic and military potential at an adequate level.
In discussions about the ways of improving the situation frequent mention is also made of the need to restore, above all, confidence among States. This, it is said, would make it possible to resolve all major problems, including those of halting the arms race and settling regional conflicts. Indeed, confidence is an important factor in overcoming the current difficulties. We feel, however, that it is impossible to achieve a necessary and reliable degree of trust in relations among States unless the causes and the material roots of distrust are removed.
But work to restore confidence must be pursued, and that is what we are doing. In particular, at the Stockholm Conference of states participating in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, the soviet union is working for the adoption of a complex of large-scale, effective political, military and technical confidence-building measures. At Stockholm we are now prepared to proceed immediately, together with our negotiating partners, to the actual drafting of agreements to that effect. Our country attaches major importance to the pan-European process as a whole.
The Soviet Union is building and developing its relations with all States in strict compliance with the Final Act and on the basis of the 10 principles proclaimed therein. It attaches special importance to the factor of confidence in those relations, and it is pleased when it sees that this factor is present in its relations with various countries in Europe, America, Asia, Africa or Oceania.
In our relations with other States we have always given priority to the search for ways of easing international tension and averting the danger of war. Of great importance in this context is the forthcoming visit of Mikhail Gorbachev to France.
We also want to build normal, stable relations with the United States. We have never been the initiators of confrontation between the Soviet Union and the United States. We do not believe that the tensions today in Soviet-American relations result from an inevitable clash of national interests. We therefore believe that both sides have an interest in the successful outcome of the forthcoming meeting between the leaders of the Soviet Union and the United States. This is precisely how the Soviet Union approaches that meeting. It remains to be seen what will be the attitude of the other side in this matter.
We are convinced that the Soviet-American summit meeting should focus on the most important problem of the day, the problem upon whose solution truly depends on the possibility of decisively reducing the danger of war, restoring international trust and creating the conditions necessary for resolving many other pressing issues in relations among States. The problem I am referring to is that of preventing an arms race in cuter space and ending the arms race on earth, limiting and reducing nuclear arms and enhancing strategic stability. I will address this question in somewhat greater detail.
To begin with, it would appear indisputable that as long as States possess nuclear weapons the risk of the outbreak of nuclear war cannot be completely ruled out. It is equally true, however, that in conditions of strategic equilibrium, that risk is comparatively lower, for strategic equilibrium means essentially that each side, even if it became a victim of nuclear aggression committed by the other side, would retain sufficient strategic capacity to strike an equally devastating blow to the aggressor. Consequently, in conditions of strategic equilibrium there could be no winner in a nuclear war and starting one would be tantamount to committing suicide.
Yet the situation might change if one side should try to acquire such a nuclear potential as would encourage it to think that by a single strike it could deprive the other side of adequate retaliatory capacity against aggression, particularly if the potential aggressor should develop a space-based anti-missile shield and count on it to protect itself against a retaliatory strike. It is obvious that in such case the aggressor might be tempted to deliver or threaten to deliver a first "disarming" nuclear strike - as it is now known - counting on its immunity to retaliation. Hence the extreme danger inherent in any bid for military superiority in a nuclear age. Yet this is precisely the purpose of the new United States military programs, work on which has already begun or is about to begin.
It could be argued that this is a purely hypothetical danger since the Soviet Union has repeatedly stated that it would not allow the other side to achieve superiority and would take appropriate counter-measures to restore the balance.
But would that mean that the problem of the danger of nuclear war would simply disappear?
It is true that our country would not permit military superiority over it. The State and Party leadership of the Soviet Union has instructed me to reaffirm this once again in this United Nations forum. Those who may expect that the Soviet economy would not be able to stand up to the strain of the qualitatively new stage in the arms race which is currently being forced upon us are profoundly mistaken. Our country and the Soviet economy have had to withstand even greater pressures. Today, the economic might of the Soviet State and its scientific and technological potential are such as to leave no doubt whatever in anyone's mind concerning the ability and determination of our people to meet that new challenge.
However, it should not be forgotten that the higher the level of military confrontation in this nuclear and space age, the more shaky and the less secure, even if strategic equilibrium is maintained, become the foundations of world peace. Nuclear war in these conditions could result not only from a deliberate decision but also from attempts at blackmail or from miscalculation by one side as to the intentions or actions of the other. It could also break out as a consequence of someone's reckless behavior prompted by a sudden aggravation of the situation or because of malfunctions of computers, which are being increasingly relied upon in the operation of modern, sophisticated weapons systems.
Such is our understanding of the current strategic and political realities. It is based on grim facts that cannot be ignored.
It is precisely for this reason that the Soviet Union has been so persistent in seeking not merely the maintenance but a lowering of the existing level of strategic equilibrium and the early adoption of effective measures to stop and reverse the arms race. We know - and many other States now realize this too - that there is no more time to waste, for it may turn out to be too late.

We have gathered in New York in the final days of the first month of autumn. It is a time associated in many countries with the harvest, when farmers look to the coming winter with a feeling of work well done. This thought brings to mind another metaphor which, regrettably, has already taken root in the vocabulary of mankind - the metaphor of the "nuclear winter", we want the word "winter" in all the languages of the world to retain its one and only meaning, its original meaning and to be identified solely with the season of the year which is so beautiful and joyful.
In an attempt to establish a favorable climate for the resumption of the process of arms limitation and reduction, and, ultimately, the complete elimination of nuclear weapons everywhere, the Soviet Union has recently taken some substantial steps on a unilateral - I stress "unilateral" - basis. These steps include the decision not to place anti-satellite weapons in outer space so long as the United States does not do so. Unfortunately, however, the united States, disregarding the interests of political and military stability, recently tested an anti-satellite weapon against a target in space. Those steps also include the suspension of further implementation of our counter-measures in Europe consequent upon the deployment of united States medium-range nuclear systems on the territories of some Western European countries. Finally, there is our moratorium on nuclear explosions.
It is clear that by their very nature such unilateral steps could not be taken as measures of unlimited duration; but they could be of unlimited duration if the United States followed our good example. That would constitute significant progress towards a relaxation of military tension in the world. If, however, the United States fails to heed the voice of reason, no one will be able to blame us when the unilateral moratoriums we have declared come to an end as their terms expire. It is not for us but for the United States to make the choice.
Notwithstanding the importance of such steps as moratoriums designed to curb the arms race, the peoples of the world have every right to demand that radical measures be taken to reduce and eventually eliminate nuclear - and not only nuclear - weapons.
From the very beginning of the Geneva negotiations on nuclear and space weapons our country has been determined to achieve a radical solution to these interrelated problems and has taken a constructive position. The Soviet delegation had brought to the current round of negotiations substantial, large-scale and far-reaching proposals, we believe that agreement to ban space-strike weapons and to bring about truly radical reductions in nuclear arms would today have the most positive effect. Such an agreement could bring about a turn for the better in the entire course of world events, avert the threat of nuclear catastrophe and open up for the peoples of the world the prospect of a world free from fear for tomorrow. Mankind would be moving towards the new millennium which is already almost with us, confident that civilization would continue to advance.
The Soviet Union has put forward proposals on the whole range of issues relating to the cessation of the arms race. I am not going to mention each of those proposals for all of them will, in one way or another, become the subject of an exchange of views at the General Assembly. Let me just say that they cover the nuclear field, including the cessation of nuclear tests, as well as chemical weapons, conventional weapons and the numerical strength of armed forces. In some cases it is a question of a freeze; in others of a reduction. The Soviet Union continues resolutely continues to support proposals to establish nuclear-weapon-free zones, chemical-weapon-free zones and zones of peace in various parts of the world. It favors a limitation of naval activities and naval armaments and resolutely opposes the development of any new weapons of mass destruction.
In the context of the proposed arms limitation and reduction measures, the Soviet Union believes it necessary to provide for adequate measures of verification and control, in some cases national, and in others national combined with international, whenever there is an objective necessity for this. We have as great an interest as anyone in effective verification of compliance by all States with their obligations in connection with disarmament measures. We call upon the States represented in the united Nations General Assembly, both members of politico-military alliances and non-aligned and neutral countries, to support this approach, which we are convinced is constructive and at the same time realistic.
I would now like to offer some ideas as to what might be done to eliminate, through our collective efforts, local wars and conflicts, which result in untold suffering and innumerable casualties.
Viewed in a purely United Nations context, the solution to this problem may seem simple. All that is needed is to compel all States to comply fully and scrupulously in their actions with their commitments under the United Nations Charter and equally firmly to deny support to those who violate those commitments.
For instance, it is hard to imagine that any delegation would venture to assert here that the monstrous crimes of the Israeli aggressors on the ravaged soil of Lebanon and in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip are consistent with the principles of the United Nations Charter or that the financing, arming, training and infiltrating into Nicaragua of thousands upon thousands of
counter-revolutionaries - contras, as they are called - are consistent with those principles.
Only chauvinistic arrogance could lead anyone to deny the Palestinian people their right to independent statehood while recognizing that right for the people of Israel. All peoples and nations have equal rights.
Who is unaware of the brutal record of the South African apartheid regime, which is executing hundreds of the country's indigenous inhabitants and jailing thousands of others? Who is unaware of the acts of aggression it is constantly committing against Angola - as we see today - as well as against Mozambique, Botswana and Lesotho? It would indeed be blasphemous even to think that this inhuman regime acts in accordance with the provisions of the United Nations Charter. But it is a fact that the Pretoria racists receive support, and that this support comes from a major Power that 40 years ago was among the founding Members of the United Nations.
Of course, expressing indignation at the crimes of the racists and condemning the aggressor does not in itself mean that those crimes will be eliminated. The peaceful settlement of any given conflict with full and just regard for the legitimate interests of all sides requires a political basis for a settlement which would not be prejudicial to those interests, as well as a negotiating mechanism appropriate to each specific conflict situation.
Such political platforms for the just settlement of all or nearly all existing regional conflicts have already been or are being formulated. Suitable negotiating mechanisms either already exist or can be established.
Let us now turn to the situation in the Middle Bast. The main parameters for solving the Middle Bast problem in a manner that would take into account the legitimate interests of all parties have long ago been defined. They include the return to the Arab States of all their territories occupied by Israel since 1967, the exercise of the right of the Arab people of Palestine to establish an independent State of their own and ensuring the right of all States in the Middle East, including Israel, to live in peace and security. A negotiating mechanism for such a settlement has long ago been proposed as well, namely, an international conference on the Middle East under the auspices of the United Nations with the participation of all the parties concerned, including the Palestine Liberation Organization, and a number of other countries, including the Soviet Union and the United States.
There may, however, be some people who think that the Middle East knot can be untied by separate deals, but experience has already shown that such actions can only result in aggravating the conflict instead of settling it. We believe that this year the Genial Assembly will take an even firmer stand in favor of an early and just political settlement in the Middle East, and will demand that those who continue to resist such a settlement should stop their sabotage.
I should like to recall, in this connection, that Israel ewes its very existence to a decision of this organization, a decision which also called for the establishment in Palestine of an Arab State. It was a dual decision. The Soviet Union actively supported precisely that decision and, incidentally, it was among the first to recognize the State of Israel.
In principle, a negotiating mechanism also exists for settling the situation in Central America which was indeed conceived by the Latin American countries themselves. I am referring to the Contadora group^ with which several more South American States, recently expressed solidarity. There is also a draft act of peace in Central America drawn up by the Contadora members. It is widely supported by the States and peoples of the region, including the Government and the people of Nicaragua, the country which is the target of the spearhead of imperialist aggression. It is important for the United Nations to support the efforts of the Contadora group and contribute to overcoming the resistance of those who, instead of peace, seek to restore their domination in Central America.
It is also possible to break the deadlock in the Cyprus problem provided that an end is put to interference by imperialist forces and that the recognition of the independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Republic of Cyprus is laid down as a firm basis.
I should like to make some specific comments about Afghanistan. A political settlement of the situation that has arisen around that country is also possible. What is necessary for this is that everyone should recognize the right of the Afghan people to build their life as they wish and that armed and other forms of outside interference in the internal affairs of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan should be ended. When such interference is ended, and if there is a guarantee that it will not be resumed, it will then become possible to withdraw from Afghanistan, by agreement with the Afghan Government- the Soviet military contingent. The sooner a political settlement is achieved, the better it will be for everyone.
The proposals of Viet Nam, Laos and Kampuchea provide a good political framework for building good-neighborly relations between all the States of South-East Asia, particularly between the countries of the Association of South-East Asian Nations and the States of IndoChina. The basis for such relations is gradually taking shape and the countries concerned are perfectly capable of establishing a negotiating mechanism. What is important is that no one should stand in the way of their wish to read agreement with each other.
We support the efforts of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea designed to bring about the peaceful reunification of Korea and the demand for the withdrawal from South Korea of all foreign troops as well as the proposal to make the Korean peninsula a nuclear-free zone.
The question of the situation in southern Africa is an urgent one today. What needs to be done here is for the Security Council finally and fully to exercise its authority with regard to the racist South African regime, which, in violation of the United Nations decisions on the subject, refuses to transfer power to the Namibian people and poses a threat to the security of African States and global security.
A quarter of a century has gone by since the United Nations adopted, on the initiative of the Soviet Union, a decision which has contributed substantially to changing the face of the world today, namely, the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. The work that was started then has now been almost completed - almost, but not entirely. There should be no room on our planet for the remaining fragments and hotbeds of colonialism. In this matter, too, the United Nations should speak out unequivocally and definitively. It is important that the newly free countries and peoples should be given assistance in ensuring their genuine political and economic independence.
The United Nations quite rightly can and should raise its voice against the exploitation of developing countries by imperialist Monopolies, against the plundering of their natural resources and the strangling of their economies with the noose of indebtedness. Cuba and some other States Members of the United Nations have proposed ways of solving the problem of financial indebtedness.
We support the demands of the newly free States for the establishment of a new international economic order on a just and democratic basis in accordance with earlier decisions of the United Nations and we also support their apposition to what is known as cultural and information neo-colonialism and all other forms of neo-colonialism.
It is inadmissible that the States of Asia, Africa and Latin America should be regarded as a sphere of someone's "vital" interests, as an arena for confrontation with socialism. Those States are the influential Non-Aligned Movement and actively support disarmament, detente and the peaceful settlement of conflicts, which has mice again been convincingly demonstrated at the recent Conference of Foreign Ministers of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Luanda.
The rights and freedoms of the individual are inextricably linked with the rights of peoples. The unique experience of our country eloquently testifies to this. Socialism has not only ensured that each and every citizen enjoys equal rights to work, housing, rest and pensions, has not only made it possible to obtain all kinds of education and medical services free of charge, but has also provided comprehensive guarantees of those rights. The standards of social justice were established in close co-ordination with the realization of the principles of self-determination of all nations and nationalities, including the preservation of their identity and the development of such national phenomena as language, literacy, literature and the arts.
Thanks to the advantages of the socialist system, the peoples of the Soviet Onion, oppressed in the past, backward and divided, now stand together, united and therefore strong, and have over a historically short span of time reached the most advanced frontiers of economic development and created a flourishing spiritual culture and attained the heights of human civilization.
We believe that this is the path that not only leads to economic and spiritual prosperity but also contributes to the building of trust between peoples and, on this basis, to bringing them closer together and concerting their efforts in order to attain the goals common to all mankind. That is how we understand the essence of the question of the rights and freedoms of the individual and peoples.
The United Nations, by virtue of its Charter, must play an important role in encouraging and developing respect for human rights throughout the world. This provision, which laid the groundwork for international co-operation in the field of human rights, was included in the United Nations Charter on the initiative of the Soviet Union. Forty years have gone by since that time but, regrettably, to this very day flagrant, massive violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms are taking place. This is an inherent characteristic of a society where the power and wealth of a minority exist at the expense of the majority of the population. Such violations have become a norm of life in those States whose leaders are trying so hard to depict themselves as champions of human rights.
I should like once again to draw members' attention to a problem, the solution to which will largely shape the world of our children, grandchildren and great grandchildren. I am referring to the problem of the peaceful exploration of outer space.
Until only recently, space was the realm of science fiction, but it has now become a theater of man's practical activities. The peaceful exploration of space holds out for mankind truly limitless prospects of utilizing scientific and technological achievements to promote the economic and social progress of the peoples of the world and to solve the tremendous problems facing mankind on Earth.
However, these truly cosmic dimensions - and here I am not speaking figuratively but literally - also present new requirements to the inhabitants of the Earth and above all to the leaders of States.
There should be no repetition of the mistake made four decades ago when states and the peoples of the world were unable to prevent the great intellectual achievement of the mid-twentieth century - the release of the energy of the atomic nucleus - from becoming a means of mass annihilation of human beings. This is a folly which should not be allowed to recur at the end of this century when mankind, having filled the first pages of its space history, is facing a choice: space will either help to improve the living conditions on our planet or it will become the source of a new and deadly danger.
In wishing to contribute to man's progress towards new heights of civilization, our country has taken a new initiative by proposing the inclusion in the agenda of this session of the General Assembly of an item entitled "International co-operation in the peaceful exploration of outer space in conditions of its non-militarization".
At the same time, the Soviet Union has submitted to the General Assembly specific proposals regarding the main directions, areas and principles of broad international co-operation in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes. Outer space is indivisible and all States should be able to take part in its peaceful exploration.
This means that progress should be made by joint efforts in both basic and applied areas of space exploration, so that all peoples can benefit from space research. It is our view that such co-operation could best be carried out within the framework of a world space organization. And this could become a reality provided that all channels for the militarizing of the boundless regions of outer space are blocked off.
To counter the sinister plans of "star wars", the Soviet Union is placing before the international community the concept of "star peace".
The Soviet union hopes that its proposals will be carefully examined by the General Assembly.
The Soviet delegation has set forth the views and proposals of the Soviet Union which we have found it necessary and timely to submit for the consideration of the United Nations. It is our hope that they will be regarded with understanding by all States represented in this Hall and by all the peoples which make up a united mankind.
Much useful work for the benefit of peace and international co-operation has been done by the United Nations over the past 40 years. However, the united Nations has still a great deal more to do since it appears that we are now altering upon a most crucial period in the history of mankind, when it will have to take a decision on this question of paramount importances whether to live in peace or perish in nuclear war.
In this regard, I should like to quote the following policy statement by Mikhail S. Gorbachev:
"Our goal as we see it is to resolve together - for no one is able to do it alone - the major problems which are essentially common to us all: how to prevent war, how to end the arms race and embark on disarmament, how to settle existing conflicts and crises and prevent potential ones, how to create a world climate that would allow every country to focus attention and concentrate resources on finding solutions to its own problems - show me a country that has no problems - and how to join efforts in resolving global problems."
Let me start by joining the President of Brazil in conveying to the people and Government of Mexico our deep sympathy over the devastation wrought by earthquakes and our solidarity with them as they work to recover and rebuild. We admire the way the Government and people of Mexico are dealing with their problem. For our part, we a?.9 responding rapidly to Mexico's request for assistance with medicine, blankets and equipment to help in removing rubble, searching for survivors and fighting fires. But these are Mexico's short-term needs. The long-range impact and cost of the earthquakes are still being determined, but one thing is clear - they will be enormous. Here, too, the United States is prepared to respond to Mexico's plight.

As I look at the devastation - and, perhaps, as you do on your television screens and you see the pictures, you cannot help but be struck by the thought that Mexico City in some ways looks war-torn. Of course, an earthquake is not a man-made event. When the earth shook in Mexico there was nothing anyone could do about it. But our task here at the United Nations is to see to it that man does not cause the earth to shake. So let us devote ourselves to the cause of peace and freedom.
Three years ago, when I addressed this body for the first time, I stressed the need for realism. There is probably no other quality so appropriate and necessary for this Organization. But realism does not mean cynicism, or even pessimism. It means a clear-sighted appreciation of the opportunities we face, as well as of the obvious problems. It means remembering the many challenges that the world community has overcome, and drawing lessons from that. It means understanding that idealism and the yearning for human betterment are themselves part of reality, and thus have enormous practical significance.
The founding fathers of the United Nations are sometimes accused of naive Utopianism. Supposedly they ignored the realities of power politics in attempting to create a global system of collective security. I doubt it. The men and women who set up this Organization 40 years ago were among the great statesmen of the century. They drafted the Charter as a set of standards for international conduct - knowing full well that the world's nations probably would fall short of those standards, but knowing also that the setting of high goals is a necessary precondition to their pursuit and attainment.
The lofty goals of the Charter have a concrete, practical meaning today. They not only point the way to a better world? they reflect some of the most powerful currents at work in the contemporary world. The striving for justice, freedom, progress and peace is an ever-present and powerful reality that is today, more than ever, impressing itself on international politics.
Our political thinking must catch up to this reality. The policies of nations must adapt to this basic human striving. This Organization, too, must adapt to reality; it cannot afford to consume itself in political warfare and unrealistic posturing. There is work to be done. Let us do it.
The world community faces enormous challenges in three areas: in satisfying mankind's yearning for democracy, freedom and justice; in preserving and perfecting global peace and stability; and in spreading economic prosperity and progress.
First, the guest for democracy and freedom. Since the end of the Second World War, modern communication has opened the eyes of most of the world's peoples to the realization that they do not have to live their lives in poverty and despair; that, on the contrary, the blessings of prosperity and liberty known in the past only by a relative few can be theirs as well. The ideals for which the war was fought, and the spread of democracy and of prosperity in the industrialized world since, created an explosion of expectations.
The result has been in recent years a revolution of democratic aspirations sweeping the world. At the time of the San Francisco Conference in 1945, most of the nations represented in this hall today were not independent States but possessions - colonies of European empires. The vast number of languages, cultures and traditions that I can now see before me testify to the revolution in the world order. The old empires eventually had to accept the post-war reality of self-determination and national independence.
Much of the conflict in the world today stems from the refusal of some governments to accept the reality that the aspirations of people for democracy and freedom simply cannot be suppressed for ever by force.
 In South Africa, these aspirations on the part of the bLack majority have as never before, drawn global attention and support. Change is inevitable. The issue is not whether apartheid is to be dismantled, but how and when. And then, what replaces it: race war, bloodbath, and new forms of injustice? Or political accommodation and racial coexistence in a just society? The outcome depends on whether and how quickly the South African Government can accept the new reality, and on whether men and women of peace on both sides can seize the opportunity before it is too late.

This such is clear; there must be negotiation among South Africans of all races on constitutional reform. True peace will come only when the Government negotiates with, rather than locks up, representative black leaders. The violence will end only when 311 parties begin a mutual search for a just system of government.
One area where the future has brightened in the past five years as the aspirations of the people to democracy have been met in country after country is Latin America - as President Sarney just said so eloquently. In contrast to only 30 per cent in 1979, today more than 90 per cent of the people of Latin America live under Governments that are either democratic or clearly on the road to democracy.
In Central America, El Salvador, under the courageous leadership of President Duarte, has shown that democracy can take root and thrive even in the most difficult terrain. Its citizens have braved extremist violence to participate overwhelmingly in four free elections since 1982. Their President's current personal ordeal only serves to underscore the sacrifices thousands of Salvadorians continue to make as they fight to realize the ideals of the United Nations Charter. For this commitment they should be applauded by all Members. Ironically, El Salvador is today the only democracy subject to the scrutiny of a special rapporteur for human rights.
Among El Salvador's neighbors, Costa Rica has long been the region's beacon of representative government; Honduras is about to replace one freely-elected government with another; and Guatemala is about to join them as a democratic nation with the election of a president in November. These developments should enhance regional co-operation for economic development, which the United States supports through our Caribbean Basin initiative and President Reagan's initiative for peace, development and democracy.

But regional peace in Central America is threatened by the rulers of Nicaragua and their Soviet and Cuban allies. Behind a cloak of democratic rhetoric, the Nicaraguan communists have betrayed the 1979 revolution and embarked upon a course of tyranny at home and subversion against their neighbors. Brave Nicaraguans are fighting to restore the hope for freedom in their country and the other nations of the region are working together in collective self-defense against Nicaraguan aggression.
How can this crisis be resolved? The Central American nations, together with their nearest neighbors, the members of the Contadora Group, have subscribed to a document of 21 objectives. These include non-interference in the affairs of one's neighbors, serious dialog with domestic opposition groups, free elections and democracy in each country, the removal of foreign military personnel and a reduction of armaments. My Government supports a verifiable treaty based on full and simultaneous implementation of the 21 objectives. We welcome the resumption of talks next month in Panama and hope they lead to a final agreement. Contadora is the best forum for pursuing a settlement.
In El Salvador, President Duarte, true to his pledge to the Assembly last year, has pursued a dialog with the guerrilla opposition. Would that the rulers of Nicaragua would make,- and honor, a similar pledge to the Assembly this year. In San Jose on 1 March of this year the Nicaraguan democratic resistance called for internal dialog, moderated by the Roman Catholic Church, to end the killing.
The people of the region are waiting for a positive answer from the rulers of Nicaragua. Can it be that, never having been chosen by their people in a truly free election, they lack the confidence to face opponents they cannot silence or lock up, as they have so many others? The united Nicaraguan opposition deserves to participate in Nicaraguan political life and has an important role to play in the diplomatic process. Regional peace will not come without it.
The reality of democratic revolution is also demonstrated by the rise of national liberation movements against communist colonialism: in Afghanistan, Cambodia, Angola and other lands where, as in Nicaragua, people have organized in resistance to tyranny. Unlike the old European empires that came to accept the post-war reality of self-determination and national independence, the new colonialists are swimming against the tide of history. They are doomed to fail.
In Afghanistan the almost six-year-old Soviet invasion has inflicted untold suffering on a people whose will to resist and to free themselves from a pitiless tyranny cannot be broken. Hundreds of thousands of Afghans are dead or maimed, millions more make up the largest refugee population in the world and countless villages, schools and farms lie in ruins. Nowhere in the world has the carnage wrought by Soviet imperialism been greater than in Afghanistan and nowhere has the resistance been more determined and courageous.
The withdrawal of Soviet forces, as the General Assembly has noted on six occasions, would lead to solution of the Afghanistan problem. A solution must also encompass restoration of the country's independence and non-aligned status, self-determination for the Afghan people and the return in safety and honor of the more than 3 million refugees, unless and until the Soviet Union permits such a solution the national liberation struggle in Afghanistan will continue, the world-wide effort to provide succor to a beleaguered people will go forward and Soviet protestations of peace on this and other issues will not ring true. My Government, together with others concerned, stands ready to implement a just solution to this problem.
Cambodia, as we all know, stands as one of the worst examples in history of a totalitarian ideology carried to its bloodiest extreme. Today, courageous freedom fighters under the leadership of Prince Norodom Sihanouk and Son Sann struggle to reclaim their country. He continue to support the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) program for a peaceful solution; Vietnamese forces must withdraw completely, and Cambodia's independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity must be restored under a Government chosen in free elections.
In other countries where the apparatus of repression is well developed, countless thousands of men and women wage private struggles for freedom, armed only with their consciences and their courage. Some suffer for their political convictions, others for their religious beliefs: solidarity trade unionists in Poland; Jews, Baptists, Roman Catholics, Pentecostalists and others in the Soviet Union; Baha is in Iran. With all the men and arms at their disposal, what are these Governments afraid of?
These brave and often nameless prisoners of conscience struggle to achieve for men and women in every corner of the world the promises of this Organization. He are with them, and we call on all States as Members of this body to honor their solemn commitments. As Thomas Jefferson once said,
"The opinions of men and women are not the rightful object of any Government, anywhere."
The quest for peace continue on many fronts. And for all the obstacles confronting it, there are examples of success - such as the treaty on Antarctica, which recently marked a quarter century of effective international co-operation. We can learn from problems overcome as we tackle the formidable problems ahead.
In the Middle Bast, 10 or 15 years ago, peace between Israel and any Arab State seemed a remote, if not impossible, dream. Finally, after untold suffering and four wars, a courageous leader, Anwar El-Sadat, abandoned the old ways of thinking and took the step no other Arab leader had been willing or prepared even to contemplate: he recognized that the State of Israel was here to stay and, with Prime Minister Begin, vowed there would be no more wars. Peace and normal relations were established, and the Sinai was returned.
The past year has seen major efforts toward new negotiations between Israel and its Arab neighbors. The United States is committed and engaged in support of those efforts, in accordance with President Reagan's initiative of three years ago. Yet the lesson of the past is clear: progress can be achieved only through direct negotiations, based on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). There is no other way, and evasion of this reality only prolongs suffering and heightens dangers. Nothing positive will ever be achieved by chasing illusions of so-called armed struggle; but much can be accomplished by parties who are committed to peace and engaged in serious dialog. The moment is at hand - this year - to make major progress and to begin direct negotiations.
To the east, we have the continuing failure of reason to prevail and end the devastating war between Iran and Iraq. Prolonged by Iran's refusal to come to terms with its inability to achieve victory, this war has now entered its fifth year, with no end in sight. We again call on both parties to negotiate an end to the fighting.

On the Korean peninsula we see the first tentative steps being taken to get away from the mode of thinking that has characterized the pa at years. A decade ago, there seemed little hope for a significant reduction of tension. Yet last year both Koreas began a multifaceted, direct dialog, which the United States supports as the key to a solution. While the animosities of a lifetime are not resolved quickly, a start has been made. We also believe that membership in the United Nations for both the Republic of Korea and North Korea, in accordance with the principle of universality, would help reduce tensions.
Perhaps the most dramatic problem that requires new ways of thinking is international State-sponsored terrorism. Terrorism is every bit as much a form of war against a nation's interests and values as a full-scale armed attack. And it is a weapon wielded particularly against innocent civilians, against free nations, against democracy, against moderation and against peaceful solutions. It is an affront to everything the United Nations stands for.
Progress has been made against the terrorist threat through co-operation in the United Nations system. Many nations subscribe to The Hague, Tokyo and Montreal Conventions to make air travel safer and to suppress hijacking and sabotage. Progress has also been made in providing protection for diplomats, and some nations have agreed on how to handle hostage situations. Just this month, participants at the Seventh United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, held at Milan, adopted a strong, broad-ranging resolution urging all States to adhere to these agreements and to strengthen international actions against terrorism.
Much more remains to be done. The United States and other nations, for example, are working with the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) to improve standards of security. Over this past year, so far 90 potential terrorist actions against United States facilities or citizens have been deterred or prevented. But the fight has only begun, and it cannot be won by one Government alone. The civilized world must put the terrorists and their supporters on notice: we will defend ourselves in any and every way we can.
The reality of the nuclear age has spelled the United States and the Soviet Union to engage in a dialog, of varying intensity, for the past 40 years. This dialog has been an unprecedented attempt by two rivals to manage their competition and avert war. We know that we share a responsibility for maintaining peace, not just for our peoples, but for all the earth's peoples.
Despite all the difficulties, let us remember what has been accomplished. After the two most destructive wars in history, the super-Powers, joined with others, have averted world war for four decades. We have had some success in limiting nuclear testing. Working together with other nations since the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in 1968, we have succeeded in restricting the proliferation of nuclear weapons. Twenty years ago it was conventional wisdom that there would be 15 to 25 nuclear-weapon States by today; yet the number of States acknowledged to possess nuclear weapons has held at five for the past 20 years. The United States remains committed to all the goals of the Treaty, whose Third Review Conference just concluded successfully in Geneva. And the United States and the Soviet Union have taken practical steps to avoid conflict. Our navies have long agreed to work together to prevent incidents at sea. And we have set up and improved the "hot line" for crisis communications.
In the nuclear and space arms talks in Geneva, the United States has advanced far-reaching proposals: a reduction by almost one-half in the most destabilizing weapons, strategic ballistic missile warheads, and the elimination of the whole class of the United States and Soviet longer-range intermediate-range nuclear forces missiles worldwide, all leading ultimately to the complete elimination of nuclear arms. We repeatedly have stressed our readiness for give and take and to
 consider alternative proposals. Each of our proposals has been followed up by further attempts to find common ground with the Soviet Union. He have offered trade-offs and have made clear our readiness to take account of legitimate Soviet concerns to obtain an agreement that would enhance strategic stability and strengthen deterrence..
Progress at Geneva has been slow. Thus far the Soviet Union has not negotiated with the responsiveness that the talks require. None the less, our determination to reach an equitable agreement has not wavered.
In this spirit, President Reagan last June decided to continue our policy of taking no action that would undercut the limits of previous agreements, to the extent the Soviet Union shows comparable restraint. Despite serious reservations about those agreements, and serious concerns about the Soviet record of non-compliance.', the President made this decision to foster a climate of truly mutual restraint to facilitate progress in arms control.
While the most direct path to a safer world is through equitable, verifiable reductions, we also see value in verifiable limitations on nuclear testing. For that reason, President Reagan, in his speech to this body last year, proposed that the United States and the Soviet Union exchange visits of experts at test sites to measure directly the yields of nuclear-weapon test. This would significantly improve confidence in the verifiability of proposed treaty limits on underground testing. The Soviet Union rejected this offer. Nevertheless, last July, the President issued an unconditional invitation for a Soviet team to observe and measure a nuclear test at the Nevada Test Site. We again call on the Soviet Union to take up this offer, which is a concrete, positive step toward verifiable restrictions on nuclear testing.
 When the Anti-Ballistic-Missile Treaty was signed in 1972 it was assumed that tight limits on defensive systems would make possible real reductions in strategic offensive arms. But the Soviet Union has never agreed to any meaningful reductions in offensive nuclear arms. Instead, it has continued an unprecedented military build-up - particularly in heavy intercontinental ballistic missiles with a first-strike capability - which is eroding the basis on which deterrence has rested for decades. The strategy of reliance on offensive retaliation to preserve deterrence and prevent war thus is being called into question by Soviet actions.
The answer is, first, for us both to agree that strategically significant, verifiable reductions in the numbers and destructive potential of offensive weapons. But there are additional ways to redress the problem. President Reagan has directed our scientists and engineers to examine, in the light of new technologies and fully in accord with the Anti-Ballistic-Missile Treaty - the feasibility of defense against ballistic-missile attack. Strategic defense could give our children and grandchildren a safer world. We would continue to rely on deterrence to prevent war, but deterrence would be based more on denying success to a potential attacker and less on threatening massive mutual destruction. Such a means of deterrence should be safer and more stable. Our goal is not to achieve superiority but to add to the security of both sides. As former Soviet Premier Kosygin said, an anti-missile system "is intended not for killing people but for saving human lives". The Soviet Premier was right.
We want to co-operate with the Soviet union in making progress on these most important of all issues. Progress requires - it demands - good will, realism and honesty. Behind the curtain that encloses Soviet society, free from the open debate we see in the West, a major strategic defense program has proceeded for decades. The current Soviet leaders know that. In the past 20 years the
 Soviet Union has spent about as much on strategic defense as on its offensive nuclear forces. The Soviets know that. The Soviets have the world's most active military space program, last year conducting about 100 space launches, some 80 per cent of which were purely military in nature, compared to a total of about 20 United States space launches. The Soviets know that, too. They deploy the world's only anti-ballistic-missile system, whose nuclear-armed interceptors and other components are undergoing extensive modernization. They are researching many of the same new technologies as we, and are ahead in some. And the Soviet Union has the world's only extensively tested and fully operational anti-satellite system. The Soviet leaders know full well their own efforts in these fields. Their propaganda about American programs is blatantly one-sided and not to be taken seriously.
So let us get down to real business, with the seriousness the subject deserves, and let us do so in the quiet of the negotiating room, where we can really make progress cm narrowing our differences.
Progress needs to be made in other arms-control areas as well. Restraints on chemical and biological weapons have eroded in recent years as international agreements have been violated by the Soviet Union and others. In April 1984 the United States proposed a comprehensive treaty for a global ban on chemical weapons. We will again introduce a draft resolution on chemical weapons in the First Committee. We must have talks on serious, verifiable proposals.
To reduce the risk of conflict through miscalculation we and our Atlantic allies have proposed significant confidence- and security-building measures at the Conference on Disarmament in Europe. To enhance security in Central Europe we have repeatedly sought ways to move the mutual and balanced force reduction talks in Vienna forward.
In sum, the United States and the Soviet Union now have a historic opportunity to reduce the risk of war. President Reagan looks forward to his meeting with General Secretary Gorbachev in November. We have a long agenda. The United States is working hard to make it a productive meeting and we want the meeting itself to give a further impetus to the wide-ranging dialog on which we are already embarked. Soviet acts of good faith and willingness to reach fair agreements will be more than matched on the American side.
Just as there is a democratic revolution in the world today, so there is also a revolution in economic thinking. Mankind is moving towards an ever greater recognition of the inescapable tie between freedom and economic progress. Command economies, in spite of all their pretensions, have not done very well in liberating people from poverty. In reality, they have served as instruments of power for the few rather than of hope for the many. Expectations of material progress and prosperity have been fulfilled in countries whose Governments have applied reason and fresh thinking to their problems, learning from experience rather than slavishly Allowing outworn dogma. The new way of thinking - economic freedom -actually is a return to old truths that many had forgotten or never understood.
Those developing countries in Asia relying on free market policies, for example, have enjoyed one of the most remarkable economic booms in history despite a relative lack of natural resources. The ASEAN nations and the Republic of Korea have grown at a 7 per cent a year rate over the past decade, the fastest rate in the world, and ASEAN has become a model of regional development and political co-operation. In recognition of the success of economic freedom the island nations of the South Pacific have continued to encourage the private sector as well. We are joining with them in a dedicated effort to negotiate quickly a regional fisheries agreement that will benefit all.

The success of these and other countries demonstrates that the laws of economics do not discriminate between developed and developing. For all nations equally the true source of wealth is the energy and creativity of the individual, not the State. After decades of fashionable socialist doctrine we see today on every continent efforts to decentralize, deregulate, denationalize and enlarge the scope for producers and consumers to interact in the free market. In India, China and elsewhere new policies are being adopted to unleash the creative abilities of talented peoples. At the Bonn economic summit last May the leaders of the largest industrial democracies acknowledged the same truth. The road to prosperity begins at the same starting point for all nations: freedom and incentives for the individual.
This truth should be our guide as we address today's economic challenges,.
In sub-Saharan Africa drought has placed perhaps 30 million men, women and children at risk. We do not know how many have already died. Along with other Western countries, the United States has undertaken one of the largest disaster relief programs in history. This year alone the United States has provided $1.2 billion for drought and famine relief and $800 million in other economic assistance. The nations that have been helping should continue to do so; those that have not borne their share should start to do so.
But we owe it to the suffering to ask this question: Why is food so scarce? Drought, without question, is part of the reason, but in some countries there are other, more important reasons. One is Government policies that have severely harmed agricultural productivity. These policies must be reversed. Those countries that have undertaken liberalizing reforms are reaping the benefits and can show the way for others. Another problem is lack of appropriate technologies. The United States is carrying out a long-term program to strengthen African agricultural research, which we hope will help to produce a green revolution on the continent.
 Elsewhere in the developing world, as in Africa, countries face the continuing problem of debt. Many have undertaken necessary, though painful, adjustment, taking courageous steps to cut Government spending, eliminate subsidies and price controls, permit currencies to adjust to the market, free interest rates to encourage saving and discourage capital flight and create conditions to attract new capital. Austerity, however, is certainly not an end in itself. The purpose of short-term adjustment is to get back on the track of long-term growth.
In all these efforts we must be careful that the heavy burden of servicing the historic debt levels of the developing nations of Latin America and Africa does not inhibit their future growth. Creative co-operation between borrowers and lenders, with continued constructive assistance from the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF), will be essential in achieving that goal.
Other nations too have a major part to play in helping these countries overcome their debt problem and resume sustainable growth. External financing to support effective adjustment has been and will continue to be important. Access to export markets is also necessary. Indeed, an open trading system is crucial to the hopes of all of us. Trade expansion has been an engine of post-war prosperity. It would therefore be suicidal to return to the protectionism of the 1920s and 1930s which helped bring on the great depression. Protectionism is not a cure; it is a disease, a disease that could cripple all of us. Trade must be free, open and fair. The United States will work to see that it is. But there must be a level playing field. We want open trading, but that means mutuality. Barriers erected against American products are just not acceptable to us.
As President Reagan is saying today in a major speech,
"The freer the flow of world trade, the stronger the tides for human progress and peace among nations."
 To preserve and strengthen the trading system may well be the central economic issue facing the world community today. For that reason it is essential that all nations join now in preparations for a new General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. (GATT) round next year; no nation, even one as large and as powerful as the United States, can by itself ensure a free trading system. All that we and others have done to provide for the free flow of goods and services and capital is based on co-operation* Indeed, it was that very spirit of co-operation that prompted the United States and four of the leading industrial nations yesterday to pledge firm resolve to work together in addressing the pressing economic issues of this decade.
Sound economic policies in every country are the key to strengthening the world economy. In the United States policies that have unleashed individual talent, reduced Government's role and stabilized prices have helped to produce more than 8 million new jobs since 1982 and lead the world out of recession. But many imbalances in the world economy remain, notably in trade accounts, exchange rates and capital flows. These must be corrected by the world community acting in concert if recent economic gains are to be preserved and hopes for progress sustained. For its part, the United States must restrain public spending, reduce its budget deficit and encourage saving. Others must do more to reduce rigidities and promote the private investment needed to facilitate adjustment and spur expansion.
I believe we can surmount our problems just as we succeeded in solving the energy crisis and bringing inflation under control. There was a time when those problems too seemed insurmountable. We can succeed again today if we have the honesty and courage to face our problems squarely and if our ways of thinking conform to reality.
Forty years ago the founders of the United Nations recognized that new ways had to be found to regulate conduct between nations. That remains true today. The
 Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights speak to us, not as different races, creeds and nationalities, but as human beings, men and women. Our task as we look at the next century is to learn that the things which unite us - the desire for peace, human rights and material well-being - as set down in those documents are far more important than the things which divide us.
The main obstacle to greater realization of the goals of the Charter is the lust of the few for power over the many, just as it has been the obstacle to human happiness since the dawn of history. But change is inevitable. And today change, technological change, holds out hope perhaps as never before. The revolution in communications and information may be the most far-reaching development of our time. Those political systems that try to stand in the way of the free flow of knowledge and information will relegate their citizens to second-class status in the next century. The future belongs to societies that can spread knowledge, adapt, innovate, tap the unfettered talents of well-informed citizens and thus fully exploit the new technologies; free societies clearly are best equipped for this challenge. The communications revolution will be a truly liberating revolution, for it threatens the monopoly of information and thought upon which tyrants rely for absolute control.
On every continent - from Nicaragua to Poland, from South Africa to Afghanistan and Cambodia - we see that the yearning for freedom is the most powerful political force all across the planet. The noble ideals of democracy and freedom are in the ascendant. Today, we can look with renewed hope to the day when the goals of the united Nations truly will be met.










