 May I begin. Sir, by warmly congratulating you on your election to the presidency of the forty-first session of the united Nations General Assembly. I am sure that with your ability and experience you will make outstanding contributions to the work of the current session. At the same time, I should like to extend my high respects to Mr. Jaime de PiniSs for his fruitful work as the President of the fortieth session.
A year ago we were meeting here to commemorate the grand occasion of the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations. We expressed our ardent desire for the maintenance of world peace and promotion of international co-operation, put forward quite a few proposals and voiced concerns and anxieties over the turbulent international situation. The year 1986 is the International Year of Peace. The people of the world have made various efforts for peace and the forces against war and for peace have grown further. In November last year the United States and the Soviet Union held a summit meeting, indicating in their joint statement that "nuclear war cannot be won and must never be fought"  and acknowledging that the two countries bear special responsibilities for halting the arms race and carrying out nuclear disarmament. During their talks and dialogs on the question of arms control and disarmament, each side indicated that it would reduce its strategic nuclear weapons by 50 per cent. Since then there has been a certain degree of relaxation of international tension. We welcome this development.
Nevertheless, people cannot fail to see that the United States and the Soviet Union are still far apart in their views and positions on the question of disarmament. At present the arms race is still going on, and various proposals and ideas for disarmament remain only on paper. No substantive progress has been achieved on disarmament and no solutions have been found to regional conflicts. The root cause of international tension still exists. Therefore, people have no reason to feel relieved about the present world situation. The creation of tension and confrontation goes against the wishes of the people of all countries, including the United States and the Soviet Union. The popular will for peace is an irresistible trend in the world today. The people of all countries must persist in their arduous efforts towards relaxation of international tension and the maintenance of world peace.
We hold that the key to disarmament lies in true sincerity in favor of disarmament, and the greatest test of the sincerity of the two major nuclear Powers is whether or not they will take practical steps to be the first drastically to reduce their armaments. We hope that they will reach an effective agreement through serious negotiations, take real actions for disarmament and not indulge in rhetoric, still less use disarmament talks as a cover for the arms race. Xn the present circumstances, it is necessary for them to be the first jointly to undertake not to launch a nuclear war or resort to the use or threat of force against other countries, so that favorable conditions may be created for disarmament and the relaxation of international tension.
China has all along opposed the arms race and its extension to outer space. We stand for the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and for the substantial reduction of conventional weapons. We are in favor of the peaceful use of outer space. Zn his statement on 21 March 1986, Chinese Premier Zhao Ziyang gave a comprehensive and systematic elaboration of the Chinese Government's position of principle on the question of disarmament, including such issues as nuclear disarmament, conventional disarmament, intermediate missiles, space weapons, chemical weapons and the relationship between disarmament and security. At the same time, China has taken actual steps towards disarmament in many areas. By the end of this year, it will
complete the seduction of the number of its troops by 1 million. China has been cutting its military expenditures year by year and a considerable portion of its military industry has been shifted to civilian production. Some military airports and naval ports have been turned to civilian purposes. The Chinese Government has officially declared that it will no longer conduct atmospheric nuclear tests.
The basic views of the Chinese Government on disarmament are as follows.
The two super-Powers, the United States and the Soviet Union, which possess by far the largest nuclear and conventional arsenals in the world, bear special and unshakable responsibility for disarmament and should take the lead in drastic arms reduction. Nuclear disarmament should be carried out simultaneously with conventional arms reduction, and the two should promote each other.
As the question of disarmament affects the security interests of all countries in the world, every country should have a say in this question. The United Nations should play a greater role in disarmament. The two major nuclear Powers should heed, respect and accept the reasonable demands and propositions of various countries, especially the small and medium-sized countries. No disarmament negotiations or agreements between the major nuclear Powers should jeopardize the interests of other countries.
Disarmament and international security are closely related. Efforts to achieve disarmament should be combined with those for the maintenance of world peace and security. In order to ease international tension and maintain world peace, it is necessary not only to achieve effective arms reduction but also to oppose hegemonism and power politics, check aggression and expansion and resolve regional conflicts.
In keeping with the consistent stand of our Government on disarmament, the Chinese delegation will submit to the current session of the General Assembly
The war of Vietnamese aggression against Kampuchea has been going on for eight years. Although Viet Nam has dispatched large numbers of troops and employed every means available, it has never succeeded in subduing Kampuchea. The so-called irreversible situation in Kampuchea as claimed by Viet Nam is nothing but a myth. Facts have demonstrated that Viet Nam cannot possibly succeed in its attempt to annex Kampuchea by force of arms. The only way to a settlement of the Kampuchean question is the withdrawal of Vietnamese troops from Kampuchea. The earlier Viet Nam extricates itself from the quagmire of the war in Kampuchea, the better it will serve the Vietnamese people and their national interests. The traditional friendship between China and Viet Nam will be restored provided Viet Nam effects a genuine withdrawal of troops from Kampuchea and gives up its anti-China policy.
Last March the Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea headed by President Saradech Norodom Sihanouk put forward an eight-point proposal for a political settlement of the Kampuchean question. This proposal is fair and reasonable and conforms with the principles in the relevant resolutions adopted at successive sessions of the United Nations General Assembly. It has offered a reasonable basis for a political settlement of the Kampuchean question and thus won support from many countries. It is the consistent position of the Chinese Government that the Kampuchean question should be settled on the basis of the relevant United Nations General Assembly resolutions and the Declaration of the International Conference on Kampuchea. China firmly supports the eight-point proposal of the Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea and all the proposals and suggestions conducive to a just and reasonable settlement of the Kampuchean question put forward by the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and other countries.
We stand for a political settlement of the Kampuchean question. After the withdrawal of the Vietnamese troops, just and reasonable solutions to Kampuchea's internal problems should be worked out by the Kampuchean people and by the various political forces in Kampuchea through consultations on an equal footing, free from external interference. China hopes that Kampuchea will be a peaceful, independent, neutral and non-aligned country and would not like to see any single group monopolize power. China seeks no selfish interests in Kampuchea. We are ready to join other countries concerned in an international guarantee that Kampuchea will enjoy the status of a peaceful, independent, neutral and non-aligned country. This is China's basic position on the question of Kampuchea.
The occupation of Afghanistan by foreign troops is an encroachment upon its independence and sovereignty and poses a grave threat to the security of the adjacent countries and peace in Asia. The international community has all along strongly demanded a just and reasonable settlement of the Afghan question at an early date in line with the relevant United Nations resolutions. The eight rounds of indirect talks in Geneva held under the auspices of the United Nations have failed to achieve substantive progress on the crucial question of the withdrawal of foreign troops. If the Soviet Union sincerely desires a political settlement of the Afghan question, it should implement the relevant United Nations resolutions and present a time-table acceptable to the international community for an early withdrawal of all its troops from Afghanistan.
It is the desire of the people to see relaxation of tension on the Korean Peninsula. We support the positive efforts made by the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea for the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea and its reasonable proposals and demands for dialog between the North and the South, tripartite talks and the withdrawal of United States troops from South Korea. We hope that the parties concerned will work together to ease the tension on the Korean Peninsula so as to promote the peaceful reunification of Korea.
It is disturbing that the situation in the Middle East remains tense and turbulent. We have consistently supported the just struggle of the Arab countries and the Palestinian people. For them to sink their differences, strengthen unity and act in concert is a basic guarantee for victory in the Arab and Palestinian national causes. We hope that the parties concerned in the Middle East will seek a just and comprehensive settlement of the Middle East question through political negotiations so as to bring peace to the region. To this end, the national rights of the Palestinian people must be restored, and Israel must abandon its policy of aggression and expansion and withdraw from all the Arab territories it has occupied since 1967. At the same time, the right to existence of all countries in the Middle East should be recognized and they should live in friendship on the basis of the principles of peaceful coexistence.
The widening and escalation of the Iran-Iraq war has posed a grave threat to peace and stability in the Gulf region and brought enormous suffering to the people of the two countries. Both Iran and Iraq are China's friends. We hope that the two neighboring countries will exercise restraint and refrain from intensifying the war so as to create an atmosphere necessary for conducting peace talks and bringing about a cease-fire. We sincerely hope that in accordance with the norms of international law, they will settle their disputes on mutually acceptable terms through peaceful negotiations and bring an early end to the war.
Owing to external intervention, the situation in Central America is becoming more complicated. In order to put an end to the prolonged turmoil and bring about a just peace in Central America, it is imperative to respect the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of all countries in the region and do away with all external interference and power politics so that the people of these countries will be able to solve their own problems. Foreign military threat against, and intervention in, Nicaragua in violation of the norms governing
international relations have aggravated the situation in this region and naturally met with the opposition of the international community. We support the just and reasonable principles put forward by the Contadora Group for solving the problems in Central America and hope that the Group will succeed in its efforts,
The situation in southern Africa is deteriorating and becoming even more volatile, as the South African authorities perpetrate racist atrocities, cling to their illegal occupation of Namibia and engage in grave provocations against the neighboring countries. The Pretoria regime's sanguinary suppression of the black people in South Africa is a challenge to human dignity and international justice, which has aroused the great indignation and strong protest of the international community. The World Conference on Sanctions against Racist South Africa held by the United Nations and the special session of the General Assembly on Namibia have played an important role in mobilizing the international community for intensified struggle against South African racism. We firmly endorse effective sanctions against the South African authorities and support the South African people in their heroic struggle against racism and for racial equality. We support the just struggle of the Namibian people for national independence and the efforts of the independent States in southern Africa to safeguard national security and bring peace and stability to the region.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the adoption by the United Nations of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. These two instruments are of positive significance to the realization of the purpose and principle of the United Nations Charter concerning respect for human rights. The Chinese Government has consistently supported this principle of the Charter. Just as in all other countries which were victims of imperialist and colonialist oppression, there were no human rights to speak of in the semi-colonial, semi-feudal old China. It is only following the founding of the People's Republic of China that Chinese citizens are able to enjoy extensive democratic rights. In accordance with the provisions of the Constitution of China, the Chinese Government has adopted various measures to ensure the enjoyment by its citizens of all kinds of fundamental rights. With the progress made in economic development and structural reform in the past few years, there has been a steady improvement in socialist democracy and the legal system in China. Never before have the Chinese people enjoyed such a high degree of democracy and freedom as they do now.
We have noted with concern that, although the United Nations has formulated and adopted a number of international instruments on human rights, gross and massive violations of human rights continue to occur in many parts of the world as a result of colonialism, racism, foreign aggression and occupation. Moreover, interference in other countries' internal affairs in the name of protecting human rights is also a common occurrence. We call on the international community to make joint efforts to check these violations of the principles of the Charter.
In discussing the current international situation we must pay close attention to the question of development in the world. Over the past year the developed countries have maintained a low economic growth rate and many developing countries are still in grave economic difficulties. International economic relations are becoming increasingly imbalanced and irrational. The prices of most raw materials and primary products for export by the developing countries have kept falling and the export of their manufactured products has run into numerous obstacles owing to trade protectionism in the developed countries. External debts are weighing more and more heavily on the debtor countries. The developing countries are in desperate need of development funds, but,, while capital inflow keeps dwindling, an abnormal phenomenon of reverse flow of funds has occurred.
Such developments serve to widen the gap between the developed and the developing countries, which will not only do great harm to the developing countries but also have grave consequences for the developed countries in the long run. The developed countries account for only one quarter of the world population of nearly 5 billion while the remaining three quarters are in the developing countries. The world economy cannot grow steadily without the economic growth of the developed countries, but at the same time its steady growth also depends to a great extent on whether the developing countries can overcome their difficulties and revitalize their economies. Therefore, helping to boost the economic growth of the developing countries will contribute both to the common prosperity of the world economy and to world peace and stability.
Following political independence, the developing countries are all committed to their domestic economic development. In the process they have made headway in a search for development strategies, economic structures and economic policies suited to their respective national conditions. Many of them have made readjustments and introduced reforms in their economies, with gratifying results. In addition to their own efforts and promotion of South-South co-operation, it is of great importance to the economic growth of the developing countries to improve North-South relations. As the developing countries are still fettered and harmed
by the inequitable international economic relations, it would be difficult for them to attain the goal of economic development smoothly by merely relying on their own efforts. He hope that the developed countries will, in the overall interest of the world economy, help create an international environment favorable to the developing countries. The international community should take practical measures in trade, finance, development and other international economic fields to facilitate the flow of capital and transfer of technology to the developing countries, further increase their access to markets and reduce their debt burden, thus contributing to the overall growth of the world economy.
The special session of the United Nations General Assembly on the critical economic situation in Africa, held last May, gave expression to the concern of the international community for Africa's economic recovery and development. We hope that the parties concerned, particularly the developed countries, will fully honor their commitments so as to ensure the full implementation of the United Nations Program of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 198C—1990, which was approved unanimously by the session.
International relations are now undergoing a great change. The newly independent countries which emerged in the post-war period, the numerous non-aligned and other small and medium-sized countries, regardless of their different situations, all treasure independence and oppose power politics. They desire peace and stability and oppose war and tension, and they all want to get actively involved in international affairs and play their part in maintaining peace and promoting international co-operation. It is no longer realistic simply to take ideology and social system as a criterion for differentiating countries and international political groupings. The time is gone for ever when a big Power or power center could manipulate international relations according to its wishes. The
recently concluded Eighth Conference of Beads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries proved once again that the Non-Aligned Movement is playing an important role in the international affairs of the day. The trend towards multipolarity in international relations and the growing aspiration of the peoples to take their destiny into their own hands are an inevitable historical development and constitute a positive factor making for peace.
We are of the view that all countries, regardless of their ideologies and social systems, should establish and develop relations on the basis of the five principles of mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence.
We are in favor of dialog, which is the correct way for the peaceful settlement of international disputes. Facts show that only through peaceful negotiations and consultations on an equal footing is it possible to remove contradictions and differences between States, forestall international conflicts and ensure international security.
Obviously, in order that dialog can be conducted and yield positive results, the use or threat of force must be abandoned, the sovereignty and security of all States respected and all acts of aggression and expansion stopped. In no circumstances should a country be allowed to impose its will on others.
The Chinese people are now going all out in the drive for China's material, cultural and ethical advancement, determined to turn China into a modernized socialist country with Chinese characteristics through the efforts of several generations. China firmly pursues an independent foreign policy of peace, whose fundamental aim is to preserve world peace and secure an enduring peaceful international environment for its socialist modernization. Peace and development are inseparable. To have peace and development, we need friendship, co-operation and strengthened relations with other countries on the basis of the five principles of peaceful coexistence.
This year we in China have started to implement the Seventh Five-Year Plan for National Economic and Social Development. In the coming five years we shall basically complete the overall restructuring of our economy. Meanwhile, we shall adhere to the policy of opening up to the outside world, improve the environment for investment and expand our external economic relations. We are promoting the sustained and steady growth of China's economy by carrying out reform and the policy of opening up to the outside world, and we want to ensure successful and uninterrupted economic development by pursuing an independent foreign policy of peace. China's current domestic and foreign policies have proved to be sound and effective and in the interests of the people. We shall adhere to these policies with unshakable determination.,
The United Nations has entered upon its fifth decade since its founding. It has tremendous successes to its credit, but it also faces problems and difficulties. Since the restoration of its rightful seat in the United Nations China has always abide by the purposes and principles of the Charter, actively participated in the work of the Organization and endeavored to perform its duty as one of the permanent members of the Security Council.
The financial crisis confronting the United Nations at the present time has caused widespread concern. We are of the view that the United Nations should undergo rational structural reforms, but such reforms must be aimed at strengthening, not weakening, the role of the Organization and must observe, not violate, the principle of the sovereign equality of all Member states, as provided for in the Charter. It is our sincere hope that the United Nations will, with the joint support of all Member States and through consultation^ on an equal footing, take the necessary measures to overcome the difficulties it faces and improve its efficiency, so as to achieve even greater success in its endeavor to safeguard world peace and promote international co-operation.
In this autumn of 1986, the community of nations is again facing serious problem* and momentous decisions that affect the destiny of our peoples.
We are threatened by embroilment in hostilities as well as by famine and misery. Dangers threaten international economic and financial co-operation. The dignity of man is being violated in a thousand ways. Wars are taking place in many parts of the world. In the Republic of South Africa there is a threat of civil war. Natural disasters are compounded by man-made disasters with far-reaching
effects that transcend national boundaries.
But we see hopeful signs also. In Europe co-operation across the ideological boundaries is developing into a strong force for the preservation of peace. Negotiations between West and East on confidence-building and disarmament are being conducted in unprecedented depth. Encouraging progress has been registered. New negotiations are being prepared. Throughout the world the hand of those who seek co-operation instead of confrontation is becoming stronger. More and more people realize that we have become a community in pursuit of survival. There is a prevailing awareness that the survival of mankind requires co-operative solutions -for the prevention of war, for the protection of our ecological basis, for the new technological developments, for the peaceful use of the sea-bed and the peaceful use of outer space, for the fight against famine and disease, for solutions to international economic problems, including that of indebtedness. The peoples of the world want their Governments to recognize these signs.
The quest for superiority and hegemony, the quest for unilateral advantages,
the exploitation of political, military and economic power, the attempt to bring
others to their knees, the attempt to force one's own social order on others: all
these are outdated aspirations. Again and again they have dragged mankind into
catastrophe. The peoples of the world are no longer prepared to tolerate such policies.
My country, the Federal Republic of Germany, is on the side of progress,
co-operation, human rights, self-determination and peace. We regard man, in his
unalterable dignity, in his uniqueness and in his freedom, as the focus of all
action. Those values are the cornerstone of the alliance between democratic
Europe, the United States and Canada.
The President of this session of the General Assembly himself comes from a
country that has sought international co-operation time and again to overcome
difficult economic problems. I wish him and the United Nations good fortune and
success.
I should like thank Mr. Perez de Cuellar for his excellent work, his wise decisions and his sensible initiatives as Secretary-General of the united Nations.
The 12 States members of the European Community, on their way towards European union and a common foreign policy, are speaking here from a common position. As representative of the Chairman of the Community, Sir Geoffrey Howe has spoken for all of us. Going on from there, I shall outline the views of the Federal Republic of Germany, which has irrevocably committed its destiny to that of Europe and which
is a firmly established member of the Western Alliance.
Europe, so often torn by wars in the course of its history, a continent from which conquest, force and repression have spread to all parts of the world, today's Europe wishes to be a continent of peace and an example of good-neighborly relations. The peoples of the European Community - first and foremost the Germans and the French - have shown that it is possible to replace centuries-old rivalry and deadly conflict with friendship and to grow together into a union of equals.
However, Europe is more than the Community of the Twelve. After all, Europe does not end at the Elbe and Werra Rivers. Hence, in taking our decisions we never forget that there are also Germans and Europeans to the east of us. As a nation in the center of Europe, we consider it our historical duty as Germans to defuse and eventually surmount the antithesis between East and West. We should be bad Germans and bad Europeans were we to do otherwise. That is why, during the 1970s, we put relations between the Federal Republic of Germany and its eastern neighbors on a new contractual basis, a basis that remains an unshakable cornerstone of our policy. Conscious of the course of history, we seek steady development of German-Soviet co-operation, which is an essential prerequisite for a realistic policy of European detente.
We shall consistently pursue the process of German-Polish reconciliation, we seek a peaceful modus vivendi in the whole of Europe based on co-operation and mutual trust. An ever-more important role in this effort falls to the two German States by virtue of the 1972 Treaty cm the Basis of Relations. We Europeans must develop and design our European home, which comprises Europe in its entirety, as a place fit to live in. We must not continue to accept the enormous commitment of resources and energies to the conflict between West and East.
If today Europeans are becoming more fully aware of their common identity and seeking to live peacefully in their common home, the doors in that home must be opened much wider. This means that it must not be a capital offense to pass through those doors from one part of the home to the other, we must rid borders of their awesome and divisive character, thereby enabling States with varying social systems to pursue their common and complementary interests and their responsibility for their common future in peaceful competition, so that their peoples no longer live in fear of each other but can get to know one another. The Europeans must, through a gradual process of reducing conflict potential and of fostering co-operation, elevate their relations to new forms, what we seek is a peaceful order in Europe based on the equality of all and on equal entitlement to security.
We seek a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will regain its unity through free self-determination.
The defusing of the East-West antithesis depends greatly on the development of relations between the two super-Powers. For that reason, it is important that the second summit meeting between President Reagan and General Secretary Gorbachev should take place before the end of this year.
United States-Soviet nuclear and space negotiations must lead to positive results. The negotiating objective agreed upon by both parties in Geneva on 8 January 1985 to prevent an arms race in space and terminate it on earth has become an obligation towards all the peoples of the world. That obligation must be honored without reservation.
We attach particular importance to the negotiations on the American and Soviet intermediate-range missile systems. In recent months progress and rapprochement have been achieved in that field. We desire the global elimination of all American and Soviet land-based intermediate-range nuclear force of longer range. If that aim cannot be fulfilled in one step, we should like to see an interim result which leaves the lowest possible number of missiles cm both sides and sets equal ceilings on a global scale and for Europe.
We want the arms spiral finally to be reversed. We Germans will bring all our influence to bear to help negotiations to that end to an early result. We also desire drastic reductions in strategic nuclear potentials. The relationship between offensive and defensive weapons must be discussed in its proper context, as was agreed on 8 January 1985.
We consider it necessary that the provisions of the SALT II agreement continue to be observed and that the 1972 Treaty on the Limitation of An ti-Ball is tic Missile Systems be adhered to until the establishment of a new contractual basis.
Last weekend the 35 States participating in the Stockholm Conference on Confidence and Security Building Measures and Disarmament in Europe adopted a final document. That document is a signal of hope. The Conference derived from a Franco-German initiative. At the beginning of this year the joint appearance of the French and German Foreign Ministers injected a fresh impetus. Its success is a triumph for common sense, responsibility and sound judgment. The measures agreed upon will apply to the whole of Europe from the Atlantic to the Urals. They will make the military behavior of the participating States more calculable, thereby helping to reduce distrust. They can facilitate progress at the Vienna mutual and balanced force reduction negotiations and, above all, initiate negotiations on conventional stability in the area between the Atlantic and the Urals. There are also too many conventional arms in Europe, and there is an imbalance to our detriment.
The offer of negotiations made by the Halifax meeting of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Foreign Ministers still stands. The Warsaw Pact has responded favorably. Action must be taken before this year is over. The aim of future negotiations must be to create a situation in which the size of the forces of both sides is determined solely by defensive requirements. On our side this is already the case. We must never forget that even a war waged with conventional arms alone would in today's Europe be a thousand times more horrific than the Second World War and would amount to multiple genocide in Europe.
Negotiations on the world-wide prohibition of chemical weapons have reached the stage at which it is possible for the community of nations as a whole to be freed from the scourge of chemical weapons. There is no longer any reason to delay an agreement.
In the important issue of a nuclear test ban, too, progress is possible. Stable and lasting peace requires co-operative structures in all areas. Apart from confidence-building and disarmament, this implies the establishment of an ordered system of political interaction as well as the broadest possible economic, technological, environmental and cultural co-operation. Peoples must have a part in exchanges and co-operation and be permitted to exercise the rights set forth in
the Helsinki Final Act.
We in Europe are endeavoring to bring about such a development within the framework of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, whose key elements are security and co-operation. The participation of the United States and Canada in that process corresponds to the reality of the security situation in Europe. The multilateral nature of the process gives all Europeans in Western, Eastern, neutral and non-aligned countries the opportunity to help build the Europe of the future, in which all States, irrespective of their social systems, will determine their own fate and their engagement in co-operation with their neighbors.
The follow-up meeting in Vienna to the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, due to be opened at ministerial level in November, must point the way towards a peaceful order in Europe.
We seek a mandate for the continuation and expansion of the negotiations on confidence-building measures and disarmament in the whole of Europe on the basis of the encouraging results in Stockholm. We must take co-operative steps towards the establishment of more stable security structures in the conventional sphere.
In the field of economic co-operation, we seek greater transparency of markets, more exchanges and division of labor, and new forms of co-operation.
Everyone will benefit if the latest reactor-safety and environmental technology becomes accessible to all countries.Chernobyl was a warning signal.
Isolationism and trade wars are of no use to mankind; exchanges and co-operation are the way to accomplish common tasks, to increase the prosperity of all and to ward off dangers. Co-operative solutions to security issues will further extend the basis of trust, to the benefit of economic and technological co-operation.
We want human rights to be respected*, we seek more contacts and improved opportunities for human encounter, we seek even more youth exchanges, educational co-operation and progress in the field of information.
At this very moment there are real prospects of substantial progress, both in the relations and negotiations between the two super-Powers and in the multilateral process of detente, progress that will lead to a new end more lasting phase of fruitful relations between West and East. Tangible progress in Europe serves to promote development, security and stability throughout the world.
The European Community is already shouldering its responsibility for co-operation in the development of the third world. We do this without ambitions for political power and without wishing to impose our social model on others or to establish spheres of influence. We seek a world in which self-determination, social justice, human rights and fundamental freedoms are the paramount principles of interaction among all peoples.
International terrorism, the scourge of mankind, is directed against peaceful interaction among nations, the right to live and human dignity. It is the common task of the community of nations to fight this evil. The decisions of the General Assembly and the Security Council are an encouraging sign that awareness of this task is growing.
The continually worsening international refugee problem is a symptom of grave injustice in some parts of the world. The recommendations deriving from the discussion of the refugee initiative that I introduced in the General Assembly six years ago must lead to an improvement in international co-operation in this area. We hope that this session of the General Assembly will adopt by consensus the recommendations made by the Group of Experts.
Respect for the right of self-determination and respect for human rights are absolutely essential if peace is to be safeguarded. There is a direct path leading from the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights through the two covenants on human rights to the prohibition of torture. By adopting the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the community of nations has reaffirmed its desire to combat systematically this particularly abhorrent form of violation of human rights,. The next step should be the prevention of arbitrary executions. He shall continue to support the abolition of the death penalty.
Two years from now, in 1988, 40 years will have passed since the united Nations in its Universal Declaration of Human Rights took the vital pioneering step to embed human rights in international law. The United Nations needs institutions that will guarantee better protection of human rights. To this end, the appointment of a high commissioner for human rights is just as indispensable as the creation of a United Nations court of human rights. By such actions we could lend real significance to the year 1988. The persecuted and the suffering await a decisive and effective step on the part of the international community^
We roust not remain silent with regard to serious violations of human rights. If we find something intolerable, we have a duty to say so. Today this applies particularly to the inhumane and immoral system of apartheid, the systematic form of racial discrimination and segregation. The state of emergency in the Republic of South Africa has bred arbitrary and lawless action. An increasing death toll is the horrific outcome of a policy directed against people who wish only to live in their own country and to enjoy equal rights and freedom from discrimination. If the inhumane system of apartheid is not eliminated, the inevitable consequence will be even more violence, even more bloodshed and ultimately chaos and civil war.
Just as inhumanity cannot be reformed but only eliminated, apartheid is not
reformable and must therefore be abolished.
We demand the immediate initiation of dialog among the authentic representatives of all sections of the population and are preparing an initiative with that aim. We demand the immediate release of Nelson Mandela and all other political prisoners. We demand that the ban on the African National Congress and other political groups be lifted. We demand the termination of the state of emergency. The measures adopted by the European Community on 16 September 1986 lend emphasis to this political demand.
The internal tension generated by apartheid in South Africa reverberates through the entire region and is exacerbated by the South African policy of destabilizing its neighbors. This situation is further aggravated by the continuing illegal occupation of Namibia, whose people are denied their independence and their right of self-determination. The Federal Republic of Germany will not waver in its support for the earliest possible establishment of Namibian independence on the basis of Security Council resolution 435 (1978), as called for by the General Assembly at its fourteenth special session. There is no alternative to the United Nations proposed settlement as outlined in resolution 435 (1978).
The eighth summit conference of the non-aligned countries at Harare provided further evidence that genuine non-alignment is an important factor for peace and stability in inter national relations. We support the call addressed to the warring States of Iran and Iraq to put an end to the bloodshed in the Gulf region. We support the call made by the summit conference for the withdrawal of all foreign troops from Afghanistan and Cambodia. In Afghanistan, as in Cambodia, the right of peoples to self-determination must be realized.
In the same way, we advocate the right of the Palestinian people to exercise self-determination and to decide on their own future. This must come about within the framework of a peace settlement for the Middle East that guarantees all countries of the region, including Israel, safe and recognized boundaries and hence a secure existence as States.
We appeal to the regional groupings in all parts of the world to render their contribution to international stability.
We also need co-operative approaches to solve international economic problems and to align the international economic system with the needs of tomorrow. My country regards development co-operation between North and South as a central pillar of its policy in pursuit of peace. This is demonstrated by the rate at which our official aid has increased-, in 1985 its growth of 9 per cent far exceeded the growth of our gross national product. At the same time, our help is directed to areas where the need is greatest-, for that reason, the share of our aid devoted to Africa has been raised from 37 to 47 per cent. The Federal Government will also give its most vigorous support to the ProgramF of Action adopted at the special session of the United Nations General Assembly on the critical economic situation in Africa. We know that our world is facing a common fate, and we act accordingly. Our aim is a system of world-wide co-operation based on partnership and awareness of the interdependence of nations, in which private initiative and autonomous efforts have their place.
The first and elementary goal of development co-operation must be to free the world from hunger. To this and, we must enable farmers in all parts of the third world to produce enough food for themselves and for their domestic markets. In most of the developing countries rapid agricultural growth can prove to be a locomotive for national economies. All the aid devoted to rural development can bear fruit, however, only if the industrialized countries do not engage in ruinous competition with third-world food producers by subsidizing their own products. A stop must be put to the world-wide dumping of agricultural products.
We have managed so far to keep the problems of indebtedness under control by means of a co-operative strategy, but the crisis of indebtedness itself remains unresolved. It continues to pose a political challenge, but if it is to be overcome the international financial institutions, the governments of creditor countries and the private banks must play their part. Capital must at last begin to fl<w again from North to South instead of financing budgetary deficits in industrialized countries. It is of central importance that the private transfer of capital should be set in motion again. For this reason, the Federal Government has signed the Convention on the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency, which can become an effective means of attaining that goal. However, the indebted countries must also act. They must create conditions which will restore the confidence of domestic as well as foreign investors in the future of their countries. Only thus can the flight of capital be halted.
Another crucial task is that of revitalizing the international free trade system. The Punta del Este agreement on the opening of a new round of trade liberalization is an encouraging sign. We must strengthen and develop the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). We must prime radically the proliferation of agreements on voluntary restrictions; we must thin out the jungle of agricultural subsidies*, we must modernize GATT, and that means gradually incorporating services and foreign investments into the GATT system.
In an increasingly close-woven international economy, economic policies can no longer exist in isolation. Each country must see and consider the effects of its own economic policy on other countries. Here, too, co-operation and solidarity are called for. The greater a country, the greater is its economic responsibility to the rest of the world.
To establish the world-wide co-operative structures that will enable us to master our common future, we need a comprehensive dialog between industrialized and developing countries. I therefore consider it urgently necessary that we should at last inject new life into the North-South dialog and that we should orient that dialog towards the major issues affecting the future, thereby making it a potent factor in international politics and economics. In 1975, which is already 11 years ago now, as we took the first steps towards a large-scale North-South dialog, our thinking was determined by the study drawn up by the Club of Rome on the limits to growth. Shortages of energy, raw materials and foodstuffs, limits on the tolerance of the environment, seemed to be the law that would determine the future of the world. But we are beginning to sense that sane thing completely different is taking places a new technological revolution, which is establishing new and wider horizons for growth. New forms of technology -space technology, information technology and gene technology - permit a new type of growth that conserves energy and raw materials and which protects, indeed heals, the environment. This departure from the industrial age into a new era is not by any means peculiar to the Western countries but is a world-wide phenomenon. The new forms of technology can also bring decisive benefits to the developing countries in particular.
The potential of gene technology is immense. Let us remember that in the sixties high-yield varieties of rice and wheat led to the green revolution. India, which had hitherto been an importer of grain, became self-sufficient and even began to export grain. The new varieties were produced in the traditional manner by cross-breeding. Gene technology now offers far quicker and more effective ways of cultivating "made-to-order" plants, which are resistant to disease, can withstand drought and cold, can grow in over-saline soil and are rich in protein, and plants which breathe in nitrogen from the air, thereby relieving farmers of the need to buy expensive fertilizers.
A second green revolution seems set to take place in the nineties, its effects far exceeding those of the first. Above all, it will include regions hitherto at a disadvantage and be of great importance to arid zones such as the Sahel. Major improvements can also be expected in livestock breeding. Then there are the opportunities that gene technology opens up for medicine. For example, it gives us reason to hope that we can develop vaccines against tropical diseases that are at present incurable.
Great and new though the opportunities deriving from these new forms of technology may be, the risks associated with them are equally great and new. Gene-technology in particular raises issues of immense importance, since it gives man unprecedented power to interfere with the hereditary genes of living creatures.
The accident in the Chernobyl reactor brought home to us overnight how the task of mastering safely the risks of high technology has become a common responsibility, one that welds the nations of the world into a community in pursuit of survival. In Vienna the special International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) meeting on reactor safety has just begun. We hope that it will set negotiations in motion which will lead to universally binding safety standards and an international liability law. It is significant that that conference should take place under United Nations auspices, for the United Nations has become the indispensable forum for dealing with the issues that will determine our global future.
We must not, however, accept nuclear energy as the final answer to man's energy requirements? here, too, we must jointly seek new answers. The protection of the environment cannot today be guaranteed by an individual State when it relies on its own resources. Radioactivity, as we have seen, does not stop at national boundaries, nor do air and water pollution. It follows that environmental protection is no longer an affair to be dealt with by each individual State as it sees fit.
For thousands of years the inroads made by human technology into nature seemed so minimal that their overall impact could be disregarded. Nature appeared indestructible and inexhaustible. It is now realized, however, that technology has assumed dimensions that threaten to destroy the ecological balance of nature. We are living today with the shock of that discovery. Nothing is the same any more. International environmental policy has become a vital task. It is a safeguard for the future, a course of action dictated by our responsibility to future generations. In this field, we are confronted by fundamental tasks under the
heading of international domestic policy, a term which implies the need to act
together.
Those few references alone demonstrate the challenge facing all of us in this new technological revolution. What must be done - and here let me cite the Secretary-General's report to our Assembly - is;
"to manage safely, and to common advantage, the inventions of the human mind".
We need a North-South dialog that devotes itself to those new questions. It must be a dialog that takes as its starting point the immense structural upheaval currently taking place in the world and faces up to it in a courageous and forward-looking manner. What is needed is a global policy in which the problems of mankind are understood as tasks for mankind. Mankind, which has become a community in quest of survival, must recognize its responsibility to its contemporaries as well as to all future generations.
The United Nations is the forum where this policy must be discussed. This development must take place with due regard for the identity of all peoples, which have all made unique contributions to human history and to the civilizations of the world. Respect for others also entails respect for their cultural identity. Our international Organization must therefore promote a world-wide cultural dialog that sill prevent the submersion of native cultures by foreign influences and highlight the variety of cultural achievements for the benefit of all.
I have again stated the case for world-wide co-operation in a spirit of mutual confidence to resolve the major international issues facing us. To this end we need the United Nations as a sound international Organization, as the forum where openness prevails and as an indispensable negotiating framework. It draws its strength not least from its universality. That is why all peoples, including the Korean people, should be represented here. We must do everything possible to maintain the effectiveness of the United Nations. To this end, it is necessary for us, the Member States, to observe fully the obligations deriving from the Charter. It is also necessary for this session of the General Assembly to achieve positive results in its discussion of measures to increase the efficiency of the United Nations, based on the report of the 18 experts.
My Government supports the views outlined by the Secretary-General in his report on the role of the United Nations in international relations and the structural reforms needed to strengthen the Organization. My delegation welcomes the fact that the President has so clearly defined the operative objectives of the reforr process. The United Nations needs reforms to remain strong and effective. For our part, we need a strong and effective United Nations so that through our co-operation here in the Organization the survival of mankind may be assured.
It is a great honor for me to address the Assembly on behalf oFrance.
The French Government is pleased, Sir, that the General Assembly is meeting this year under your distinguished guidance. Your election is a tribute to Bangladesh, whose commitment to peace and international co-operation is known to all of us here. It also bears witness to the confidence our delegations have in you, sure in the knowledge that you will carry out your mandate with the authority necessary to direct our work successfully. You can count on the whole-hearted co-operation of the French delegation, which offers you its warmest congratulations and its best wishes for success.
It is also a pleasure for me to salute our Secretary-General, whom I was delighted to receive in Paris a short time ago. I am happy to see him restored to health, and to be able to express again, here, the French Government's gratitude for the services he has rendered our Organization, and in particular for the decisive contribution he made to settling the dispute that had arisen between New Zealand and France. I hope he will obtain from all Member States the assurances he has every right to seek in order to continue the mission entrusted to him nearly five years ago, which he has carried out with such competence and skill. The fortieth anniversary of our Organization, while an occasion for celebrating our achievements, also reminded us of the limitations reality imposes on the implementation of the Charter.	^
To review the disillusionments and disappointments is in itself a salutary exercise. Today, as the Secretary-General emphasized in his remarkable report, our Organization faces not only the problem of its financial situation, but also the inability of its Members to agree on priorities and tasks. It is my feeling, however, that the general realization of past disarray and inadequacies has, foe the first time, led to a commitment to real reform, as evidenced by the conclusions of the Group of 18.
No one disputes the existing shortcomings in co-operation between Members of the United Nations, but this necessary clear-sightedness should not lead us to take a pessimistic view. On the contrary, France considers that only a display of demonstrating realism can give us assurance that we shall be able to resolve the problems of today and those of the future.
The San Francisco Charter made the preservation of international peace and security the primary goal of the United Nations. Looked at uncompromisingly and without ideological bias, the world in which we live is seen to fall far short of the expectations of the founders of the United Nations.
One of the outstanding features of our age, accentuated by changes in attitudes and by technological progress, is the shrinking of our planet, which is leading to increasing overlapping of problems at the world level. No serious event, however localized, can leave us indifferent any more. Today neither conflicts nor alliances take account of frontiers or distances. They transcend differences of culture and race, without, however, eliminating them. Cn the contrary, in many cases, the internationalization of problems has triggered a backlash, sometimes very extreme, in the form of clannish behavior of every kind.
Paradoxically, therefore, while the world is tending to become a single entity, it has not been able to overcome th.; threats and collective challenges confronting it. Conflicts and violations of human rights are increasing, while the cancer of terrorism is spreading. The arms race is continuing, spurred on by technological progress, the benefits of which ought rather to be shared throughout the world. The economic and financial situation of many third world countries remains very critical.
In the Middle East, France has long maintained that peace must be based on principles which, for us, are self-evident. Israel's security and right to existence must be acknowledged and guaranteed; the Palestinian people must be permitted to exercise its right to self-determination. Peace presupposes first of all mutual recognition by the parties concerned and the primary responsibility of the parties in the quest for a settlement, which cannot be achieved by outside Powers, although their contribution may be very useful.
That being so, there is now talk again of convening a properly prepared conference with the presence of all the parties concerned. He approve of this in principle and are ready to play a full part in helping to find a solution to a conflict that is too serious for the international community to have the right to regard itself as powerless.
Among the favorable signs that may be noted is that the idea of the need for dialog is gaining ground, albeit slowly. France has always welcomed indications to that effect.
Unfortunately, these rays of hope do not allow us to forget the unending crisis that is tearing Lebanon apart. It has tragic consequences for a people linked to France by age-old ties of every kind, a people France loves and respects.
Whatever else may have been said, Lebanon was once a very model of coexistence, tolerance, freedom and culture to the entire world. It would be an irreparable loss if this center of intellectual vitality, whose light shone throughout the Mediterranean world, were to be engulfed in the rising tide of fanaticism and hatred. It is my fervent hope that this battered and ravaged country will one day find the path to reconciliation through the restoration of its independence and territorial integrity.
For the past several years, by virtue of its historical ties with Lebanon -but also because the issue far transcends Lebanon itself - France has made
ceaseless efforts, at the price of considerable sacrifice, to promote the return to peace longed for by the vast majority of Lebanese. To that end, France decided to participate in international action wh<ch made it possible to limit the chaos in the aftermath of the Israeli invasion. Our Ambassador in Beirut, Louis Delamare, was among the first to pay with his life for his untiring efforts to renew dialog between fraternal enemies. Dozens of French soldiers have been killed in the attempt to permit a return to the rule of law and to restore a minimum of normal life to the civilian population of Beirut.
In the south of that suffering country the international community is endeavoring to prevent a new escalation in the fighting and senseless violence. Side by side with other national contingents in the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), French soldiers have all too often paid with their lives in a peace mission.
But of late the situation has become intolerable. The united Nations Force is no longer merely being caught in sporadic clashes between the enemies it is meant to be keeping apart; it has become the target of methodically prepared attacks which will soon leave it no alternative other than to retrench in order to ensure its own safety.
We must note that since its formation in 1978 UNIFIL has been unable to carry out the mandate entrusted to it by the Security Council. That is why last April France drew the attention of the Council to this state of affairs and to the concern it was causing us. The events of the past few weeks have, unfortunately, confirmed our assessment. The sacrifices we have accepted to date give us the right to demand that each of us should shoulder his responsibilities and that the means available to the Force should be commensurate with the mission entrusted to it. We are facing a serious challenge to our Organization, its authority and its ability to carry out peace-keeping operations. That challenge must be met.
For sore than six years Iraq and Iran have been tearing each other apart in a war which, because of its intensity and the resources and tremendous losses it has entailed, can no longer be considered simply as a regional conflict. Freedom of navigation has been imperiled on shipping routes of vital importance for the world economy. The dogged prosecution of this absurd war threatens to shatter the equilibrium of a region of strategic importance. Like all other members of the international community, France is aware of and deeply concerned by this situation. We can but express our hope for a reasonable negotiated outcome to this protracted conflict, and we urge that the relevant Security Council resolutions finally be implemented. France supports all efforts to bring an end to this war, in particular the Secretary-General's offers of mediation.
Although We have dwelt at length on crises in the Middle East that our Organization has thus far, unfortunately, been powerless to resolve, I have no intention of forgetting all the others which have thwarted the peace efforts of our Organization for many years. These include: Cyprus, where a de facto situation which France does not recognize has been established; Afghanistan and Cambodia, subjects to which I shall return in this statement; the Korean peninsula, where division and tension have persisted for 40 years and where it is our earnest hope to see dialog established between North and South, which is the only way to ease tension and then to resolve the Korean question. We wish the United Nations to be a truly universal body and, hence, for all the Korean people to be represented here. Other crises include the situation in Central America, where I hope that with the active assistance of all the countries in the region a solution nay be found to the current crisis; and Western Sahara, where I hope that the joint efforts of the Secretary-General and of the past and current Chairmen of the Organization of African Unity will make it possible to resolve a conflict involving States friendly to France, a conflict which has already lasted too long.

The international community cannot fail to express its indignation at the continuing daily violations of the most basic human rights throughout the world, whether such violations result from the wars raging in several areas or from deliberate policies. No pressure, regardless of its source, and no sophism can ever make us accept such violations. Transcending all ideologies and arguments prompted by expediency, there can be only one concept of human dignity.
I am pleased to see that in many States, especially the Philippines and Latin America, the return to democracy has shown that people have never forgotten it.
For several years now, with the courage born of determination to defend their independence and dignity, the Afghan and Cambodian peoples have been resisting foreign occupation and the authorities it has imposed on them.
In Afghanistan one third of the inhabitants of the country have had to seek refuge outside its borders. The elite of the population has had to leave the country in large numbers, and every day women, children and old people have been paying the price of the acts of war perpetrated against their villages in violation of all humanitarian principles.
In Cambodia the Khmer people, a friend of France, is the victim of increasingly oppressive foreign occupation. We are even witnessing a new form of colonization in that country.
Were the Afghan and Cambodian peoples to be given back their pride and freedom they would not constitute a threat to anyone in the region any mere than they, have in the past, and certainly not to their powerful neighbors. The invasions of which they are victims must be seen as wars of conquest belonging to another age, and France will continue to say, along with the vast majority of States, that the Soviet Union and Viet Nam must, in their own interest and for the sake of world peace, end their respective ventures in Afghanistan and Cambodia.
Speaking on behalf of the Twelve, Britain's Foreign Secretary has just stated once again that the institutionalized racial discrimination that the South African authorities persist in maintaining is unacceptable. The measures announced by Pretoria have so far not touched on essentials, and no one should be surprised that they have failed to check the spiral of violence.
While recognizing the complexity of the problems involved, France, together with its partners in the European Community, has decided to put into effect an additional program of sanctions but believes that these arrangements should be supplemented by positive measures. Everything possible must be done to promote genuine dialog, which of course presupposes the freeing of political prisoners.
Together with all those who are working to encourage moderation and conciliation in that country, we should like to believe that it is not too late to lay the foundations of a society in which, without exception, the right to dignity of all the communities that have built South Africa is at last recognized.
The tragic events in Istanbul, Karachi and Paris have proved once again that terrorism has become the systematic weapon of a war that knows no frontiers and is mostly faceless.
Admittedly the phenomenon is not a new one and instances of it are only too numerous. However, I am struck by the recent upsurge of terrorism and the growing number of victims. Here I must mention in particular the French, American and British hostages being held in Lebanon.
Unless it wants to delude itself, the international community should recognize that it has not always faced up to the scourge as unflinchingly as it should have. Some would have us believe that it is the only means of expression of oppressed peoples. The odious methods it uses, the slaughter of innocent people in free societies and the continuing blackmail over the lives of hostages make it impossible for us to confuse, even for a moment, those actions with genuine resistance.
Certainly no one would deny that the persistence of unresolved conflicts and the injustices they bring in their train is one of the sources of terrorism. But we must also denounce many other causes such as the rising tide of intolerance and fanaticism and the complicity of States that are willing to close their eyes to the activities of terrorist organizations or do not hesitate to use them to their own advantage and even go so far as to encourage them.
In a world in which indiscriminate terrorist violence can affect the citizens of all States, there was bound to be a reaction.
We are gratified to note that the General Assembly, reflecting that world-wide realization, last year condemned these cowardly and criminal practices and that the Security Council and the Commission on Human Rights have taken a firm stand against the taking of hostages. However, France, which took the initiative in submitting this question to the Commission on Human Rights, wishes to emphasize the need to supplement these texts, whose political significance is evident, with the concrete measures the situation calls for.
The determined action required would be made easier if all States were effectively to meet the obligations incumbent upon them under international law and conventions to which they have subscribed.
I venture to hope that the appropriate reaction of the international community expressed here will encourage all States to co-operate, particularly in the strengthening of air and maritime security, and convince them of the need to work through all appropriate channels, national and other, to eradicate terrorism.
Since the United Nations was founded the Organization and the entire international community have had to face up to the strategic realities of the -nuclear age.
France is convinced that nuclear deterrence, which has prevented a direct confrontation between the two super-Powers for the past 40 years, remains an
irreplaceable factor for peace and that there is no alternative within human grasp in spite of the rapid progress taking place in advanced technology, progress in which France has equipped itself to play a full part. t
In view of the considerable disproportion in existing arsenals, any progress towards nuclear disarmament must begin with verifiable, progressive and balanced reductions in the entire range of American and Soviet strategic weapons systems. These reductions must be carried out under such conditions that the balance of nuclear deterrence is not called into question.
All the speakers here have stressed the importance that progress in the current negotiations in Geneva between the Soviets and theAmericans could have for East-West relations. France has already said many times that it would welcome a priori such prospects as might be opened by a Soviet-American summit meeting this year. It recognizes in particular the political importance that an agreement on a global limitation on intermediate-range weapons systems could have in the world. It must, however, observe that the reduction of those systems would affect only a very small part of the nuclear arsenals of the United states and the Soviet Union.
The President of the French Republic recalled in 1983 from this very rostrum the conditions which France has set for its participation in a nuclear disarmament process when the time comes. I should like to repeat here that these conditions will not change and that France will not agree to its forces being take) into account, directly or indirectly, in negotiations to which it is not a party.
As long as French security rests on nuclear deterrence, the first requirement f or ray corn try is to maintain the credibility of its strategic forces at the necessary level. For that reason, France has naturally declined to go along with any form of planned obsolescence of its forces while other Powers retain a huge excess nuclear capacity. It will accept neither a quantitative nor a qualitative freeze on its arsenal nor will it halt its nuclear tests. That arsenal does not exceed the level considered indispensable for our security and our independence. The nuclear tests are being carried out in unquestionably safe conditions that have been recognized as such by independent and undisputed experts from the countries of the Pacific to whom France has allowed access to its test site, other States regularly carry out many tests and none of them provides or has provided such guarantees on the international level.
With regard to Europe, the problem of security cannot be reduced solely to its
nuclear aspects. What distinguishes our continent from all the others is that the
permanent wound of its division is compounded by an unequal arms build-up of 
conventional and chemical weapons unmatched elsewhere in the world.
Several years ago France proposed that in the framework of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe an approach should be sought that would make it possible, in stages, to bring greater transparency to military activities and hence greater trust throughout our continent before initiating a gradual return to a lower level of the balance of armaments. In that spirit and, I would recall, on the basis of the French proposal, the Conference on disarmament in Europe was convened. It completed its work at Stockholm last week. We are pleased that the first East-West agreement on security to be reached in nearly 10 years came about in that context. This result should enable the follow-up conference of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, which will meet shortly in Vienna, to make headway in all fields covered by the Helsinki Final Act - among them, human rights, the free movement of individuals, contacts among people -which, just as much as security and disarmament, affect the progress of East-West relations.
In regard to nuclear energy, France, like the rest of the world, was disturbed by the Chernobyl accident. The accident must be judged with due gravity and seriousness. On the other hand, it should not serve as a pretext for those who seek to speculate on fear and irrational sentiment. The analysis recently completed in Vienna by international experts confirms the specific nature of the Soviet reactor; the lessons of the Chernobyl tragedy cannot be transferred as such and applied to Western-type installations.
France decided several years ago to base its energy independence on nuclear energy. That goal is well cm the way to being reached today and cannot be brought into question. Conscious of what is at stake, France will naturally work for greater co-operation on safety already under way in the framework of the International Atomic Energy Agency. But I should liKss to make the point here that the power to regulate in such an area must belong quite clearly to those who alone have the responsibility, capability and means to put into operation both the installations themselves and the regulations - in other words, national Governments, in the same spirit, France will continue to help interested countries acquire the benefits of the civilian applications of the atom once there is appropriate international monitoring to guarantee that the fruits of such co-operation are not diverted.
France and its partners in the European Space Agency have decided to confront the great challenge of the peaceful exploration of space. We for our part are resolved to prevent a gap from developing in this field between nations that would move ahead for their own advantage and the others, which would be denied the benefits of applications vital for their development: earth observation, meteorological applications, navigation, communications transmission and direct television. France will continue to work to further existing international co-operation and develop the co-operation planned for the years ahead.
We are bound to note today that the economic and financial situation of numerous third-world countries, especially the least developed among them, appears to have grown much worse. The situation is especially critical in Africa, and the special session which once again this year the General Assembly fortunately devoted to the problem highlighted the dimensions of the problem.The African corn tries know from experience that the efforts they have courageously decided to undertake will have the resolute and fraternal backing of France. Our commitment stems from the close relations we have with our partners to the north and the south of the Sahara. It also results from our awareness of the exceptional seriousness of the crisis, whose internal and external causes have been analysed with exemplary lucidity by the States concerned. The crisis affects almost the entire continent, which still encompasses two thirds of the world's least-advanced countries. France provides more aid to sub-Saharan Africa than any other country. Its contribution to the development of the continent as a whole has not flagged over these past years. No one should doubt that this will continue in the future.
Certain regions in the third world whose economic development has been disastrous are also victims of threats to their security, and I should like to say a few words here about the sadly telling case of Chad. The difficulties and handicaps of every kind that that country's leaders have had to face are widely known. They have once again been compounded by attempts on the part of its neighbor, Libya, at destabilization, by occupation of part of the territory and, lastly, by overt military aggression. The Government of Chad received, when it has so requested, the support of France. The aid we provided, and in particular the
military assistance, was intended, while deterring Libya from pursuing its offensive activities, to prepare what will doubtless be a long and difficult road towards national reconciliation and reconstruction in Chad.
In the case of Chad, as in many other cases, the relationship between underdevelopment and insecurity and, consequently, the level of armaments, has been constantly demonstrated. Some years ago France proposed that this crucial problem as a whole should be the subject of political examination at the United Nations. Following the debates of the experts, it now remains to give concrete substance to this plan, either at the next special session of the General Assembly on disarmament or, if a consensus emerges, at a special conference to be held at an earlier date.
I should like, finally, to say a few words about the question of debt. For all too many developing countries debt has now become a dominant concern. The day-to-day effort to meet payments on due dates mobilizes all their energies. It does not permit Governments the freedom necessary to resolve their long-term development problems.
Over the past few years, there has been a great deal of consideration of this question. The very volume of such discussion shows that the international community has awakened to the seriousness and, at the same time, the complexity of the situation. Debt, in itself, is the consequence of the distorted development of the international economy which has brought us to the situation in which we find ourselves today.
It is for that reason that no one can any longer claim that the issue can be resolved in a purely mechanical manner by granting short-term facilities or through the simplistic application of miracle remedies. If we are to solve the problem in a lasting manner, we must tackle the root causes of the situation and not simply its effects.
The world facing a crisis of exceptional gravity, a phase of structural
adaptation in the international economy requiring greater international
cooperation so that it will be more imaginative, more active and more pragmatic. I am fully aware that not everyone is convinced that this is necessary, but I think that the movement is in the right direction. France, for its part, believes that we must increase international co-operation in three areas. First, there must be increased financing for developing countries to loosen the grip of debt. I should add that there is no instance of a country that has not had to have recourse to substantial external financing during its industrialization phase. This is obvious, and in this area I note some progress, both in thinking and in conduct.
Broad agreement is now emerging on the need to expand the role and enhance the intervention capabilities of multilateral development institutions Each of us recognizes that every other kind of financial assistance is also needed, in particular from international commercial banks and from States, in the form of aid for development and commercial credit.
With regard to bilateral aid for development, France will again increase its effort in 1987 over 1986, with a view to reaching its goal of 1 per cent of gross national product.
Secondly, the remarkable efforts to ensure economic recovery embarked on by developing countries, especially by the most heavily indebted among them, must be continued. Outstanding results" have already been achieved in the battle against internal and external deficits, in curbing inflation and in implementing bold economic policies that emphasize the long-term interests of nations rather than favor illusory, fragile short-term solutions. It takes courage to set up and implement such policies, and I should like to pay tribute to those who have taken such initiatives.
A single statistic will suffice to illustrate the importance of such efforts: the balance-of-payments deficit of non-oil-exporting countries has fallen from $73 billion in 1982 to $29 billion in 1986.
Lastly, it is absolutely essential to correct the current disorders in the international economic and financial system. The solution to the debt problem must be based on the resumption of sustained economic growth in the world economy. This should be a key objective of the industrialized countries> which have a primary responsibility in this regard.
The progress made in the war against inflation should enable us to continue to lower real interest rates, without which any lasting solution of the debt problem would be illusory, and to continue to move towards greater stability of the international monetary system.
The correction of financial imbalances should also be actively sought. It is not a healthy situation when the world's greatest industrial country continues to drain off such a sizable 
In this context, France welcomes the success of the Punta del Este conference and hopes that the new round of negotiations to be launched will make it possible to liberalize world trade and to strengthen solidarity among nations.
Freedom in all its dimensions - political, economic, cultural and religious - is being flouted in too many countries. War and terrorism are spreading insecurity and fear. The dignity of the human person is in jeopardy in every part of the world where hunger, poverty and violence reign.
Whatever ideologists may say, the values of dignity and freedom are inscribed in the conscience of all mankind. France, for its part, intends to defend those values wherever it is present in the world, as well as within this Organization, which would be failing in its mission if it resigned itself to compromise or impotence.
Off all the challenges I have mentioned, two seem to me of more urgent response than the others.
One is terrorism, which would take us back to a time we thought long past if we allowed it a free hand to undermine democratic societies and destroy the basic rules of international life.
The other is the critical situation of many third-world countries, particularly the least advanced among then. It is inconceivable that we should allow them to be crushed under the weight of their economic and financial difficulties - inconceivable, inhuman and irresponsible.
Over and above the problems encountered by our Organization, even in its day-to-day functioning - problems which I am convinced will be resolved - the wisdom and intelligence so often demonstrated by this Assembly encourages me, in turn, to make a confident appeal to all the Member States.
As I said at the beginning of my remarks, the internationalization of problems does not of itself entail international solidarity. In this regard, the development of co-operation at the regional level is an encouraging first step. Everybody knows that France in particular sets great store by intensifying its co-operation with its partners in the European Community.
The urgency of the challenges that I have just mentioned compels us to set awareness of the need for this solidarity above our economic differences and political divergences. Let us all, therefore, understand that the dangers confronting mankind are common to us all and that the only response is to be found in solidarity.
The PRESIDENT; On behalf of the General Assembly, I wish to thank the Prime Minister of the French Republic for the important statement he has just made.
Mr. President, I welcome you to your prestigious office with the same warmth which exists between our two countries - both members of the CeraHonweaifcu. I share with you some knowledge of the English Bar and know that you will show the dedication, wisdom and objectivity which, if I may say so, is the hallmark of our legal profession.
I cannot fail at the same time to pay a tribute to your predecessor, who represents a fellow member of the European Community. Ambassador de Pinies has had a distinguished career at the United Nations, crowned by his handling of the fortieth anniversary session, which captured world attention. He did not disappoint the high expectations we all had of him.
Nor can I omit to pay a tribute to our Secretary-General and to say how happy I am, how happy we all are, to see him restored to health. His modesty and patience - qualities which once again showed through in his annual report - are an example to us all.
I have the honor to address the General Assembly today on behalf of the European Community and its 12 Member States.
Forty years ago, on 19 September 1946, Winston Churchill had this to say of Europe:
"Over wide areas a vast quivering mass of tormented, hungry, care-worn and bewildered human beings gape at the ruins of their cities and homes and scan the dark horizons for the approach of some new peril, tyranny or terror." A generation later it is sobering for us in Western Europe to remember those words. They remind us of the full destructive force of what Churchill, in a later speech described as:
"Ancient nationalistic feuds and modern ideological factions [which] distract and infuriate the unhappy, hungry populations."
The destructive power of Churchill's "feuds and factions" is undiminished, and it is for that reason I wish to dwell for a moment on the more hopeful experience of the European Community. I say this with great humility; for in this century, as often before, we Europeans have feared and distrusted, fought and plundered one another. Yet today 12 free countries of Western Europe can speak to the world with a single voice; and we can do so in the conviction that we shall never attack one another again.
The Community is an ambitious undertaking. The decisions we take in our Community can change the laws of all our countries. They touch the life of all our citizens. Of course it sometimes takes us time to agree; but we believe other nations could profit from the same stability and trust which we have built in Europe since 1945. This mutual trust has allowed us to build up our joint political and economic strength. We are determined to go on advancing our interests together. Let there be no doubt: a challenge to one of us is a challenge to all: whether it be to our liberties, interests, rights or well-being; whether it comes from terrorists or drug-dealers, from bullies or from tyrants.
Last year my predecessor, Jacques Poos, the Foreign Minister of Luxembourg, spoke here as representative of 10 members of the European Community. It is my privilege to address you on behalf of 12 member States, for the Community has welcomed two new members - Spain and Portugal. Their accession weaves two more strands of European culture and history into one ever-thickening cable. Meanwhile the construction of Europe goes on. We are ratifying new treaty provisions on foreign policy co-operation. And by the end of 1992 we mean to have broken down the barriers that still divide the Community; so that, from Aberdeen to Athens, from Copenhagen to Cadiz, goods, services and capital and, by no means least, people, can move freely between us.
Our Community has learns to work together in domestic affairs. It is now the world's single greatest trading bloc.Individually we have made powerful contributions to world affairs: our contribution must and will grow, now that we act together. The principles of the Charter of the United Nations have always been basic to our Community. He believe that our history imposes on us a particular responsibility to work for those principles and to promote in the world the ideal of dialog and peaceful co-operation which has served the member States so well.
But Europe, the wider Europe, remains divided. Twenty-five years ago the Berlin wall cast its shadow between East and West. Barbed wire and concrete set neighbors and families apart from each other. These man-made divisions oblige us, as Europeans, to search for reconciliation and the rebuilding of trust between nations. Our common history and culture encourage us to believe we can succeed.
The accident at Chernobyl, to which the Soviet Foreign Minister has just referred in his own speech, has added a new dimension to exchanges between East and West. Let us hope that the lessons of that accident will be well learned. As Martin Luther King Jr. said, in a different context:
"We must learn to live together as brothers or perish together as fools."
For us in Europe, as for the rest of the world, better relations between the two super-Powers are of the greatest importance. We warmly welcomed the Geneva summit meeting last November between President Reagan and General Secretary Gorbachev. We share the widespread hope that there will be another summit this year. That prospect has already produced major proposals by both sides. We therefore much regret that the arrest of a respected American journalist in Moscow has cast a cloud over those hopes. We look for its early removal.
The Geneva negotiations have as one priority the prevention of an arms race in outer space. The other urgent priority is deep cuts in the strategic and intermediate forces of the United States and the Soviet Union. We believe that the United States, the Soviet Union and Europe can make significant progress towards disarmament without compromising their security. An early agreement on the world-wide elimination of chemical weapons should and must be obtained.
Even if the objective of general and complete disarmament can only be gradually achieved, it nonetheless remains our ultimate goal. But agreements will have lasting value only if they are fair, balanced and verifiable. And if confidence is to grow, existing arms control agreements must be respected by all parties. We are approaching a critical period: there is an opportunity for major decisions. Future generations will not forgive failure.
Arms control and disarmament negotiations are only part of East-West
relations. Practical steps are needed to overcome the tension and divisions that lie behind the high level of armaments.
That is why the Helsinki Pinal Act is so important. It is fundamental for the health of East-West relations that all the Helsinki commitments should be honored. We look to all the participants in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) process to do so. At the CSCE follow-up meeting in Vienna, we will press for the sort of steps which ordinary people in our countries can see and understand.
The Twelve warmly welcome the successful conclusion of the Stockholm conference last weekend. The agreement that has been reached there is a significant contribution towards reducing the risk of war in Europe and towards establishing greater confidence between East and West. The Twelve, who made a substantial contribution to that result, will seek to build on it both in the field of arms control and, more widely, in the CSCE process.
Although Afghanistan and Cambodia are two countries far distant from our own, the outside interventions there symbolize many of the problems we face in East-West relations and in working for greater stability in the world at large. In Afghanistan in particular, some small detachments of Soviet troops may be withdrawn, but over 110,000 Soviet troops will still remain.
Tens of thousands of Afghan citizens have been killed as a result of the Soviet occupation. They will not return to life. Four million people remain outside their country, living as refugees. Many of them have been taken in by Pakistan, which has been rewarded by numerous attacks launched across its border from Afghanistan.
Speaking for a moment as the Foreign Minister of the United Kingdom, I cannot refrain from observing that it was in this context that the Foreign Minister of the
Soviet Union said that "the time has come to learn to call things by their proper names." I cannot refrain from expressing my astonishment and dismay that the facts which I have just described - the events which have taken place in the past six years in Afghanistan - were described by the Soviet Foreign Minister as "a national, democratic revolution". If that be their view, then it is not a view that can be shared by the rest of the world.
Speaking again for the Twelve, the principles we seek are those that must underlie a solution. They have been massively endorsed by the Assembly on many occasions. The Soviet Union should implement those principles, withdraw all its troops from Afghanistan and agree an acceptable timetable without delay. We support the efforts of the Secretary-General of the United Nations to resolve the conflict. Only the success of those efforts - and soon - can prevent further suffering.
Few parts of the world have suffered more than the Middle Bast from the ancient feuds and modern factions of Churchill's phrase. Our approach is the same: to counsel dialog and co-operation. There are no military answers to the conflict in the Middle East or in North Africa.
A just, lasting and comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israel dispute can be achieved only through negotiation. We take encouragement from the agreement between Egypt and Israel over Taba. We have made our own views known on many occasion, and we stand by them. An international conference could make a major contribution if the gap between the parties could be narrowed and if they could agree on the principle and nature of such a conference.
All parties should clearly and unambiguously accept two principles: the right to existence and security of all States in the area, including Israel, and the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination and all that that implies.
We appeal to the parties concerned - the Arab States, Israel and the Palestinian people - to open the door to peace by recognizing each other's rights.
The Twelve are working individually and collectively to help development in the occupied territories. We call on Israel, pending its withdrawal in accordance with Security Council resolution 242 (1967), scrupulously to fulfill its obligations as the occupying Power and to ease restrictions on political activity and economic development. But such measures must be a prelude to, not a substitute for, true peace negotiations.
Six years ago this month, the conflict between Iran and Iraq broke out. It has claimed well over half a million casualties and gravely damaged both countries. It is a source of great concern to their neighbors in the Gulf, with whom we sympathize. We have unreservedly condemned the use of chemical weapons and the escalating attacks by both sides on shipping in the Gulf. The two countries should ask themselves what possible good is served by continuing this conflict. We would deeply deplore any further escalation.
It should be accepted equally by both parties that this conflict can only be brought to an end by negotiation. Security Council resolution 582 (1986) forms the best basis for such a negotiated settlement. We urge Iran and Iraq to agree an immediate ceasefire and to seek a peaceful, honorable solution to their differences, co-operating fully with the Secretary-General in the exercise of his good offices.
In the Western Sahara, as well, we appeal to the parties to respond positively to the Secretary-General's efforts to find a peaceful solution.
The United Nations is doing vital worth the effort to preserve Lebanon's sovereignty, unity independence and territorial integrity. We deplore recent
incidents which have put new obstacles in the way of the mission of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). We extend our sympathies to the victims. We wish to underline the urgency and importance of taking measures to enable the Force to carry out its mission safely and effectively. The latest events have demonstrated how intolerable the present situation has become.
I now turn to the problem of Cyprus, which after too many years remains an important matter of international concern. The island remains tragically divided. The Twelve reaffirm their strong backing for the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of Cyprus, in accordance with relevant United Nations resolutions. We stand fully by our previous statements.
In particular, we reject any action that purports to establish an independent State within Cyprus. As we have made clear on many occasions, we support the Secretary-General in his mission of good offices for a just and viable solution to the problem. We ask all concerned to co-operate with him and not to take any action that would make his task more difficult.
In South Africa, the Twelve have worked to promote the genuine national dialog that is so obviously and urgently needed if there is to be a peaceful solution to the country's problems. South Africa's policies also affect its neighbors. We have forcefully condemned its armed incursions against neighboring countries. There must be no recurrence of those armed raids.
The Twelve have repeatedly made clear their revulsion at apartheid, we have demanded that it should be abolished. We utterly reject a philosophy which denies opportunity or liberty to one child yet gives ordinary rights and privileges to another solely on the basis of his or her colour. Such a system breeds hatred and violence. There have been reforms in South Africa, but too few and too slow to stem the surging bitterness and bloodshed in the country. The present state of emergency has brought desolation to the homes of many thousands of people imprisoned without trial and has worsened, not improved, the prospects for peaceful change.
Violence will not end apartheid. Instead, conditions must be created in which dialog can begin., But dialog is impossible while black leaders remain imprisoned or detained and black organizations proscribed. That is why the Twelve have repeatedly called on the South African Government to release unconditionally Nelson Mandela and other political prisoners and to lift the ban on the African National Congress, the Pan African Congress of Azania and other political parties.
In September 1985 the European Community countries agreed on a series of measures - some restrictive, some positive - designed to impress on the South African Government the inescapable need for fundamental reform. In June this year, at The Hague, the European Council decided to take additional action. As part of that action, Heads of State and Government of the Twelve asked me to undertake a mission to southern Africa. In the course of two visits to the area ^r July I sought to explain the policies of the Twelve to South Africa's neighbors and to impress upon the South African Government our deep concern and the need for steps to encourage a peaceful negotiated solution.
In the absence of any progress in that direction, and having consulted the major Western industrialized countries, the Twelve agreed at Brussels last week to
impose a ban on new investments in South Africa and on the import of iron, steel and gold coins from South Africa. Those measures represent a further step reinforcing the measures we took last year, which included bans on all exports to and imports from South Africa of arms and paramilitary equipment, a ban on oil exports and a ban on all new co-operation in the nuclear field.
In addition we are implementing a concerted European program to help the victims of apartheid, both individually and collectively. We are helping those arrested under the state of emergency and we are putting heavy emphasis on programs of training and education for black South Africans. We are also helping South Africa's neighbors, for example over the improvement of transport facilities in the region.
We shall keep up our effort in all these areas and do everything we can to promote urgent and peaceful change.
Time is short. We appeal to the South African Government to look to the future, to accept that fundamental change is inevitable. That Government clearly understands the demographic and economic challenge. South Africa's white leaders are sowing the wind; unless sincere negotiation begins now, their own children will reap the whirlwind.
The South African Government also bears a heavy responsibility in Namibia. Last year it set up a so-called transitional government of national unity. That body has no status whatsoever under the United Nations plan. We cannot accept unilateral moves by South Africa to transfer power in Namibia. We call upon the South African Government to implement the United Nations plan without further delay.
Central America is another area where armed force will solve nothing. dialog and peaceful negotiation are the only way forward. A political solution is
of the highest importance and it must emerge from the region itself. We support the Contadora peace process, which is a major step in the right direction, but further effort is needed by all concerned to reduce regional tensions. .*t Luxembourg last November we established a political dialog with Central America to underline our active support for that process in the interests of stability and pluralistic democracy. We also signed a co-operation agreement. We reiterate our intention to increase our aid to the region substantially in order to encourage regional co-operation and economic development.
On behalf of the United Kingdom I shall be circulating a document, a separate national communication, on the FaIklands.
More widely in Latin America, we have been encouraged by the continuing consolidation of democracy in most countries of South America. We hope that this process will continue throughout the region. But problems certainly remain in some countries. We have made plain our particular concern about human rights abuses and the continuation of violence in Chile. The Chilean Government has re imposed a state of siege following the attempted assassination of General Pinochet, we view this development with deep concern and reiterate our hope that the Government will immediately release political prisoners and initiate without delay a dialog with the democratic opposition about a peaceful restoration of democracy.
The human rights abuses in Chile and South Africa are by means unique. This Assembly cannot remain indifferent in the face of the systematic violations of individual liberties, of the tyranny, oppression and indiscriminating violence which persist in many countries and of the fact that hunger, disease and lack of opportunity deny the most basic economic and social rights to countless people.
On 21 July this year we issued a statement setting out our principles in this field. That was a signal of the high priority we attach to human rights in our
international relationships. This Assembly has established clear standards - in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other international instruments. We seek the universal observance of those instruments. That is, what our people expect, not just fine words, so we attach particular importance to maintaining and strengthening the mechanisms established by the United Nations for the protection of human rights.
The scourge of international terrorism has brought a new precariousness to modern life. It has killed innocent people in airports, shopping arcades and crowded streets. We utterly condemn cowardly attacks like the Karachi hijack and the recent atrocities in Istanbul and Paris, which can do nothing to help the political causes that their perpetrators profess to believe in. Our horror is greater when sovereign States lend their support - moral or material - to the terrorists. This year we have taken certain steps to deter State-supported terrorism, particularly in the case of Libya. No country which supports terrorism can expect to enjoy normal relations with the Twelve. We are determined to do more, and a ministerial meeting of the Twelve will be taking place on 25 September to consider future action. We shall not tolerate such behavior by supposedly responsible Governments.
So, too, the problem of drugs demands an urgent collective effort. International drug trafficking is now on a scale that threatens to undermine whole societies. Close international co-operation is required to defeat this evil trade. We shall play our part at the World Conference in Vienna next June - a valuable initiative by the Secretary-General.
Economic issues have been central to the development of the European Community. It is now the world's largest trade grouping, accounting for 20 per cent of world trade. We are the world's largest importer, in particular of products from developing countries, amounting to $US 105 billion in 1985. Our
320 million citizens are linked to some 400 million people in Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific through our trade and aid agreements with their countries. We are collectively the largest donors of aid in the world. This economic weight gives us certain responsibilities towards the world's trading systems and we take these responsibilities seriously.
Since the Second World War, growth in world trade has been stimulated by the progressive dismantling of the tariff barriers that existed between the two world wars. Nevertheless there are strains in the world trading system. Old traditional industries in the Western world have faced massive contraction as comparative advantage has passed to the newly industrialized countries, with traumatic social changes for those involved. Pressures for import controls have grown. They look like easy solutions, but they are not.
Protectionism above all penalizes developing countries by reducing access to prime markets in developed countries. In the developed countries themselves, protectionism penalizes consumers by increasing prices and restricting choice and exporters by increasing their production costs. ProtsGfeicnisa is self-defeating. A spiral of retaliatory protectionist measures would have disastrous effects on world trade, particularly for the third world. Let us always remember that trade fosters growth.
The contracting parties of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) have just concluded their ministerial meeting at Punt a del Este at which an important agreement has been reached to launch a new round of multilateral trade negotiations. The Community has worked hard for a successful outcome. Multilateral trade negotiations serve two purposes: to renew the GATT system, bringing it up-to-date with the realities of world trade, and to pursue trade liberalization by allowing countries to make concessions multi later ally that they may find difficult to make bilaterally. If we all share the burden of adjustment, we spread the pain. We are fully committed to this process.
You may ask what the Community is doing to give effect to these admirable principles. Let me give two brief examples:
First, in the textiles sector, the Community has achieved a. remarkable degree of restructuring. The Community is glad that the new Multi-Fiber Arrangement agreed in July foresees the application of GATT rules to trade in textiles as a final objective and calls for all participants to co-operate in the progressive liberalization of the textile trade. The Community also argued strongly for the particularly favorable treatment that the new Multi-Fiber Agreement gives to the
least developed countries.
Second, agriculture is a major political issue, and one that mnst be tackled urgently. There has been a revolution in food production in the last 10 years. New technology has meant new fertilizers, fatter cattle, new types of grain and rice, more efficient storage. India is now exporting food. China is virtually self-sufficient. These are great success stories which serve as an inspiration to those struggling to overcome food shortages.
Ironically, more plus more can equal less. Too much food in some countries can aggravate food shortages in others.Expensive producers growing more can cause poorer producers to grow less. The result is a tragic paradox: that even in an age of plenty, famine persists. Meanwhile trade disputes become political conflicts, as countries compete to subsidize their food exports, and dispose of their growing surpluses.
We have to address these problems now. While recognizing the importance of agriculture for the well-being of rural communities, the Tokyo Summit agreed on the need "to redirect policies and adjust the structure of agricultural production in the light of world demand". The Community is committed to this. Heads of Government agreed at the European Council in The Hague in June that "a better control of total production must be ensured so that it is better adjusted to the market situation". This is not the responsibility of one country or group of countries. The problem is world-wide, and we can only deal with it - in the words of the Tokyo declaration - in co-operation with each other. Last week, GATT Ministers agreed to launch a new GATT round, including negotiations on agriculture. We have no more important task than to make this a success. The Tokyo Summit was also an important opportunity to review progress on the debt problem. The annual meetings of the International Monetary Fund (IMP) and World Bank are less than a week away, so I shall be brief.
The last year has seen important changes. International recovery may be in its fourth year, but the international economic environment remains unfavorable. Growth is still unevenly distributed throughout the world and growth rates are still lower than we want. Lower interest rates help us all, even if in real terms they are still high by historical standards. Oil price falls help many but severely affect others, and commodity prices generally remain weak. Many debtors have undertakes courageous adjustment programs of the industrialized
countries have reduced the imbalances of the early eighties which aggravated the difficulties facing debtors.
The debt burden remains heavy for a number of countries. The Community fully supports the United States initiative for sustained growth, which aims to meet the legitimate aspirations of debtor countries for growth through structural adjustment and economic liberalization with the necessary external financing. Or, in plain language, it recognizes that we sink or swim together. Those who expected instant results misunderstand the initiative and the problem's complexity. But much has been achieved. The World Bank has stepped up its policy-based loans. The IMF and World Bank are working more closely together. And, in recent weeks, they have shown a flexible and imaginative approach to the very difficult problems faced by the oil-producing countries.
There has been much criticism that resource flows have declined. This may be so for the banks in the short term: it partly reflects falling short-term demand for loans. But the banks have a crucial role to play in support of the United States initiative. We are confident they will rise to that challenge. For their part the creditor countries are responding to the need to ensure adequate finance for adjustment through rescheduling at the Paris Club-, new export credits; aid program; and support for the international monetary bodies. The Twelve will support a general capital increase for the IBRD at the appropriate time, and they welcome progress towards a 3US 12 billion replenishment, IDA-VIII, to help the poorer countries.
One way or another, be it bilaterally, multilaterally or through the institutions of the European Community, we provide one third of the world's official development assistance. We shall maintain and, where appropriate, expand
these flows to meet the commitments we have made individually to targets established by the United Nations.
The problems of Africa are particularly acute. As the special session recognized in May, many countries face grave economic problems. But natural disasters such as droughts and man-made disasters such as civil war have made them far worse. We extend particular sympathy to the people of Cameroon who have suffered the appalling natural calamity of Lake Nyos.
At the special session on Africa, African countries acknowledged the role they themselves must play. The industrialized countries, including the Twelve, agreed on the importance of increasing official development assistance to Africa, and on improving its quality and effectiveness. We maintain substantial bilateral aid programs and contribute to international and regional development agencies; in addition, we are making a substantial collective contribution through the Lome III Convention and other association and co-operation agreements.
Finally, this Organization itself faces a very serious problems how to confront its own financial crisis. A number of countries, over the years, have either delayed payments or withheld contributions. The Twelve collectively provide just under 30 per cent of the United Nations budget. We believe that every State should sect its legal obligations. The Secretary-General has shown courage in proposing certain measures, endorsed by the General Assembly at its resumed session in the Spring, to deal with the short-term problem. But further measures are required. There is a clear need for changes in the system which will produce broader consensus on financial issues and help overcome the reluctance of some Members to meet their financial obligations.
We are grateful for the work done by the Group of 18 high-level experts. We shall make a positive and constructive contribution to the discussion of their report. We support the creation of a new mechanism to consider the program and budget, structured so 53 to ensure effective decision-making and to contribute to greater rationalization and efficiency within the system. He are firm in our support for the Charter and for a strong and effective United Nations. Greater budgetary discipline, improved co-ordination, and rigorous adherence to priorities can only strengthen the Organization and ensure its future stability and vigor.
As this Session will once again demonstrate, the world faces many grave problems - too many to cover in one speech; and I have not attempted to do so. So I am also circulating today as document A/41/634 a memorandum as a companion piece to this speech, describing our position on a number of other issues to.which we also attach the highest importance.
Voltaire once observed that, in India and China, they believe that a prophet will come out of the West, whereas people in Europe expect their sages to come from the East. The lesson of this, perhaps, is that we all have something to learn from each other. The United Nations is a place to listen as much as to speak. And if we do so, perhaps we shall find to our surprise that we can learn from each others' experiences and profit from each others' good will.
I have tried to show how our experience of co-operating together in the European Community has shaped our positions on a number of key issues facing this Assembly. I believe those positions, though ambitious in aim, are fair and realistic in practice. It is an approach which we believe fulfills the ideals to which this Organization is committed. In our search and support for freedom, peace, justice, democracy and prosperity for mankind, in offering our friendship to all who wish us well, we shall continue to pursue our duty to other nations, notably to those less fortunate than ourselves. At the same time we shall uphold and defend what we have built together.

At the outset. Sir, I extend to you once again the felicitations of my delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the forty-first session of the General Assembly, it is a matter of immense pleasure for me and the rest of my delegation that a distinguished diplomat from a close and friendly neighbor country has been elected to that high office. You bring to your position rich and varied experience. We are confident that you will guide the deliberations of this Assembly with distinction.
I also take this opportunity to express our appreciation to your predecessor, Mr. Jaime de Pinie's, for his skillful leadership during the deliberations of the fortieth session of the General Assembly.
I should like to convey our greetings to the Secretary-General, whom we are happy to see once again actively discharging his many onerous responsibilities. I hope that our Organization will continue to have the benefit of his experience and guidance for many years to come.
In the past year the United Nations - indeed the entire multilateral system -
has been subjected to severe strain and challenge. I am glad that, as he states in his report on the work of the Organization, the Secretary-General has found notable unanimity in the recognition of the continuing validity of the principles of the United Nations Charter and the need to strengthen title United Nations so that it may better meet the needs of the future. India is a founder BSeaber and its allegiance to the Organization and commitment to the principles of the Charter remain firm and unswerving.
As all of us are aware, the United Nations came into being in the wake of unparalleled death and destruction. The founding of the United Nations reflected the hopes and aspirations of humankind, which saw the need for a more rational world order. That vision is even more relevant today.
The international situation remains tense. The nuclear arms race and its extension into outer space, conflicts around the world and the world economic crisis endanger peace and international security. Nuclear weapons no longer threaten only States and nations, they threaten the very survival of man. In her address at the seventh summit of non-aligned Heads of State or Government, in New Delhi in March 1983, Prime Minister Indira Gandhi warned that
"Never before has our earth faced so much death and danger. The destructive power contained in nuclear stockpiles can kill human life, indeed all life, many times over and might well prevent its reappearance for ages to come."  What is at stake is civilization itself.
Last year, at the Geneva summit, the leaders of the Soviet Union and the United States declared that a nuclear war cannot be won and must not be fought. We call upon those two nations, which bear the major responsibility with regard to disarmament, to reinvigorate their dialog and take the logical follow-up steps to that assertion. We are glad that after a period of anxiety the two countries
appear to have resumed their efforts to make progress in this vital field. Their decisions will have consequences not only for their own peoples but for humanity as a whole. We trust that at their next meeting President Reagan aid General Secretary Gorbachev will reach important and meaningful agreements.
Other nuclear-weapon States must not shirk their responsibility either. A decision on their part in favor of nuclear disarmament could only have a positive effect. They should no longer take shelter behind the position that they will disarm only if the two super-Powers do.
Tl-e desire for peace is universal. There is increasing articulation of that feeling around the world, including in nuclear-weapon States, in legislatures and deliberative bodies, in universities and peace movements, aroong scientists and professionals - indeed, among all citizens.
Early this month, Heads of State or Government assembled at Harare for the eighth summit of non-aligned nations appealed to the two most powerful nuclear-weapon States to arrest the trend towards confrontation and conflict. Earlier, the leaders participating in the six-nation, five-continent peace initiative urged an immediate moratorium on nuclear tests and offered a concrete Program of verification. A large number of Governments have welcomed this; many Parliaments have expressed enthusiasm and support. We welcome the positive response of the Soviet Union to the appeal by the Six in the Mexico Declaration by extending its unilateral moratorium on nuclear testing for a third time, now until January 1987. We hope the United States will respond positively.
The United Nations has a unique role to play in all issues of disarmament. Regrettably, the negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament have failed to bring about any positive steps on the vital issues of a nuclear test ban, the cessation of the nuclear arras race, nuclear disarmament and the prevention of nuclear war. It is thus more urgently necessary for the General Assembly to put forward new ideas and mobilize support for disarmament measures. Many issues that were before the United Nations at the time of its inception continue to linger on its agenda. Our pride in the freedom achieved by formerly dependent peoples is abridged by the failure to remove the last vestiges of colonialism in Africa and the still unfulfilled promise of a homeland for the Palestinian people.
Last week we focused on Namibia at a special session of the General Assembly. Namibia, which is solely the responsibility of the United Nations, mirrors a situation where every value enshrined in the Charter stands challenged. ECforts towards freedom there have been continually frustrated by those who had concurred in the plan for independence of Namibia charted in Security Council resolution 435 (1978). This is the bitter twist of irony. Necessary consequent action by the Security Council has received support from all Members except those that have direct commercial stakes in the area and that also have the power to annul the collective will with their veto. It is not Namibia that is isolated; it is those who have sought to isolate Namibia that are.
In South Africa apartheid survives and is the root cause of violence and instability in the region. Every initiative for a peaceful resolution has been rejected by the Pretoria regime. Since the last session of the General Assembly a major effort was made by the Commonwealth to bring about a dialog between the minority who rule and the majority who are ruled in South Africa. An Eminent Persons Group comprising distinguished personalities from seven Commonwealth countries visited South Africa for this purpose. However, the authorities in Pretoria live in a world all their own. Every meaningful proposal was spurned. The international community has no option but to impose comprehensive and mandatory sanctions against South Africa in accordance with Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter as the only peaceful means to compel the South African regime to dismantle apartheid. The alternative would be too ghastly to contemplate.
South Africa cannot withstand the tide of history. The abhorrent system of apartheid will collapse. In the words of Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi:
"Racism cannot last. People's aspirations cannot be uncaged in a prison. Nelson Mandela and his people will be free"-
The presence of' great Powers continues to increase in the Indian Ocean. Formation of command structures and other forms of outside military presence and pressures negate the decision of the General Assembly to declare the Indian Ocean as a zone of peace. The convening of the Conference on the Indian Ocean at Colombo has been inordinately delayed because of the unhelpful attitude adopted by some. The Non-Aligned Movement has suggested 1988 as a finite target at which we must aim, and we hope the early convening of the Conference no longer remains an illusion.
We remain deeply concerned over the situation in west Asia. The people of Palestine continue to languish without a homeland of their own. Israel's arrogant defiance of the will of the international community, the consolidation of its stranglehold over the occupied territories: all constitute sad chapters in a seemingly endless tragedy.
We call for the complete and unconditional withdrawal of Israel from the Palestinian and other Arab territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem. We support the exercise of the right by the people of Palestine, under the leadership of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), to self-determination and the establishment of an independent sovereign State in Palestine. The right of all States in the region to live in peace within secure and recognized borders, including the independent State of Palestine, must be assured.
We would like to underscore once again the importance of the early convening of the International Conference on the Middle East in accordance with General Assembly resolution 38/58 Cj that would constitute a major contribution by the United Nations towards the achievement of a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict.
The continuing conflict between Iran and Iraq causes us deep concern and anguish. Both these nations are heirs to great and proud civilizations. Both are
endowed with the riches of nature and talented peoples. Yet for six long years death and destruction have prevented the channeling of their resources to productive activities. As a country which has friendly ties with both, we have had and shall continue to have close consultations with them to bring this tragic conflict to an end.
Of late, we have seen a disturbing trend of violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States by powerful nations. Nicaragua has the right to follow its national policies without outside intimidation or interference. All differences must be settled through negotiations. We have extended our full support to the Contadora process. Whether in Central America and the Caribbean or in the Mediterranean, the security and independence of non-aligned countries must be respected. No nation has the right to take the law into its own hands. Policies of domination must give way to greater understanding and respect for the aspirations of the States.
Cyprus remains divided, with part of its territory under foreign occupation. We reiterate our solidarity with its people and reaffirm our support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a non-aligned and unified Republic. We have noted the efforts made by the Secretary-General to bring about a satisfactory resolution of this issue.
In relation to Afghanistan and South-West Asia, I reiterate that the situation can be resolved only through an overall political settlement based on the principles set out in the New Delhi Declaration. We support the efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
The differences in South-East Asia call for a political solution. There can be no military solution, what is needed is a balanced approach that takes into account security and other considerations of all the countries in the region and
eliminates outside interference. We urge all States in the region to undertake a dialog to resolve the differences and establish durable peace.
The menace of terrorism is spreading. Assassinations, hijackings, bombings have meant the death of hundreds of men, women and children and have resulted in the loss of innocent lives, the mindless destruction of property and the jeopardizing of fundamental freedoms. I wish to reiterate the total opposition of my delegation to all acts of terrorism, whether committed by individuals, groups or States. All countries must co-operate in fighting this common scourge within the framework of internationally accepted norms.
At the same time, we support the struggle of people under colonial and racist regimes and all forms of foreign domination and occupation and of the national liberation movements against their oppressors. Their struggle is legitimate and must not be confused with terrorism.
The process of regional co-operation in South Asia, with which you, Mr. President, have such a close personal involvement, culminated in the formation of the South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation (SAARC). The seven nations of the region, which face similar problems, are determined to nurture and foster this process of regional co-operation. SAARC will provide a vehicle for this purpose. India will have the privilege to serve as host to the second summit of SAARC leaders this November.
Tensions and instability can arise also from the unsatisfactory state of the world economy. The economic situation continues to cause concern and is fraught with uncertainties which carry grave implications for the future,, Expansion of world output and trade has slowed considerably, and developing countries in particular continue to be confronted with exceptionally difficult circumstances. Mechanisms of international co-operation which might have helped to mitigate their problems have been rendered largely ineffective. The international economic system remains inherently iniquitous.
The developing countries have been urged to undertake drastic adjustments in the face of an unhelpful' international economic environment. Their efforts are hampered by intensified protectionist barriers, sharply declining prices of commodity exports and an increasingly intolerable debt burden. The severity of adjustment measures demanded of them has not only affected development prospects but has in many cases led to social and political tensions and unrest. Such adjustment to an adverse environment, which the developing countries have had no hand in shaping, really means accommodation by them to the policies and national interests of developed countries. There is thus a real danger that outside pressures may lead to an infringement of the economic sovereignty and be inimical to the political stability of developing countries. While it is obviously necessary for the developing countries to implement economic policies which will restore momentum to their economic growth, they must resolutely reject so-called solutions which would have the effect of undermining stable, democratic political structures.
Along with the economic slow-down that has characterized the first half of this decade, there has been a marked change in the attitude of the developed countries, to the detriment of the interests of the developing countries. This attitude can be described as apathy with regard to the fundamental problems of poverty and development. It is, therefore, necessary to restate the basic consensus that has guided the international community in the post-war period; namely, that the development problem is a common concern of mankind and requires the co-operation of rich and poor nations alike. A retreat from that consensus and from the responsibilities associated with it will lead to an even deeper economic crisis. Enlightened co-operation in our interdependent world is no longer a luxury of choice but a necessity.
The uncertainties of today can be turned into the opportunities of tomorrow. This would, however, require breathing new life into mechanisms and modalities of economic co-operation. On their part, the developing countries are ready in the most pragmatic and constructive spirit to resume such a dialog. In this context, we have noted with interest the proposal of the Secretary-General to convene a ministerial-level meeting of the Economic and Social Council to reach an agreement on the issues which need to be addressed most urgently. We are willing to explore all avenues which could lead to a resumption of meaningful dialog and co-operation in the areas of vital economic concern.
The major economic imbalances which exist in the world economy also reflect the choices before us. If traditional approaches are continued, the vast surpluses and the corresponding deficits which are accumulating in some parts of the world could have a dangerous destabilizing effect. Alternatively, with bold and imaginative measures, they could be used to expand the productive capacity and the potentially vast markets of the developing countries, which could lead to a quantum increase in trade and growth rates around the globe. Low inflation rates and the benefits which industrial countries derive from the low commodity and energy prices should make it easier for them to undertake such measures. It is our firm belief that sustained growth in the world economy for the benefit of all would not be possible without a reactivation of the development momentum of developing countries. It is not sufficient merely to promote growth in the developed countries. Any significant improvement in the material conditions of life - which is the fundamental purpose of development - cannot come about entirely through the trickle-down effect of growth in industrial countries. We have to face the development issue squarely and evolve co-operative action to deal with it.
The major imbalances in the world economy, the mounting burdens of external debt, the intensifying protectionism and the falling commodity prices reflect deeper structural deficiencies in the international economic order which need to be urgently addressed. In this regard, we support the proposal made by the Group of 24 in Washington to constitute a representative committee of ministers to examine further the different proposals for monetary improvement and reform. Such an examination could be an important preparatory process leading towards the convening of an international conference on money and finance for development. The forthcoming meeting of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) would also provide an important opportunity to consider in an integrated and comprehensive manner the interrelated areas of money, finance, trade and development; and we would urge all countries to co-operate fully in reaching an early agreement on the agenda and other issues related to it. It is particularly important that the role and mandate of UNCTAD in dealing with trade and development policies should be pursued and further strengthened.
In Punta del Este last week agreement was reached on the launching of a new round of multilateral trade negotiations to be called the Uruguay Round. We hope that these negotiations will result in the removal of protectionist barriers against the export products of developing countries.
One of the most critical issues as regards the development problem in the years ahead was highlighted by the 1986 report of the United Nations Committee on Development Planning, namely, that developing countries face a serious financing
gap over the next decade and that, without the restoration of development finance, prospects for growth would remain negligible and unable to satisfy even minimum aspirations for employment creation and higher living standards. We fully support the proposal of the eminent persons comprising the Committee on Development Planning for the doubling of development finance to provide an additional $25 billion per year, which they have contended is the minimum necessary condition for restoring moderate sustained growth in the developing world.
The General Assembly has decided to put on its agenda a separate item entitled -External debt crisis and development". This is an appropriate recognition of the severity of the debt and development crisis. Ke believe that in our search for a solution to this important issue measures to prevent the recurrence and spread of this problem should form an important element.
The developing countries and the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries remain deeply concerned about the critical economic situation in Africa. Within their capacities, the developing countries, including India, are doing their utmost to help the African countries overcome the critical situation. On earlier occasions ny delegation has outlined the concrete steps that we have taken. These are being continued and further expanded, in the context of the United Nations Program of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990, adopted by the General Assembly at its thirteenth special session, we shall continue to do our utmost to support the efforts of the African countries in areas where the skills and capabilities that we have acquired in our development experience have particular relevance.
We are concerned that the current financial crisis facing the United Nations remains acute, despite the efforts made by many Member States to expedite their payments. Thus, the United Nations faces a situation in which it will not be able to carry out the work Program mandated by its legislative bodies. The crisis is above all a political crisis, arising from disregard for obligations flowing from the Charter and from lack of agreement among Member States on how to finance the Organization and its activities. We hope that wisdom will prevail and that a consensus will be achieved.
At the same time, it is also necessary to pay due heed to economies which can be achieved without undermining the Organization itself. In that context, we express our appreciation of the work done by the Group of High-level Intergovernmental Experts to Review the Efficiency of the Administrative and Financial Functioning of the United Nations. The United Nations must continue to play its vital role in the maintenance of international peace and security and in the promotion of development and international cooperation. We pledge our full oo-operation to that end.
In his very first cress to the General Assembly Jawaharlal Nehru warned that it was becoming increasingly apparent that if we did not move with speed towards a world order, we should be left with order in the world. Secretary-General Perez de Cuellar in his first report to the General Assembly similarly warned of the approach of a "new international anarchy". Nearly 40 years separate us from Jawaharlal Nehru's warning; only four years from the caution addressed to us by the Secretary General.But their strength and relevance endure. A stable world order my be one which is founded on ethics and international morality. Political stratagems divorced from morality may hold out the promise of short-term advantage, but they cannot provide the basis of any ensuring settlement. The durable world order to which we aspire must be based on justice, equity and mutual advantage. That is the goal to which the United Nations and all countries individually must dedicate themselves.




This session of the Assembly opens the fifth decade of the United Nations. I hope that it will begin an era in which this body will come closer to realizing the dreams of its founding fathers.
Their ideals were inspired and inspiring: safeguarding the principles of universality and equality, a genuine desire to maintain international peace and security, encouraging international cooperation in solving global problems and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Unfortunately, those lofty principles have been vitiated and perverted beyond recognition. Extremists have seized this body. They have compelled it to shun the only peace treaty in the Middle East - the Camp David Accords. They have forced upon it an annual ritual of adopting dozens of distorted and irrelevant resolutions relating to my country. In clinging to these barren exercises, the United Nations spends precious time and funds, resources that could profitably be used to combat
hunger and poverty.
These and other issues remain unresolved, however, and they demand serious and responsible attention. First among them is the repugnant reign of apartheid in South Africa.
Israel, founded upon basic moral and democratic values, cannot remain silent in the face of racial discrimination, wherever it nay occur.. We reject and condemn apartheid as a political, social and economic system. Israel also believes that violence is not the path to reform in South Africa. We must urgently foster a climate that will facilitate a political settlement if we are to avoid a further drift towards economic chaos, suffering and bloodshed. We hope responsible leaders on all sides will act to create such a climate and that the Government of South Africa will initiate negotiations that will satisfy the legitimate political aspirations of all South Africans, regardless of race or color.

In the heart of the African continent many continue to suffer from hunger, disease and poverty. There is a growing awareness around the world of the need to provide help. People must be fed right now. We have contributed to that effort, but we also believe that we must help countries afflicted by hunger to develop the long-term means to prevent its recurrence and to set their economies on the road to development and growth.
This past year the General Assembly convened a special session on the critical economic situation in Africa. The Organization of African unity (OAU) has outlined a development strategy that is reminiscent of Israel's own development experience. Israel announced at that special session its readiness to make immediate contributions to the attainment of those goals. We offered to share our experience in agriculture and desertification, in medicine and education and in the general field of economic development. Many in Africa remember our earlier contributions in this field. Our experience has been gained in 28 years of assistance by Israel to more than 100 countries in Asia, Africa and Latin America. We have trained over 55,000 professionals from developing countries. We have shared our experience with the specialized agencies of the United Nations. And we are ready and willing to do more.
Many of those African States that severed relations with Israel in 1973 and 1974 are now in the process of resuming those relations. I wish to commend the leadership and courage of the Heads of State who have gone on to re-establish formal diplomatic ties with us despite the pressures exerted upon them. We extend the hand of friendship and co-operation to all African nations and we expect many more countries to resume full diplomatic relations with Israel in the near future.
The Middle East, with its vast resources of land and minerals, has within it the potential to leap into a new age in the twenty-first century - an age of great economic prosperity and a better life for millions. But that hope hangs on the outcome of a precarious contest between those who seek progress and those who continually plunge the region into turmoil and hatred.
Perhaps the most tragic instance of the fanaticism that plagues our region is the cruel war waged by Iran and Iraq for the past six years. That war has claimed well over a million casualties; it has reintroduced outlawed means of warfare such as gas and chemical weapons and the wholesale torture of prisoners; it has hurt the entire world by threatening freedom of navigation and the free flow of oil. It is a sad commentary that, despite their various proclamations, those two warring Governments show no intention whatsoever of genuinely seeking ways to stop the horrible carnage.
Another instance of the reign of fanaticism and its terrible human cost is Lebanon. The tragedy is rooted in the chronic absence of an effective Government able to control and reconcile the warring factions. Without such a strong central authority, Lebanon has been unable to discharge the most elementary obligations of government - the control of one's territory against lawlessness and terror, terror directed against one's own citizens and against the citizens of neighboring States.
The first to pay for that anarchy have been the Lebanese themselves. Over 100,000 were slaughtered in the civil war of 1975-1976 and thousands of others have been killed since in sectarian clashes. Lebanon's Government has set no effective jurisdiction over any part of the country: not over the Bekaa Valley or Tripoli, where 20,000 Syrian troops physically occupy Lebanese territory; not over the Shouf Mountains; not even over Beirut itself. Such conditions encourage the reign of the gun, the rocket and the bomb throughout Lebanon. Naturally, the southern part of the country has not been exempt from that dismal pattern. Beginning with the PLO, various terrorist groups have used the south as a staging area for terrorist attacks against Israel. Those who expected that a "Pax Syriana" would pacify Lebanon were hopelessly deluded,.for Syrian domination of Lebanon has meant that Syria has been playing off one factor against another, as well as using Lebanon as a base for proxy terror attacks against Israel
and against targets world-wide.
That Syrian strategy, now shared by Iran, should concern the entire international community. As for Israel, we have one, and only one, objective regarding Lebanon: to protect northern Israel against attacks launched from Lebanon. This is self-defense in its simplest form. We shall not let Israeli citizens pay with their lives for Lebanon's failure to control its territory. We shall continue to take the necessary measures to defend our people. We hope that Lebanon will produce an effective Government with which we can agree on permanent security arrangements. In the meantime we shall continue to work with any Lebanese party genuinely interested in preventing terror in the South of Lebanon and in the North of Israel.
The United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) has tried to assist in bringing stability to the area. It has performed a useful role. It has suffered painful casualties in the process, including losses sustained in a recent rash of murderous attacks. We extend ou£r deepest condolences to the bereaved families end their Governments. We must be clear, however, on what role UNIFIL can and cannot play. International forces are most effective when they serve as buffers between two States that share a commitment to pacifying their common border. Unlike Israel's neighbors on two other borders, that is not the case with Lebanon. That is why UNIFIL, unlike the multinational Force in the Sinai and the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) in the Golan Heights, has been unable to act as an effective buffer, since the day it was established by the United Nations. Peace-keepers cannot be asked to combat terrorists. That role must be left to the Governments and the peoples in the area of turmoil. We shall continue to co-operate with UNIFIL, as we maintain the necessary security arrangements to defend our norther border.
Israel watches with concern the larger conflicts waged in our region: those between radicals and non-radicals, between conservative regimes and revolutionaries, among militant religious movements, and among the various dictatorships themselves. But there is little we can do to affect this tragic and chronic violence. Where we can act - where we have acted and shall continue to act - is in the limited confines of the dispute between the Arab States and Israel.
Ever since Israel's independence we have made every effort to achieve peace with our neighbors. Peace for us is a natural and integral part of our heritage. The Jewish people is a democratic and free people striving to rebuild its national life in the ancient - the only - homeland of the Jews. Israel is a haven for the persecuted, a land where ever Jew from whatever background feels at home. We can best achieve our ideals and goals in an atmosphere of peace and security. Hence, we cherish peace? we pray for it and we teach its blessings to our children. Our entire people rejoiced when, after decades of war which were forced upon us, we were able to build a bridge of peace with one of our Arab neighbors.
During the past year we have made special efforts to broaden that peace. In July, Prime Minister Peres visited Morocco for talks with King Hassan. We have made efforts to reinforce the peace treaty with Egypt and to solve the problems that are still outstanding. We hope we are on the threshold of a substantial improvement in the relations between our two countries. Such an improvement is vital in and of itself, and of even greater importance for the prospects for peace
with other Arab States.
A few days ago we marked the eighth anniversary of the signing of the Camp David accords. With the passage of time we can see that those accords were a turning-point in the history of the Middle East. They have proved decisively that there is a way out of the cycle of belligerency, and they have demonstrated unequivocally that there is no alternative to direct negotiations. To this very day they remain the one and only blueprint for accommodation and peace between Israel and its Arab neighbors. All attempts to bypass, nullify or denigrate the Camp David accords have failed. Those attempts have been unsuccessful because they have disregarded the minimal needs of all parties, because they were not rooted in achievable proposals acceptable to all the sides.
Camp David accords are still the leading parties to which everyone concerned with peace in the Middle East turns. Together they hold the key to progress towards peace. With its commitment to the accords, Egypt has gained in prestige and stature. Many of those in the Arab world who once attacked and boycotted it are now looking to Egypt to play a leading role in peace negotiations. The United States, of course, is equally sought after. Many have come to appreciate the positive influence it brings to bear on the political process in our region.
For its part, Israel remains anxious and willing to move the peace process forward without delay. The peace treaty with Egypt was intended to be the first in a series of treaties that together would constitute a comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israel conflict.
Those who are afraid of peace or who are seeking to evade peace with Israel are trying to promote an alternative to direct negotiations, and ultimately to peace itself, through an international conference. Let me repeat again: Experience proves that the only path to peace is through direct negotiations. Substitutes for such negotiations can only lead us away from peace. The history of our region provides anple evidence of this simple truth.
The Government of Israel has repeatedly called upon King Hussein of Jordan to enter into direct peace negotiations with Israel. We recognize that once he decides to respond to our call Jordan may face considerable opposition from some Arab quarters. That opposition, however, will not be deflected or appeased by such devices as an international conference. Ultimately, Jordan will have to decide whether the advantages of peace with Israel outweigh the risks and difficulties involved in making such a move. But Jordan must understand that its peace will have to be with Israel, not with an international body. The first sign of a
genuine willingness to move towards peace is a declared readiness to deal directly with one's former adversary. There is no other way to a genuine reconciliation.
We firmly believe that the absence of democracy and freedom in our region is a major obstacle to peace. Only democracy offers the guarantee of freedom, the hope of progress and the prospect of peace. We do not believe any people want war. We do not believe the Arab peoples want war. Wars of aggression are initiated by Governments that do not represent the will of their peoples and fail to reflect their aspirations. That is why we must hope that democratic Governments will prevail throughout the Middle East on a not too distant day, for on that day true and permanent peace will come to our region. To hasten the coming of that day we call on all countries interested in peace in the Middle East strongly to support direct talks between Jordan and Israel. We call on them strongly to signify their willingness to buttress and strengthen a peace settlement by declaring their readiness to endorse it immediately. In addition, the supporters of peace should undertake to extend whatever assistance and support may be needed by the Government and the people of Jordan to embark on an ambitious development Program that will accompany the implementation of the peace treaty. The rewards of peace must be swift and exemplary, and serve to belie the words of its opponents.
Our region - the entire world in fact - is plagued by the spread of Arab terrorism. There is no limit to its atrocities. Even places of worship are not immune to this wanton murder. The recent attack on a synagogue in Istanbul was merely the latest and deadliest in a series of such attacks on Jewish places of worship. But Jews are not the only victims. Arab terror has made a blood pact with terrorists from all over the world to fight the common enemy, of which Israel and Jews are merely a part. That enemy is the community of democratic nations. The fight against this menace is therefore the fight of all civilized and free nations.
The so-called PLO was the linchpin of this alliance in terror; it pioneered the art of hijacking, bombing, kidnapping and massacre on an international scale. In the decade preceding 1982 the PLO used its mini-State in Lebanon to train and arm terrorist groups from five continents, from left-wing extremists to neo-Nazi gangs. Libya, Syria and Iran joined in financing, training and arming the terrorists and providing them with safe havens.
Since our action in Lebanon in 1982, the PLO has disintegrated into a number of rival terrorist gangs, most of them mercenaries in the service of various Governments. Their one common objective is to sabotage any attempt at peace and stability. The legacy of terror that they have created has encouraged other terrorist groups, many of them possessed by a mad desire to spread anarchy and terror for no reason whatsoever.
Much has been said about ways to combat international terrorism, but little has been done. Terrorism will continue to take its toll as long as the terrorists believe they can kill with impunity and achieve legitimacy and their political goals in the process. They must be denied these victories. They must never be appeased. They must never be "understood". They must always be condemned and fought vigorously. If we are serious in our desire to rid ourselves of international terrorism, we must adopt a broad and comprehensive campaign against the terrorists.
We must expel the representatives of terrorist organizations, starting with the PLO, from all countries committed to the fight against terror. We should hunt down the terrorist killers. They must always be on the run. But no matter what measures we take against the killers themselves, they will not be enough. If we do not go to the source, to the regimes whose support and protection make terrorism possible, we will not succeed in rolling back the tide of terror. We must isolate
and punish those terrorist States. We should shut down their embassies, expel their diplomats, curtail trade with them, and co-ordinate a military response if they persist in attacking us. Those who refuse to address the problem of State-supported terrorism are not merely failing to solve the problem? they are
facilitating its expansion.
Last year, from this rostrum, I spoke of three major threats facing the countries of the Middle East: the escalating race in conventional arms, the dangers of nuclear weapons, and the grave problem of chemical warfare. Unfortunately, little if anything has been done to reduce those threats. In fact, in some ways the situation has worsened in the past year.
The most dramatic development has been the increased use of chemical weapons by Iraq in its war with Iran. This has been investigated by the united Nations and condemned by the President of the Security Council on behalf of its members. There is also considerable evidence that other States in the Middle East, most notably Syria, are developing a chemical warfare capability. The free world should pool information on this subject and adopt concerted measures to prevent the development or acquisition of chemical and biological weapons. We cannot afford to cower before dictatorships that stockpile these inhuman inventories, especially since these regimes have shown no hesitation in using them.
To our disappointment, negotiations on a nuclear-weapon-free zone among the States in the region have yet to begin. It is our firm belief that, in an area as sensitive as the Middle East, the most effective and credible barrier to proliferation would be a freely and directly negotiated convention establishing a zone free of nuclear weapons. The Soviet Union and other socialist countries were among those which supported the establishment of our State in 1948. But things have changed. With the exception of Romania, all the Eastern-bloc countries have severed their diplomatic ties with us and adopted a one-sided policy towards the Middle East. We welcome, of course, any sincere attempt at improving relations and re-establishing diplomatic ties between us and any Eastern European country.
This year, for the first time in nearly 20 years, an official meeting took place in Helsinki between representatives of Israel and the Soviet Union. We hope that it is a sign of a positive change in the policy of the Soviet Union towards Israel. Without such a renewal of diplomatic relations and without a major change in the Soviet Union's policy towards Soviet Jews - especially the policy that prevents them from exercising their basic right of repatriation to Israel - it is difficult to see how the Soviet Union could contribute in any way to the attainment of peace in our region.
The plight of our Jewish brethren in the Soviet Union has been raised countless times by Israel's representatives and by world leaders; yet the tragic suffering continues. The hope that a new leadership in the Soviet Union would bring with it an improvement in the situation of Soviet Jewry has, so far, not been borne out. The condition of Soviet Jews, especially those among them wishing to leave for Israel, has deteriorated still further.
In a country of over 100 nationalities, speaking over 100 languages, Jews remain the only officially recognized nationality in the Soviet Union denied the right to maintain its cultural heritage and pass it on to the next generation. They are forbidden to study their ancient language, Hebrew. Throughout the entire length and breadth of the Soviet Union there is not a single Jewish school where Jews may study their history, literature and traditions.
In recent years, hundreds of thousands of Jews from the Soviet Union have expressed their desire to join their people in Israel. But the Soviet authorities have effectively stopped Jewish emigration; less than 500 Jews were allowed to leave during the first eight months of this year. Thousands have had their requests for exit permits repeatedly refused on the flimsiest of pretexts; as punishment for daring to apply to leave, they have been subjected to all manner of harassment and reprisals. Among those "refuseniks" are the prisoners-of-Zion, who have been subjected to arrests and lengthy terms of imprisonment on trumped-up charges. The real reason for their imprisonment is painfully clear: it is their insistence on their right to emigrate to Israel and their right to study Hebrew and persevere in their Jewish heritage.
The Soviet policy towards Soviet Jews is a flagrant violation of the International Convention on Human Rights, to which the Soviet Union is a signatory. It is totally contrary to the letter and spirit of the Helsinki Accords. The refusal of the Soviet Government to fulfill its most elementary humanitarian obligations must weigh heavily in the considerations of all who would contemplate entering into agreements with the Soviet Union on any subject.
Prom this rostrum, I call upon Governments and people of good will everywhere to urge the Soviet Government to bring its behavior towards Soviet Jews into line with universally accepted international standards. We in Israel will not rest until every Jew in the Soviet Union is permitted to exercise his right to emigrate and until Jews are free to follow their ancestral traditions and faith.
Another beleaguered Jewish community are the Jews of Syria. They are subjected by the Syrian regime to discrimination and restrictive policies. They are not free to live wherever they wish. Several hundred young Jewish women cannot
find husbands in the Jewish community. The Syrian Government has callously refused to allow then to leave the country so that they may marry within their faith and establish families. Jews who wish to travel abroad must leave their families behind as living hostages to ensure the travelers return. All that, too, is another instance of flagrant violation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, to which Syria is a signatory.
None of the problems I have described, including those relating to our region, is insoluble. They can be resolved if the Governments involved muster genuine good will, we turn again to the leaders of our Arab neighbors with an outstretched hand of peace. Let us bring an end to belligerency and hatred. Let us make real the hopes for a new era of understanding and coexistence. We shall not spare any effort in this quest, nor will we give up hope that it will bear fruit.
The eyes and hearts of millions of human beings who are wasting away from hunger and poverty, who live under oppressive regimes that deny them basic human rights, who are victims of barbaric terror, are turned towards us in the hope that we can alleviate their suffering. They look to us, to this body, for the hope of a better future. We cannot let them down and still claim fidelity to the ideals of this Organization. We bear the responsibility to begin action now for their sakes and for the sake of our place in history. Let us not forsake them, or our aspirations for a better and safer world.
Mr. President, I congratulate you on your election. We have a great deal of work to get through at this session. I know from my meeting with you yesterday that you will guide us skilfully through the rough water we will inevitably meet. Let me say, too, how good it is to see the Secretary-General restored to full health. We need his wisdom and courage at this time.
I appear here today as the representative of a small country from the southern reaches of the vast Pacific Ocean. Forty years ago my country was amongst those which pledged their commitment to the objectives of this world Organization. How much nearer are we, today, to achieving those ideals? Enormous problems confront us. Technology has expanded humanity's horizons into outer space. But here on earth we have not yet succeeded in providing basic human needs - food, shelter, and at least a minimum degree of security - for all. Under the Charter we have all abjured the use or threat of force. Yet the most powerful nations among us seem unwilling to take the decisive step of rejecting the weapons of mass destruction that threaten us all. Today, more than ever before, small States need the protection that the Charter and this Organization were intended to give. The United Nations was intended to represent our interests, for the powerful are better able to look after themselves. If we who are small are not to be ignored by those who are mighty, then we must work together here to ensure the survival of this planet.
New Zealanders know from recent experience that this Organization can respond quickly and fairly to the needs of small States which call for its help.
In 1985 my country was suddenly embroiled in a dispute with France. It concerned the detonation of bombs fixed to a ship at a wharf in one of our harbors. A crewman of Dutch extraction lost his life. The circumstances were widely blazoned across the world press and need not be further recapitulated.
Despite lengthy bilateral negotiations we were not able to solve the problem. With France, we then turned to the United Nations for help in finding an acceptable solution. Both countries undertook to abide unconditionally by the United Nations arbitration. The Secretary-General took on the task himself. He made a ruling which both Governments accepted without reservation. It has been carried out by both of us. I want to record my Government's profound gratitude to the Secretary-General for the commendable way he carried out that task. Through his mediator efforts we have been able to bring to an end that unhappy episode.
Our experience in the field of decolonization has also shown us, once again, how this Organization can help us in fulfilling our obligations to bring dignity and self-respect to all people. My country is responsible for helping bring to nationhood a tiny territory in the South Pacific: Tokelau; remote, beautiful, but with few resources other than the fish in the sea around the three small atolls and the determination of its peoples. Our Government invited a United Nations visiting mission there in July to see the unique development issues confronting that atoll community. I am pleased to see members of the mission here today. We have found, as in the case of other island nations whose histories have been entwined with ours, that the United Nations could indeed make a useful and innovative contribution to the process leading to self-determination. That is an example that could well be followed again in another case in the South Pacific; and I shall return to that later.
It is clear that the United Nations can help if small nations shew that they want it to do so. Nobody believes that problems that have bedeviled us for years will be solved overnight. But one thing is clear: whatever the issue -international security, the right to live in freedom and peace, or freeing the shackles on international trade - the small and the vulnerable have much more in common with one another than with the big Powers. Separately, we may achieve a little*, together we may yet move mountains, perhaps even the Rockies and the Urals.
Today there is no greater incentive for us all to work together than the need to bring under control the fast-quickening nuclear-arms race. Arms control and disarmament are not pious goals; they are immediate and desperate imperatives. Nuclear weapons have become the subject of a monstrous exercise in self-perpetuation. We know now that none of us, even those in as remote a place as New Zealand, or more remote still, could escape the consequences of their use. All too graphically the scientists have shown us that.
The central point, surely, must be that, when you have arsenals that can destroy humanity, you can have no security. By their very nature, nuclear weapons subvert and distort the intention of Governments to provide security for their people. So-called nuclear logic always seems to require the next terrible step: the production of a new weapon to prevent the last from being used. The ceaseless search for balance is really endless escalation; security, like a desert mirage, is never reached. We sink further into insecurity and fear. The balance of terror has been raised one more notch. It is well named. And despite the truly awesome consumption of resources, it seems we are edging towards yet another new and uncontrolled level of arms technology and spending. An arms race in outer space must not be permitted. Where one nuclear giant leads, the other will surely follow.
Of course, the arms race does not exist in a vacuum. It is a reflection of deep-seated distrust and scarcely concealed hostility. Only earnest diplomatic action aimed at sincere detente will remove the distrust. Only decisive political action can end the arms race itself. No one underestimates the difficulty of managing the transition to a world without nuclear weapons, which must be the ultimate goal - but the nuclear "logic" that equates more nuclear weapons with greater security cannot be allowed to go on sabotaging the process of arms control and disarmament negotiations. What security is there, I ask, in a system under which mischance, malevolence or madness may entomb not only the nuclear Powers, but all of us?
With the fate of the world in their hands, how can the two major nuclear Powers continue to refuse to respond promptly and positively to the overtures each has made to the other? The leaders of the United States of America and the Soviet Union, separately and together, have given indications that progress can be made. The tentative steps they have taken seem to shew that there is common ground. They agree on the need for deep cuts in nuclear weapons. Their proposals now lie on the negotiating table. They must not just lie there. The political will of the major Powers to end the arms race will be judged by what they do now to narrow the negotiating gap between them. An old adage says: "Procrastination is the thief of time." Time is fast running out. The nations of the world, all but a handful of them non-nuclear, cannot wait much longer; they have waited too long already.
Nor can we, the small countries, simply conclude that it is a problem only for the nuclear Powers to solve. He must take a hand, together. New Zealand welcomes the successful conclusion earlier this week of the Stockholm Conference on Confidence-Building Measures and Disarmament in Europe. As earlier speakers from both East and West have noted, the agreement should make a significant contribution towards reducing tensions in Europe. That benefits not only Europe, but the wider international community. The agreement is most welcome after a long period of stalemate on arms control and disarmament negotiations. But it is only a beginning. We urge the larger Powers to get on with resolving their wider differences. Meanwhile there are things which the small can do, steps which we can take in co-operation with one another to encourage disarmament.
Among practicable arms control measures, the most urgent is a comprehensive test-ban treaty; one that would ban all testing by all nations, in all environments and for all time. No other single step would do so much to slow the remorseless advance of nuclear-weapon production and experimentation, or to establish confidence in the will of the nuclear Powers to eliminate nuclear weapons from the world's arsenals. It would be a truly universal arms control measure.
There may be more than one route to a comprehensive test-ban treaty. The ending of testing by any State, even temporarily, is a step forward and should be welcomed. A mutual moratorium by two or sore would be better still, even if a temporary one. All such steps give time for talk and delay disastrous escalation.
There may be other provisional measures involving all the nuclear-weapon States which would help establish confidence and encourage a commitment to negotiate a permanent ban on testing. But none of these can be a substitute for a comprehensive test ban. The New Zealand Government will again join with others in calling on the Conference on Disarmament to start immediately with the work of drawing up a comprehensive test-ban treaty. New Zealand, too, is ready to take part in an international system for monitoring a test ban. We have some facilities in place for monitoring testing in our own region and are preparing to improve them.
There is room for smaller powers to act in the regional sphere, too, in practical ways that the United Nations has recognized as valuable. For its part, New Zealand will not permit nuclear weapons in our country, even temporarily, as on visiting ships or aircraft. We intend to keep our land, our waters and our ports, and our air space nuclear-free.
With the members of the South Pacific Forum, an annual gathering of 13 independent states, we have moved to establish a nuclear-free zone in the South Pacific. The Rarotonga Treaty was adopted over a year ago now. It prohibits the acquisition, stationing or testing of nuclear weapons by any of its parties. This year's forum at Suva adopted three Protocols to the Treaty. These call on the major nuclear Powers to respect the zone. I am glad to be able to tell you that some have already indicated their willingness to sign these Protocols. The New Zealand Government, along with others in the region, hopes they will soon be endorsed by all those countries eligible to sign. But, the South Pacific will not be free of the scourge of nuclear testing until France accepts that the security concerns of a distant European Government should not thwart the legitimate desire of the nations of the South Pacific to live in peace and safety in a nuclear-free environment. For too long, far too long, the Pacific has been used as a testing-ground by the nuclear Powers. Two of them stopped testing there long ago. It is time for France to follow their example. I would note also, in passing, that contrary to what has been said earlier in this debate, the report of the Scientific Mission that visited the French testing site at Mururoa Atoll in 1983 does not provide a basis for asserting that those tests "are being carried out in unquestionably safe conditions," (A/41/PV.8, p. 71). That report specifically refused to rule out the possibility of serious damage to the Atoll and its surrounding environment in the longer-term future.
The South Pacific countries are increasingly confident of their place in the international community, certain of what binds them together, determined to preserve their cultures, committed to the principles of democracy and consensus and willing to work closely with those nations that genuinely pursue co-operation.
The micro-States in the vast ocean region that I come from present unique development challenges. New Zealand makes a major contribution, and we welcome the assistance of other countries in the region's development. Such assistance, however, is only one contribution towards economic growth. Equally important are fair and equitable returns for the region's limited resources, the produce of its |	land, its slowly expanding manufacturing exports and, most important, its fish.
All that calls for international co-operation.
The United Nations was involved earlier this year in another major step forward in the development of the Pacific. On 28 May the Trusteeship Council recommended that the Trusteeship Agreement over the Federated States of Micronesia, the Marshall Islands, Palau and the Northern Marianas should be terminated. At its
meeting at Suva, the South Pacific Forum welcomed that development. New Zealand was a party to the Forum's consensus. The peoples of those Territories have said what they want. That is decisive. The United Nations has discharged its responsibilities, and the process of decolonization is coming nearer to completion in the South Pacific.
There is a lesson here for New Caledonia. Our experience of decolonization has shown us that the United Nations can help bring about peaceful evolution. The South Pacific Forum has always regarded New Caledonia as a neighbor that should take its place as an independent member of the South Pacific community. It is, by history as well as by unchangeable geography, an integral part of the region. Unless its stability is preserved, the stability of the whole region and all its member States will be seriously affected. Forum members are concerned that the Territory's move to independence should take place peacefully. That means by negotiation. France clearly has the power to bring about change peacefully. It is deeply disappointing to us and to our South Pacific neighbors, therefore, that in the approach recently outlined by the present French Government it seems that independence is no longer its goal for New Caledonia. I noted this morning the statement of the French Minister for Overseas Departments and Territories, reported in today's Herald Tribune. He said:
"When Australia and New Zealand are advocating independence for New Caledonia, they are advocating independence for a territory that would be under Libyan control."
Such a claim is farcical. We are not supporting any faction of the independence movement in New Caledonia. We support true self-determination for all real New Caledonians. The South Pacific Forum leaders have made it clear that they want to maintain a dialog with all the parties to see if a more promising situation can be brought about. The Heads of Government of the countries members of the South  Pacific Forum decided last month to seek the re-inscription of New Caledonia on the United Nations list of Non-Self-Governing Territories. That move was strongly endorsed by the Heads of State or Government of the countries of the Non-Aligned Movement at their meeting at Harare. My delegation, with other South Pacific com tries, welcomes that support. We look forward to a positive decision by the Assembly and to a constructive solution to New Caledonia's travail.
We all know that economic stability and prosperity are a necessary condition for real security. The need for international action by the vulnerable is as pressing here as it is in any other field. New Zealand, like many developing countries that are reliant on commodity exports, depends for long-term economic growth on its ability to trade fairly in those areas in which it has a comparative advantage. Yet we are being prevented from doing so by the absurdities of a distorted world trading system. Agricultural trade has generally been excluded from the international trade rules and disciplines. It is the first area to be hit by new protectionist measures, especially non-tariff barriers; it is the main victim of domestic production subsidies which, in the large developed countries have reached a level that even they now recognize as unsustainable. But it is the rest of us, the efficient producers, who have to deal with the massive over-production dumped cm world markets and that brings down returns for everyone.
The problems of agriculture are a time-bomb ticking away under the world trading system. An explosion would threaten not just the prosperity of individual countries but global economic and political stability. That is why New Zealand attaches great importance to progress in a particular United Nations forum, that of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). The new round of negotiations recently launched at Punta del Este offers a vital opportunity for the international community to establish just and equitable rules for the conduct of agricultural trade. That will be the measure of the new round's success. It has to succeed. It will not succeed without pain, as New Zealand well knows. But if it fails, the credibility of the whole multilateral system will be thrown into question.
There is a need for international action on Africa, too. New Zealanders have been deeply moved by the plight of the sub-Saharan people, who continue to be afflicted by drought and famine. New Zealanders continue to work alongside the Government in supporting churches and other organizations undertaking rehabilitation projects. In the week before the special session on the critical economic situation in Africa they contributed substantially yet again to an international appeal, in this case Sport Aid.
The outcome of the special session was welcomed as a starting point for planning strategies for the future. The endeavors to work out practical measures to bring about an end to Africa's economic and developmental problems are encouraging. The co-operation and commitment with which the special session's deliberations were conducted must be sustained if its sound recommendations are to be put into effect.
New Zealanders have also been shocked by events in southern Africa - the violence in South Africa's black townships, the South African Government's further repression of rights and freedoms, the attacks on defenseless targets in neighboring countries, carried out simply to give a political message, and South Africa's obstruction of Namibian independence. For a while, it looked as though the entirely reasonable approach adopted by the Commonwealth Eminent Persons Group might be successful in bringing all parties in South Africa together to negotiate a new political dispensation. The South African Government's rejection of those efforts, signaled as it was by the contemporaneous and wanton bombing of neighboring capitals, is to be deplored. Negotiation is always the preferable way to bring about necessary and lasting changes acceptable to the majority. The chances of a negotiated end to South Africa's troubles now look slim indeed. Such as they are, they must be grasped, or a holocaust will surely follow.
The common theme in each issue I have raised is the need for united action. And in each case it is clear that the United Nations can play a crucial part, provided it has the support of those - the overwhelming majority of its Members -who are small, whose individual power is slight. It is disturbing, therefore, to see a weakening - even a conscious undermining - of the commitment to multilateral action. It is long-standing political indifference or, in some cases, hostility, which is the cause of the United Nations financial crisis. The selective withholding of contributions - a practice in which one major contributor has recently joined another - cannot be condoned. Nor can the action of those who allow dues to fall into arrears. But we have all contributed to the current crisis. We have pretended to believe that political problems could be solved simply by calling for more financial resources, more studies, more staff. Well, we were wrong. Entirely new measures are necessary, at once more drastic and more constructive.
The Secretary-General took prompt and decisive action earlier this year to avert the immediate cash crisis. His package of measures was designed to contain the crisis this year. This Assembly must look at the longer term. It must be resolute.
For we are in no better shape financially now than we were in April. We must recognize this in looking at the proposals before us both for economies and for reform. By a positive approach we emphasize to those owing funds that, while we cannot accept their disregard of binding Charter obligations, we are prepared to help ourselves. We small States have the most to lose - so we must find a way forward.
We in New Zealand welcome the report of the High Level Group. We strongly endorse its consensus findings. We commend them to the membership. We must go on to develop quickly an agreed approach to the reform of the program and budget process,, We must begin to run this important Organization like any self-respecting business - in the interests, that is, of its shareholders, the Member States. In the process, all of us are going to have to accept some curtailment of our favorite programs. We accept that. Compromise from all will be required.
Reform of our finances, management and administration is the first requirement, for it is the prerequisite to efficiency.
More important in the end, though, is the way this Organization goes about fulfilling the objectives of its Charter. I found myself in complete agreement with some observations two days ago of the Foreign Minister of the Netherlands and I- cannot do better, in conclusion, than to refer to them. He said:
"Differences in ideologies and cultures are a fact of life. But polarization and mutual recrimination are not their inevitable corollary." (A/41/PV.9, p. 46)
I would add that although they are a possible and, as things stand, all too likely corollary, they are the very things this Organization was founded to dispel and to avoid for the future. They can only lead to ever deepening mistrust and hostility. It is no use pretending we are not going to disagree and from time to time disagree bitterly. What we must do is face that reality and instead of papering over differences by what the Netherlands Minister rightly called "the practice of false consensus", we must seek in a real spirit of reconciliation, and friendship, to find constructive and hopefully permanent solutions to the great and serious questions that today threaten to divide much of the world into two hostile camps. We must not risk being seen by future generations as having spent our brief and precious time here preparing for war, rather than working for peace.


We all come in turn to this important rostrum to speak of our perception of the world, our combined efforts produce a picture of present day international realities.
What is the picture that we see today?
 At first glance, the interval since the last session of the General Assembly has done nothing to brighten the panorama of our time. The intervening period has been marked by a number of factors which have aggravated existing concerns. The arms race has not been halted; it is advancing in a steep spiral. The danger of its spreading to outer space has become more real. Dangerous hotbeds of armed conflict persist. In many parts of the world, misery and poverty are becoming more acute.
Despite all this, we still believe that the International Year of Peace will go down in history as something more than just a symbol of peace.
I should like to draw the Assembly's attention to some trends which enable us to speak of glimmers of light on the world's horizon. They should be noted by everyone of us, for they should strengthen our resolve to act even more vigorously. They should be noted by all the peoples, who are tired of bearing the burden of fear and anxiety. They should be noted by the world as a whole, which is becoming an increasingly interdependent and indivisible whole, and which may no longer be able to withstand strain and destruction.
Hope breeds optimism. In the words of Mikhail Gorbachev: "Everywhere in the world there is a growing conviction in the minds of the peoples and in political public circles and widely differing in their orientation and outlook that what is at stake is the survival of mankind and that the time has come for decisive and responsible action." Wfe see a glimmer of light in the fact that at a time so crucial for mankind the peoples of the world, and an increasing number of Governments, are becoming aware of the need to adopt a new way of thinking in line with the realities of the nuclear and space age.
The time is at hand when considerations of groups, blocs or ideologies are beginning to give way to the understanding that peace is the supreme value. Only if peace is translated from declarations >a x> practical action is there a chance for survival. This new way of thinking is bringing that truth into the foreground. Whole groups of countries, the Non-Aligned Movement, political parties, public organizations and anti-nuclear forces are putting forward promising ideas for ending the nuclear deadlock. A favorable background is emerging for
developing a dialog.
An exception to this trend is the policy pursued by the imperialist forces. This contrast, however, only emphasizes the general will for action, for concrete practical deeds.
It is becoming a fact of life that vast territories are being declared nuclear-weapon-free zones. Democratic majorities are taking such decisions through
democratic procedures.
Political leaders who claim that they are committed to democracy, should
become aware of the contradictions between their behavior and their declared principles. Instead of building up and counting warheads, they should be counting the votes of these who call for the complete elimination of weapons of mass destruction.
Unfortunately, in some countries the institutions of democracy are being outweighed by the immoral arithmetic of military superiority. But it is an indisputable fact that the call for action is no longer a voice crying in the wilderness. On the contrary, even in the wilderness of the Nevada desert calls are being heard for an end to nuclear testing. The Nevada explosions are new registered not only by us but also by United States scientists with their instruments installed near the Soviet city of Semipalatinsk.
At the same time, not a single seismograph in the world is registering nuclear explosions on our territory - not because of any lack of sensitivity on the part of the instruments, but because the Soviet Union is responsive to the will of the world community.
In pursuing the foreign policy proclaimed at the Twenty-seventh Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, our co lei try is taking specific, practical steps. One of the most important is the unilateral moratorium on nuclear explosions. This is precisely the kind of action that proves the sincerity of our intentions and the seriousness of our concern for the future of the world.
For more than a year now the Soviet testing sites have remained silent. Listen to this silence? it is very eloquent. If it were accompanied by a similar silence at United States test sites, that more than any words would tell mankind that what we are witnessing was the beginning of a movement towards realizing the
idea of a nuclear-free world.
Stopping the tests means not allowing the emergence of new types of nuclear
weapons and barring the way to the creation of nuclear space weapons. We call upon
the United States to join us in this forward march and not call us back to carrying
out explosions, as it proposed here yesterday. A bilateral moratorium, followed by
a multilateral one, is one of the most important links in the chain of actions
which could lead to the creation of a comprehensive system of international peace and security.
In its determination to make this a reality, the Soviet Union, together with other socialist countries, has submitted proposals on this subject for the Assembly's consideration. We are convinced that the creation of this system that would embrace the political, military, economic and humanitarian fields would be in
keeping with the interests of all States and peoples.
The sponsors of this proposal make no claim to have discovered a hitherto unknown political "continent". If there are any blank spots today they exist mainly in the field of concrete, practical measures. To clear the way for such action would indeed be a discovery of the highest order. The proposed bases for security are consonant with the principles of the United Nations Charter and designed to promote their implementation within the specific conditions of our day. Here, we are looking forward to a most democratic and constructive discussion and the collective creative efforts of all countries.
The idea of comprehensive security presupposes first and foremost material guarantees of peace, political and international legal safeguards and the establishment of principles of civilized and respectful relations among States. A safe world is a world of law and order, in which there is strict compliance with the united Nations Charter and respect for all rules of international law, for human rights and freedoms.
Our initiative contains an answer to the question of what should be done to save life on Earth. As we speak of this the abandoned villages in the area of the Chernobyl nuclear power plant stand before our eyes. That accident has meant for us more than grief over our losses and compassion for its victims. It has reinforced our anxiety for the future of the Earth. Chernobyl was a tragic mistake on the part of human beings working with the peaceful atom. But still less are there any guarantees against mistakes with the military uses of the atom. Given the existence in the world of 50,000 nuclear warheads, we are living on borrowed time and no one knows when that time will run out.
What should be done? Continue to play the game of nuclear roulette? It is
clear even now that, sooner or later, this could lead us to collective suicide and
self-destruction. There is only one way out: before it is too late, while there
is still time, the game played for insane stakes and in which there can be no
winner must be stopped. Stop once and for all this deadly gambling with nuclear death.
It is within the powers of the international community, the sole sovereign master of its own fate to do this. No single nuclear Power has the right to take decisions on behalf of all, and the USSR refuses to do so. In his historic statement of 15 January, the Soviet leader proposed something quite different - to scrap all nuclear weapons. Once again the criterion is experience.
Political responsibility is the opposite of political arrogance. The problem of nuclear testing clearly highlights these mutually incompatible approaches.
There are other facts. Look at the fate of the SALT I and SALT II treaties. They are being torn up now because they allow no room for equipping a 131st bomber with cruise missiles. One thousand, five hundred such missiles seemed too few, so
it was necessary to add 20 more.
The tribunal of history is merciless in its verdicts. If political leaders fail to take timely and responsible decisions, history will not forgive them. We have a chance to lay the foundations for lasting peace. Of course it is not just a matter of adopting yet another resolution. The United Nations must establish a system of values which gives the highest priority to practical actions.
Let ma emphasize that this is being stated by the representative of a nuclear Power. We never wanted to acquire nuclear weapons, but from the time we were forced to acquire them we have constantly sought to limit, reduce and eliminate them. We are not the last member of the "nuclear club", but we are proposing its dissolution. Let there be no mistake - we have our pride like anyone else. However, the prestige and dignity of a great Power are things we associate with the
equal security of all.
We are motivated by our sense of responsibility both to our own people and to other peoples. It is for this reason precisely that we are willing to agree to sensible compromises and make realistic concessions when we put forward proposals for the reduction of strategic offensive weapons and medium-range missiles. This reflects the new approach to the realities of the nuclear space age outlined most fully and comprehensively in Mikhail Gorbachev's report to the Twenty-Seventh Congress of our Party.
The sincerity of our intentions and the integrity of our position are matched by our determination to put an end to the dangerous course of world events. We are putting so much emphasis on the renunciation of nuclear-weapon tests because it is precisely this that is the real test of the sincerity of declarations.
Yesterday we heard the statement of the President of the United States. It is regrettable that the rostrum of the General Assembly was used in such a way. To respond point by point to that statement presents no problem. However, to enter into polemics would be to show a lack of respect for our audience. The subject under discussion is far too serious to turn it into a grindstone for sharpening political wit. Time is too precious to be wasted on refuting misconceptions and prejudices that distort reality and facts.
Nevertheless, there is one key point to which we must refer, because it is of fundamental importance. I am referring to the attempt to provide a philosophical rationale for the assertion that new sophisticated military technology is capable of reliably ensuring security. It is precisely that kind of philosophy that caused the tidal wave of armaments which has been growing year after year and now threatens to obliterate the Earth.
There is only one path to security - destroying existing weapons instead of replacing them with new ones. The technology of destruction must not be allowed to determine policy.
One can imagine the sigh of relief among people if they heard that in this International Year of Peace the United States, too, had decided to stop nuclear testing. That is what they had been expecting from the United States President,
I have been authorized to state that the Soviet Union is ready, at any time and anywhere, to sign a treaty on the total prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests. We are ready to do so here at the United Nations, so that the entire world community could become part of this great act and historical turning-point which would be a sign of respect for its will.
Words not matched by deeds are worthless, but words supported by deeds are a country's gold reserve.
We urge those who make verbal pronouncements in favor of eliminating nuclear weapons to follow up with practical deeds. Otherwise whatever they say about the inhumanity of nuclear weapons is no more than a rhetorical mirage behind which there looms an altogether different policy.
Its proponents iWe a favorite argument, verification. But that argument
increasingly resembles a tattered curtain. Broadly speaking, there is no longer
any problem of verification. In the conviction that there can be no trust without
verification, the Soviet Union is open to any form or method of verification.
In our view the summit conference of the non-aligned countries at Harare made some very valuable recommendations in this respect. The United Nations could support the proposals of the Delhi Six - Argentina, Greece, India, Mexico, Tanzania and Sweden - on monitoring compliance with the obligation not to carry out nuclear tests. The Soviet Union will accept recommendations formulated under the auspices of the United Nations.
We agree with those States which believe that the question whether mankind will live in a nuclear or a nuclear-free world must be decided by the whole world community and not by a small group of nuclear Powers.
This also applies fully to the future of outer space, for near-Earth space is the common heritage of mankind and should be used for the benefit of all. However, if weapons gat into space, this heritage would become a threat to all? just two or three States enjoying the status of military-space Powers would then dominate the rest of the world.
Is that what we want? Do we want a military-space fiefdom to be established? The question is posed by the course of events, which may become tragic for
international relations as a whole. Therefore we shall continue to work to protect outer space from attempts to turn it into a military domain of one or two Powers.
Today those designs are being camouflaged with high-sounding pronouncements about a defense program, which supposedly would do away with the threat of attack once and for all. One hears moving and soul-stirring stories about a dream which when realized would free mankind from the fear of nuclear death. Evil designs are being purveyed as good intentions, and swords as shields.
Let no one be misled by such talk. It serves to conceal an attack against the main pillar of stability, the anti-ball is tic-missile Treaty. The intention is to get the Treaty out of the way within a time frame of seven years. Here everything is being very carefully calculated, for it is precisely in seven years that they plan to prepare space weapons for deployment.
The question is. What for? Would it not be more sensible to work for an agreement on the complete elimination of nuclear missiles, whether strategic, medium-range or any other, as we are proposing?
The answer is simple; whatever is done to disguise it, the so-called defensive space shield is being designed to carry out a first strike with impunity. The first strike could become the last one, and not just for the country being attacked. Space weapons, like nuclear arms, do not recognize national boundaries, and they do not choose whom to spare and whom to destroy. And in any circumstances they could threaten, not one country or several countries, but the entire world.
Therefore we consider it necessary to warn everybody that if space is to remain peaceful everyone must protect it.In this, the United Nations, the only legitimate trustee of peace in outer space, should make its voice heard.
We also call for the help of the United Nations in regard to a matter of extreme importance - the elimination of chemical weapons. Encouraging progress has been achieved at the Geneva Conference.
The historic goal of ridding the earth of chemical weapons is new closer to attainment. The only thing that could hinder the attainment of that goal is the position of the United states, which is seeking to develop binary weapons. However, obstacles can be removed if political will is evinced - and this Organization is quite capable of stimulating it.
A comprehensive system of international security has more than nuclear, space or chemical parameters. Security implies the non-use of any force, including conventional armaments and armed forces.
The Soviet Union calls for a significant reduction in the level of military confrontation, above all between politico-military alliances. Radical proposals to that effect, based on the concept of reasonable sufficiency, have been made by the States members of the Warsaw Treaty.
I shall say even more. We would certainly not want our troops to be present anywhere beyond our national borders. This question is also open for discussion and can be resolved in an atmosphere of increased trust and with the implementation of measures of military detente.
A beginning has already been made in the Stockholm forum, and all of us - not just the Europeans - can congratulate ourselves and each other on this triumph of reason and good will. It has given us something more than just a major agreement. It has demonstrated that when we really want something, we can achieve it. It has confirmed that the Helsinki process is being successfully developed and has taken deep roots in European soil. It is now extremely important that the forthcoming meeting in Vienna should become yet another milestone in Europe's advance towards reliable security and improved co-operation.
The Asian and Pacific region should also be allowed to breathe freely. Our ideas in this regard are incorporated in a concrete program of action that was outlined in Mikhail Gorbachev's address in Vladivosfaock. We are encouraged that this program has proved to be in harmony with the feelings of many States of the region.
We are aware of all the sore spots existing in the region. First of all, there is the Korean peninsula. The people of Korea yearn for an aid to the division of their country. There is only one impediment to that, namely the presence of United States troops, which in effect occupy the southern part of the country.
The situation around Kampuchea is another source of tension. Here again the fate of the entire people is being sacrificed to the geopolitical interests of certain States. To serve those interests, some are trying; to consign to oblivion the millions of human lives destroyed by the reactionary anti-national clique. This must not be allowed to happen.
The constructive proposals of Kampuchea, Laos and Viet Nam open the way for resolving the region's problems on a broad political basis and stabilizing the situation in South-Bast Asia.
Untying those and many other knots would undoubtedly contribute to the strengthening of peace and security in the Asian and Pacific region, and we are doing our best to promote this.
The positive changes new under way in our country's relations with the People's Republic of China are important not only in terms of bilateral co-operation; they are also conducive to the improvement of the overall situation.
New and increasingly rich substance is being added to our traditional friendly relations with the people of India and its Government. The Soviet Union values good relations with many Asian States and wishes to discuss with them, in particular with the members of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), ways of upgrading relations where they are as yet below the desired level.
Measures to eliminate regional conflicts would form an organic part of the concept of comprehensive security. Of course, there is not, nor can there be, a uniform model for a political settlement here. Nevertheless, concrete expression must be given to some general principles. Those are, first, unconditional respect for sovereignty, independence and the right of nations themselves to choose their way of development; secondly, a respectful attitude towards legitimate Governments; thirdly, respect for the obligations and agreements concluded between States in full conformity with international law.
Every regional conflict is a difficult test for the United Nations This is particularly true with regard to those territories where the emblem of the United Nations symbolizes special responsibility. Unfortunately, it is all too often darkened by the shadow of unfulfilled hopes.
The time has long since come to put to effective use all the powers of this Organization, to exercise all its rights. This applies above all to the fate of the Namibian people and to the Trust Territory of Micronesia. Their problems are as old as the United Nations.
The Middle East problem is somewhat "younger". There must not be many people present in this Hall who participated in the adoption of the resolution on the division of Palestine. Today, we are once again voicing our view that along with the State of Israel, which owes its existence to, among others, the Soviet Union, an Arab Palestinian State should become part of the world's political map.
We believe that the United Nations should again take the matter of a Middle East settlement into its hands. As a practical step in that direction, the Soviet Union proposes that a preparatory committee be set up within the framework of the Security Council to do the necessary work for convening an international conference on the Middle East.
The tragedy of the people of Cyprus has been going on for so many years now. Here as well there has been no lack of mediation efforts and plans for a settlement. Various options have been tried, but the proposal that the problem of Cyprus be settled at a representative international conference under the auspices of the United Nations has been studiously evaded. Who stands to gain from that? Only those forces which intend to use the island for their military and political plans. Raising the stick of "neo-globalism" over the Mediterranean, they would like to turn the entire region into a hotbed of tension. They sometimes use that stick without giving any thought to the consequences, as was done with barbaric cruelty in Libya.
Since the very beginning of the war between Iraq and Iran, the Soviet Union has been calling for a stop to that senseless mutual extermination. Being sincere friends of both nations, we are making use of the possibilities available to us to convince the parties to the conflict that they should make peace. We shall continue to do so.
It is our conviction that were it not for the racist regime of Pretoria the black, white and colored people in South Africa would have long ago found a common language - a language of equality, concord and racial peace. The dividing line is drawn not by ethnic differences but by the cruel policy of apartheid, which is hostile to everyone, irrespective of the color of the skin. To fail to see that is to encourage, wittingly or unwittingly, genocide against the majority of the South African people.
The world community has just spoken out unequivocally about the situation in southern Africa, and it is up to the Security Council now to adopt binding decisions, embodying in them the will of the absolute majority of the world's nations.
Recently, a new and ugly phenomenon of "prepaid" regional conflicts has appeared in international practice. A graphic example is Nicaragua, into which millions of dollars are being channeled to finance the massacre of peasants and the destruction of villages and plantations - only because that small country has dared to choose its own way of development which, in the eyes of the administration of the world's largest and most powerful capitalist nation, appears to pose a threat to its security.
The undeclared wars against the legitimate Governments of Afghanistan, Kampuchea, Angola, Mozambique and Ethiopia are paid for in exactly the same way. And quite often the country financing a conflict maintains diplomatic relations or conducts negotiations with the Government concerned, while at the same time seeking to overthrow it by any means. Indeed, it does not mind the cost when blacklisting Governments and countries which, for some reason or other, it finds inconvenient. Thus, the entire range of reprisals, from direct military to economic and ideological, has been used against the Republic of Cuba for more than a quarter of a century. But surely it is high time to understand that such a policy is bankrupt and that it can only be described as insane.
Political wisdom dictates acknowledging the established realities and not seeking to undo them arbitrarily. Describing gangs of mercenaries as "freedom fighters" - which is attempted in the war against Afghanistan - does not help. The time has come to learn to call things by their own names. With regard to Afghanistan, a national democratic revolution has taken place there. Its social base is constantly becoming broader and stronger; it relies on the support and participation of all social strata and ethnic groups in that country without any exception. They have a clear-cut program for a peaceful settlement of crisis phenomena, and all that is needed is not to hamper that positive process. Here again, the Soviet Union is in favor of seeking new solutions and a fresh approach, unobscured by prejudice, that would help to identify ways of solving the problem with due regard for the legitimate interests of the Afghan people and of its friends and neighbors.
A comprehensive system of international security can give us the keys to many of the most intricate locks.
We have outlawed, as most other States have, any form of terrorism. At the same time, we are prepared to contribute, and are already contributing, to fighting that plague. No sane person can live with it. Terrorism must be mercilessly eradicated, for innocent people suffer and die because of it. But to combat it effectively we also should see its causes. One should not ignore the nature of that abhorrent phenomenon: outbursts of individual and group terror are sometimes engendered by imperialist violence against entire peoples. An improvement in the overall international situation would do much to help stamp out terrorism.
An obstacle to an improved international climate is posed by neo-globalism. It entails diktat and aggression; it tramples upon the independence of nations. The alternative to it is a comprehensive system of security.
The arms race and regional conflicts inevitably have an adverse effect on the world economic system. And while politicians, futurologists and experts are trying somehow to model a structure of security in a world with or without weapons, no one can come even close to predicting the economic consequences of the situation as it evolves. Yet the explosion with which it is fraught would be no less catastrophic than a possible malfunction in the technologies of war.
Today, militarism is not only jeopardizing man's physical survival but his socio-economic progress as well. The cost of the arms race is reaching a level comparable to the material damage caused by past world wars. All of this makes disarmament imperative.
Against the background of the uncontrollable crisis affecting the world economic structure we see with particular clarity the increasingly prevalent process of purging out resources from the national economies of the developing countries of Latin America, Africa and other regions. In the early 1980s the developing world, exploited by imperialism, was pushed into a vicious circle of development via debt, and it now finds itself hung up in the noose of a trillion dollar indebtedness. This, in effect, means that regions with the world's greatest concentration of population, resources and future markets are sliding towards economic catastrophe.
That is why we regard economic security as an integral part of a comprehensive system of international security. When it begins to function, it will be possible to set up a fund for assistance to the developing countries and to draw up, under United Nations auspices, a global program of scientific and technological co-operation.
In our opinion, a comprehensive system of international security is inconceivable without wide-ranging and open co-operation in the humanitarian field. We are strongly in favor of expanded international co-operation in implementing political, social and individual human rights, and we urge everyone to take a fresh, unbiased look at that problem. Specifically, at the Bern meeting the Soviet Union proposed that steps be taken by all States bring their domestic legislation on the whole range of humanitarian problems into conformity with international norms. Unfortunately, another approach emerged at the Bern meeting, one that ignores the consensus among most of the participants in that dialog. Here, the United States of America undermined the adoption of any agreement.
The path of detente is a path towards greater openness in societies, towards a better level of objective information, towards nations' mutual familiarization with each other's life and towards the strengthening of the spirit of mutual understanding and accord in their relations.
Whatever the field of international relations we turn to, the role of the United Nations can be seen as indispensable and its responsibility as great, "today, with the emergence of a new consolidation of the forces of progress and peace, the members of the Organization should have as their common concern the enhancement of United Nations authority and prestige and the increased effectiveness of its decisions. The dedicated work of Mr. Perez de Cuellar as Secretary-General of the United Nations at a difficult time for the Organization evokes deep respect, and we would like to thank him cordially.
The United Nations is on the verge of serious changes. It is impossible to restructure relations among States without taking into account altered realities. The Organization could only gain were the country presiding as Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement to participate, in one form or another, in the work of the Security Council.
Recent events have once again focused attention on an odd phenomenon, the country that once offered the site for United Nations Headquarters today all-too-often shows intense hostility towards the Organization. It slams the door and refuses to fulfill its obligations, as has been the case with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), or tries to assert the principle that whoever has the most money is right. It puts spokes in the wheels of the collective machinery with the notion that by so doing that machinery can be made to function according to its will. The United States has adopted the practice
of lecturing, punishing and arbitrarily threatening the Organization as a whole and those of its members it dislikes for some reason. Lately, the States Members of the United Nations have begun to ask with increasing frequency whether the United Nations can function normally in a country whose Government shows such undisguised disrespect for them and for the Organization itself. Perhaps that question should be heeded. It might be useful to hold a special debate in the United Nations on the numerous accumulated problems of the operation of the Organization.
The Organization's universality implies a forward thrust towards rapprochement and towards the elimination of centrifugal forces. In light of the proposed concept of comprehensive security, the East-West, North-South polarities can and must be expunged from the political vocabulary. That is what socialism is calling for. Whatever its antagonists assert, socialism is opposed to confrontation and intransigence in the most important pursuit of mankind: the construction of a durable and guaranteed peace. We have adopted that system of priorities in our relationship with the United States as well. This question has already been addressed here yesterday. Let me say that we are far from regarding our relations with the United States as holding no promise particularly since we have a high regard for the American people. Lately, encouraging outlines of meaningful agreements have been emerging. A summit meeting is also a realistic possibility. We could move forward fairly smoothly, if that is what the United States side wants. We are realists, and we do not draw inspiration from Utopian ideas. At the end of the last century, people envisioned the coming twentieth century as a golden age. But reality has dashed those expectations. Today, on the threshold of the twenty-first century, the objective reality is such that it could become either the golden age of science or the age of nuclear permafrost. The material means for bringing about either outcome already exist. The question is, which of them will be put to use?
The danger for civilization is ail-too evident. Hence the need for responsible, concerted action to prevent any possible catastrophe. We have made our choice. The Soviet Union - and I quote the words of Mikhail Gorbachev - will "continue to use every opportunity for productive dialog, for progress towards arms limitation and reduction, as well as towards the settlement of regional conflicts and the development of international co-operation in all areas of importance."
We think that in our deliberations it is very important that we never lose sight of the real scale of time and of the world. The language of which some politicians are so fond obscures that scale in a fog of nebulous abstract concepts, as if what is involved were not the Earth, but some other, remote, planet. Yet it is the Earth that we see before us in the images of our children and grandchildren, our fathers and mothers, our sisters and brothers, all those who are close and dear to us and with whom each of us identifies the concepts of "nation," "country" and "mankind."
This is the only acceptable yardstick. And one should not adjust his political telescope as though his sole interest were whether there is, indeed, life on Mars. All of us must answer one question, a question that is equally important to all: whether there will be life on Earth. We would very much like to answer, with confidence: Yes, there will be!
A short walk from this Hall is the delegates' Meditation Room, a refuge from a world deafened by the noise of strife and violence. "We want to bring back the idea of worship", Dag Haramarskjold once said about this room, "devotion to something which is greater and higher than we are ourselves".
It is just such devotion that gave birth to the United Nations: devotion to the dream of world peace and freedom, of human rights and democratic self-determination, of a time when, in those ancient words, "... they shall beat their swords into plowshares ... nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more".
The United States remains committed to the United Nations. For over 40 years, this Organization has provided an international forum for harmonizing conflicting national interests and has made a significant contribution in such fields as peace-keeping, humanitarian assistance, and eradicating disease. Yet, no one knows better than those in this Hall how the noble ideals embodied in the Charter have often remained unfulfilled. This Organization itself faces a critical hour - that
is usually stated as a fiscal crisis. But we can turn this "crisis" into an opportunity. The important reforms proposed by the Group of Experts can be a first step towards restoring this Organization's status and effectiveness. The issue, ultimately, is not one of cash but of credibility. If all the Members of this universal Organization decide to seize the moment and turn the rhetoric of reform into reality, the future of the United Nations will be secure. And members have my word for it: My country, which has always given the United Nations generous support, will continue to play a leading role in the effort to achieve its noble purposes.
When I came before the Assembly last year, an important moment in the pursuit of those purposes had not yet occurred. The leaders of the Soviet Union and the United States were to meet in Geneva. These discussions have now been held. For over 15 hours, the Soviet and American delegations met. For about five hours, General Secretary Gorbachev and I talked alone.
Our talks were frank. The talks were also productive - in a larger sense than even the documents that were agreed. Mr. Gorbachev was blunt; so was I. We came to realize again the truth of the statement: Nations do not mistrust each other because they are armed; they are armed because they mistrust each other. And I did not hesitate to tell Mr. Gorbachev our view of the source of that mistrust: the Soviet Union's record of seeking to impose its ideology and rule on others. So we acknowledged the deep and abiding differences between our systems of government, our views of history, and the future of mankind. But, despite these differences, we resolved to work together for real reductions in nuclear arms, as well as progress in other areas.
Delegates to the forty-first session of the General Assembly of the United Nations, today I want to report to you on what has transpired since the summit, notably the important letter X sent on 25 July to Mr. Gorbachev. In that letter, I dealt with the important issues of reducing nuclear arms, agreeing on strategic defenses, and limiting nuclear testing. In addition to those issues, which concern the military aspects of Soviet-American relations, I would also like to address other essential steps towards peace: the resolution of political conflicts, the strengthening of the international economy, and the protection of human rights.
Before I do this, however, let me, in the tradition of candor established at Geneva, tell you that a pall has been cast over our relations with the Soviet Union. I refer here to a particularly disturbing example of Soviet transgressions against human rights.
Recently - after the arrest of a Soviet national and united Nations employee accused of espionage in the United States - an American correspondent in Moscow was made the subject of fabricated accusations and trumped-up charges. He was arrested and jailed in a callous disregard of due process and numerous human rights conventions. In effect, he was taken as a hostage - even threatened with the death penalty.
Both individuals have now been remanded to their respective ambassadors. But this is only an interim step, agreed to by the United States for humanitarian reasons, it does not change the facts of the case: Gennadi Zakharov is an accused spy who should stand trial; Nicholas Daniloff is an innocent hostage who should be released. The Soviet Union bears the responsibility for the consequences of its action. Misusing the United Nations for the purposes of espionage does a grave disservice to this Organization.
The world expects better. It expects contributions to the cause of peace that only the leaders of the United States and the Soviet Union can make.
It is for this reason that I wrote last summer to Mr. Gorbachev with new arms control proposals. Before discussing the proposals, let us be clear about which weapons are the most dangerous and threatening to peace. The threat does not come from defensive systems, which are a shield against attack, but from offensive weapons - ballistic missiles that hurtle through space and can wreak mass destruction on the surface of the Earth - especially the Soviet Union's heavy, accurate ICBMs, with multiple warheads, which have no counterparts in size or number in any other country.
That is why the United States has long urged radical, equitable, verifiable reductions in these offensive systems. Note that I said reduction; for this is the real purpose of arms control: not just to codify the levels of today's arsenals, not just to channel their further expansion, but to reduce them in ways that will reduce the danger of war. Indeed, the United States believes the prospect of a future without such weapons cf mass destruction must be the ultimate goal of arms control.
I am pleased to say that the Soviet Union has now embraced our idea of radical reductions in offensive systems. At the Geneva summit last November, we agreed to intensify work in this area. Since then, the Soviets have made detailed proposals which, while not acceptable to us, appear to represent a serious effort. So we continue to seek a 50 per cent reduction of American and Soviet arsenals - with the central focus on the reduction of ballistic missile warheads. If the Soviet Union wants only a lesser reduction, however, we are prepared to consider it but as an interim measure. In other provisions as well, we have sought to take account of Soviet concerns. So there has been movement.
Similarly, in the area of intermediate-range nuclear forces, the United States seeks the total elimination of such missiles on a global basis. Again, if the Soviet Union insists on pursuing such a goal in stages, we are prepared to conclude an interim agreement without delay.
All this gives me hope. I can tell representatives that the exchanges between our two sides this summer could well have marked the beginning of serious, productive negotiation on arms reductions. The ice of the negotiating stalemate could break, if both sides intensify their effort in the new round of Geneva talks and if we keep the promises we made to each other last November.
For too long a time, however, the Soviet response has been to downplay the need for offensive reductions. When the United States began work technology to make offensive nuclear weapons obsolete some day, the Soviets tried to make that the main issue - as if the main danger to strategic stability was a defense against missiles that is still on the drawing boards, rather than the menacing ballistic missiles themselves that already exist in excessive numbers.
Still, the United States recognizes that both the offensive and defensive sides of the strategic equation must be addressed. And we have gone far to meet Soviet concerns expressed about the potential offensive use of strategic defensive systems. I have offered firm and concrete assurances that our strategic defense initiative could never be used to deploy weapons in space that can cause mass destruction on earth. I have pointed out that the radical reduction we seek now in offensive arsenals would be additional insurance that strategic defense initiative cannot be used to support a first-strike strategy. Our preference from the beginning has been to move forward co-operatively with the Soviets on strategic defenses, so that neither side will feel threatened and both can benefit from the strategic revolution that strategic defense initiative represents.
The United States continues to respect the anti-ballistic missile Treaty - in spite of clear evidence that the Soviets are violating it. We have told the Soviets that, if we can both agree on radical reductions in strategic offensive weapons, we are prepared right now to sign ah agreement with them on research, development, testing and deployment of strategic defenses based on the following.
First, both sides would agree to confine themselves, through 1991, to research, development and testing, which are permitted by the anti-ballistic missile Treaty, to determine whether advanced systems of strategic defense are technically feasible.
Secondly, a new treaty, signed now, would provide that, if after 1991 either side should decide to deploy such a system, that side would be obliged to offer a plan for sharing the benefits of strategic defense and eliminating offensive ballistic missiles. This plan would be negotiated over a two-year period.
Thirdly, if the two sides cannot agree after two years of negotiation, either side would be free to deploy an advanced strategic defensive system, after giving six months* notice to the other.
As the United States has repeatedly made clear, we are moving towards a future of greater reliance upon strategic defense. The United States remains prepared to talk about how - under what ground rules and process - we and the Soviet Union can do this co-operatively. Such strategic defenses, coupled with radical reductions in offensive forces, would represent a safer balance and give future statesmen the opportunity to move beyond it - to the ultimate elimination of nuclear weapons from the face of the Earth.
In addition to our proposals on offensive reductions and strategic defense, we have suggested new steps in another area - nuclear testing. Just as eliminating all nuclear weapons is our long-term goal, so too is a total ban on nuclear
testing; but both must be approached with practical steps. For the reality is that for now we still must rely on these weapons for the deterrence of war; thus the safety and reliability of our deterrent are themselves critical to peace.
The United States is proud of its record of nuclear safety and intends to maintain it. Nevertheless, we are as I said, ready now to take two important steps towards limiting nuclear testing: first, we ace ready to move forward on ratification of the Threshold Test Ban Treaty and the Treaty on Peaceful Nuclear Explosions, once agreement is reached on improved verification procedures. We have proposed new ideas to make this possible; secondly, upon ratification of those treaties - and in association with a program to reduce and ultimately eliminate all nuclear weapons - we are prepared to discuss ways to implement a step-by-step parallel program of limiting and ultimately ending nuclear testing.
Those are steps that we could take in the near future to show the world that we are moving forward. I therefore call upon the Soviet Union to join us in practical, attainable progress in limiting nuclear testing.
Just a few days ago I received a reply from General Secretary Gorbachev to my letter of 25 July - and, for the moment, let me say simply that we are giving it
As we move towards our goal of eliminating nuclear weapons, it is vital that we also address important imbalances in other kinds of weapons. This is why the United States has proposed a comprehensive global ban on all chemical weapons and why we and our allies have tried hard to break the stalemate in the conventional force negotiations in Vienna. In the Stockholm Conference a major advance has been achieved: a concrete new set of military confidence-building measures which
But we must remember from the experience of the 1970s that progress in arms control cannot be divorced from regional political developments. As I said at the beginning, political tensions cause military competition, not the other way around.
However, while the United States and the Soviet Union disagree over the root causes of political tension, we agree that regional conflicts could escalate into global confrontation. Last year, from this rostrum, I presented a formula for peace which would apply to five critical regional conflicts that are potential flash points for wider conflicts. I pointed out how difficult it is for the United States to accept Soviet assurances of peaceful intent when 126,000 Soviet troops prosecute a vicious war against the Afghan people; when 140,000 Soviet-backed Vietnamese soldiers wage war on the people of Cambodia; when 1,700 Soviet advisers and 2,500 Cuban combat troops are involved in military planning and operations in Ethiopia; when 1,300 Soviet military advisers and 36,000 Cuban troops direct and participate in combat operations to prop up an unpopular, repressive regime in Angola; when hundreds of millions of dollars in Soviet arms and Soviet-bloc advisers help a dictatorial regime in Nicaragua try to subvert and betray a popular revolution.
The danger inherent in these conflicts must be recognized. Marxist-Leninist regimes tend to wage war as readily against their neighbors as they routinely do against their own people. In fact, the internal and external wars often become indistinguishable. In Afghanistan, for example, the puppet regime has announced its intention to relocate tens of thousands of people from border areas, Can anyone doubt this will be done in classic communist style - by force? Many will die, to make it easier for the Soviets and their satellite troops to intimidate Pakistan.
It is just such transgressions that make the risk o£ confrontation with democratic nations so acute. So, once again, I propose a three-point peace process for the resolution of regional conflicts: first, talks between the warring parties themselves, without which an end to violence and national reconciliation are impossible; secondly, discussions between the united States and the Soviet Union - not to impose solutions but to support peace talks and eventually eliminate the supply of arms ^and the proxy troops from abroad; thirdly, if the talks are successful, joint efforts to welcome each country back into the world economy and the community of nations that respect human rights.
In addition to regional disputes, the grave threat of terrorism also jeopardizes the hopes for peace. No cause, no grievance can justify it. Terrorism is heinous and intolerable. It is the crime of cowards - cowards who prey on the innocent, the defenseless, and the helpless.
With its allies and other nations, the United States has taken steps to counter terrorism directly - particularly State-sponsored terrorism. Last April, the United States demonstrated that it will defend its interests and act against terrorist aggression. Let me assure all of you today, especially let me assure any potential sponsors of terrorism, that the American people are of one mind on this issue. Like other civilized peoples of the world, we have reached our limit. Attacks against our citizens or our interests will not go unanswered.
We will also do all in our power to help other law-abiding nations threatened by terrorist attacks. To that end, the United States believes that the understandings reached by the seven industrial democracies at the Tokyo summit last May made a good start towards international accord in the war on terrorism. We recommend to the General Assembly consideration of the Tokyo resolutions.
Moving to the economic realm, how ironic it is that some continue to espouse such ideus as a "new international economic order" based on State control when the world is learning, as never before, that the freedom of the individual, not the power of the State, is the key to economic dynamism and growth. Nations have turned away from centralized management and government controls and towards the incentives and rewards of the free market. They have invited their citizens'to develop their talents and abilities to the fullest and, in the process, to provide jobs, to create wealth, to build social stability and foster faith in the future for all. The economic summits of the industrial democracies have paid a tribute to these principles - as has the historic United Nations special session on Africa in
Hay. We applaud the African nations' call for reform leading to greater reliance on their private sectors for economic growth. We believe that overcoming hunger and economic stagnation requires policies that encourage Africa's own productivity and initiative; such a policy framework will make it easier for the rest of the world, including the United States, to help. The laws of economic incentives do not discriminate between developed and developing countries. They apply to all equally.
Much of the recent recovery in the world economy can be directly attributed to this growth of economic freedom. And it is this trend that offers such hope for the future. And yet this new hope faces a grave threat: the menace of trade barriers. History shows that the imposition of such barriers invites retaliation, which in turn sparks the very sort of trade wars that plunged the world in the 1930s deeper into depression and economic misery. Truly, protectionism is destructionism.
That is why the United States seeks the assistance of all countries represented here in the General Assembly in protecting the practice of free and fair trade. We applaud the success of the meeting of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) trade ministers last week in Uruguay, where agreement was reached to launch a new round of multilateral trade negotiations covering a wide range of topics important to economic growth, with over 90 other countries members of GATT, the United States is working to maintain the free flow of international trade.
In addition to resistance to protectionism, the United States is also seeking to stimulate world economic growth in other ways. Our Treasury bill interest rate is now just over 5 per cent, the lowest it has been in nine years - which provides enormous relief to debtor countries. America's new tax structure will open the way for greater prosperity at home, which will contribute to greater prosperity abroad.
Finally, the united States is working with other countries to minimize currency swings, to promote stability in the monetary markets, to establish predictability as a basis for prosperity.
But, the United States believes the greatest contribution we can make to world prosperity is the continued advocacy of the magic of the market-place - the truth, the simple and proven truth, that economic development is an outgrowth of economic freedom just as economic freedom is the inseparable twin of political freedom and democratic government.
And it is here that we come to our final category - human rights - the indispensable element for peace, freedom, and prosperity. I note that Mr. Gorbachev has used in recent speeches the same categories I have used here todays the military, the political, and the economic; except that he titled his fourth category: humanitarian.
The difference is revealing. The United States believes that respect for the individual, for the dignity of the human person - those rights outlined in the United Nations Universal Declaration of Hunt i Rights - does not belong in the realm of charity or "humanitarian" causes. Respect for human rights is not social work; it is not merely an act of compassion, it is the first obligation of government and the source of its legitimacy.
It also is the foundation-stone in any structure of world peace. All through history, it has been the dictatorships and the tyrannies that have surrendered first to the cult of militarism and the pursuit of war. Countries based on the consent of the governed, countries that recognize the inalienable rights of the individual, do not make war on each other. Peace is more than just an absence of war. True peace is justice, true peace is freedom. And true peace dictates the recognition of human rights.
Commitments were made more than 10 years ago in Helsinki concerning those rights and their recognition. We need only look to the East today to see how sadly unfulfilled those commitments are. The persecution of scientists, religious leaders, peace activists, political dissenters, and other prisoners of conscience continues unabated behind the Iron Curtain. You know, one section of the Helsinki Accords even speaks to: "improvement of working conditions of journalists".
So, it is clear that progress in the human rights area must keep pace with progress in other areas. A failure on this score will hinder further movement in East-West relations.
These, then, are the areas of concern and of opportunity that the United States sees in the quest for peace and freedom - the twin objectives of the United Nations Charter.
Last year, I pointed out in my address to the General Assembly the differences between the United States and the Soviet Union are deep and abiding. But I also called for a fresh start in relations between our two nations, a fresh start that could benefit our own people and the people of every nation. Since that time, the United States has taken action and put forth new proposals that could lead our two countries and the entire world in a direction we all have long sought to go. Now more than ever, it is the responsibility of the Soviet Union to take action and demonstrate that they too are continuing the dialog for peace.
As I have said, I believe that we can be hopeful about the world and the prospects for freedom. We only need look around us to see the new technologies that may some day spare future generations the nightmare of nuclear terror, or the growing ranks of democratic activists and freedom fighters, or the increasing movement towards free market economies, or the extent of world-wide concern about the rights of the individual in the face of brute, State power.
In the past, when I have noted such trends - when I have called for a "forward strategy for freedom" and predicted the ultimate triumph of democratic rule over totalitarianism - some have accused me of telling people what they want to hear, of urging them not: to engage the day but to escape it.
Yet, to hope is to believe in humanity; and in its future. Hope remains the highest reality, the age-old power; hope is at the root of all the great ideas and causes that have bettered the lot of humankind across the centuries.
History teaches us to hope - for it teaches us about man, and about the irrepressible human spirit, A Nobel laureate in literature, a great figure of the American South, William Faulkner, once said that the last sound heard on earth would be that of the two remaining humans arguing over where to go in the spaceship they had built. In his speech to the Nobel Committee in 1950, Faulkner spoke of the nuclear age, of the general and universal physical fear it had engendered, a fear of destruction that had become almost unbearable. But, he said:
"I decline to accept the end of a man. I believe that man will not merely endure: he will prevail. He is immortal ... because he has a soul, a spirit capable of compassion and sacrifice and endurance."
Faulkner spoke of the old verities and truths of the heart, of the courage, honor, pride, compassion, pity, sacrifice and, yes, that hope which is the glory of our past. And all of these things we find today in our present; we must use them to build our future. It is why today we can lift up our spirits and our hearts; it is why we resolve that with God's help the cause of humanity will not merely endure but prevail; that some day all the world - every nation, every people, every person - will know the blessings of peace and see the light of freedom.

 May I begin. Sir, by warmly congratulating you on your election to the presidency of the forty-first session of the united Nations General Assembly. I am sure that with your ability and experience you will make outstanding contributions to the work of the current session. At the same time, I should like to extend my high respects to Mr. Jaime de PiniSs for his fruitful work as the President of the fortieth session.
A year ago we were meeting here to commemorate the grand occasion of the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations. We expressed our ardent desire for the maintenance of world peace and promotion of international co-operation, put forward quite a few proposals and voiced concerns and anxieties over the turbulent international situation. The year 1986 is the International Year of Peace. The people of the world have made various efforts for peace and the forces against war and for peace have grown further. In November last year the United States and the Soviet Union held a summit meeting, indicating in their joint statement that "nuclear war cannot be won and must never be fought"  and acknowledging that the two countries bear special responsibilities for halting the arms race and carrying out nuclear disarmament. During their talks and dialogs on the question of arms control and disarmament, each side indicated that it would reduce its strategic nuclear weapons by 50 per cent. Since then there has been a certain degree of relaxation of international tension. We welcome this development.
Nevertheless, people cannot fail to see that the United States and the Soviet Union are still far apart in their views and positions on the question of disarmament. At present the arms race is still going on, and various proposals and ideas for disarmament remain only on paper. No substantive progress has been achieved on disarmament and no solutions have been found to regional conflicts. The root cause of international tension still exists. Therefore, people have no reason to feel relieved about the present world situation. The creation of tension and confrontation goes against the wishes of the people of all countries, including the United States and the Soviet Union. The popular will for peace is an irresistible trend in the world today. The people of all countries must persist in their arduous efforts towards relaxation of international tension and the maintenance of world peace.
We hold that the key to disarmament lies in true sincerity in favor of disarmament, and the greatest test of the sincerity of the two major nuclear Powers is whether or not they will take practical steps to be the first drastically to reduce their armaments. We hope that they will reach an effective agreement through serious negotiations, take real actions for disarmament and not indulge in rhetoric, still less use disarmament talks as a cover for the arms race. Xn the present circumstances, it is necessary for them to be the first jointly to undertake not to launch a nuclear war or resort to the use or threat of force against other countries, so that favorable conditions may be created for disarmament and the relaxation of international tension.
China has all along opposed the arms race and its extension to outer space. We stand for the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and for the substantial reduction of conventional weapons. We are in favor of the peaceful use of outer space. Zn his statement on 21 March 1986, Chinese Premier Zhao Ziyang gave a comprehensive and systematic elaboration of the Chinese Government's position of principle on the question of disarmament, including such issues as nuclear disarmament, conventional disarmament, intermediate missiles, space weapons, chemical weapons and the relationship between disarmament and security. At the same time, China has taken actual steps towards disarmament in many areas. By the end of this year, it will
complete the seduction of the number of its troops by 1 million. China has been cutting its military expenditures year by year and a considerable portion of its military industry has been shifted to civilian production. Some military airports and naval ports have been turned to civilian purposes. The Chinese Government has officially declared that it will no longer conduct atmospheric nuclear tests.
The basic views of the Chinese Government on disarmament are as follows.
The two super-Powers, the United States and the Soviet Union, which possess by far the largest nuclear and conventional arsenals in the world, bear special and unshakable responsibility for disarmament and should take the lead in drastic arms reduction. Nuclear disarmament should be carried out simultaneously with conventional arms reduction, and the two should promote each other.
As the question of disarmament affects the security interests of all countries in the world, every country should have a say in this question. The United Nations should play a greater role in disarmament. The two major nuclear Powers should heed, respect and accept the reasonable demands and propositions of various countries, especially the small and medium-sized countries. No disarmament negotiations or agreements between the major nuclear Powers should jeopardize the interests of other countries.
Disarmament and international security are closely related. Efforts to achieve disarmament should be combined with those for the maintenance of world peace and security. In order to ease international tension and maintain world peace, it is necessary not only to achieve effective arms reduction but also to oppose hegemonism and power politics, check aggression and expansion and resolve regional conflicts.
In keeping with the consistent stand of our Government on disarmament, the Chinese delegation will submit to the current session of the General Assembly
The war of Vietnamese aggression against Kampuchea has been going on for eight years. Although Viet Nam has dispatched large numbers of troops and employed every means available, it has never succeeded in subduing Kampuchea. The so-called irreversible situation in Kampuchea as claimed by Viet Nam is nothing but a myth. Facts have demonstrated that Viet Nam cannot possibly succeed in its attempt to annex Kampuchea by force of arms. The only way to a settlement of the Kampuchean question is the withdrawal of Vietnamese troops from Kampuchea. The earlier Viet Nam extricates itself from the quagmire of the war in Kampuchea, the better it will serve the Vietnamese people and their national interests. The traditional friendship between China and Viet Nam will be restored provided Viet Nam effects a genuine withdrawal of troops from Kampuchea and gives up its anti-China policy.
Last March the Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea headed by President Saradech Norodom Sihanouk put forward an eight-point proposal for a political settlement of the Kampuchean question. This proposal is fair and reasonable and conforms with the principles in the relevant resolutions adopted at successive sessions of the United Nations General Assembly. It has offered a reasonable basis for a political settlement of the Kampuchean question and thus won support from many countries. It is the consistent position of the Chinese Government that the Kampuchean question should be settled on the basis of the relevant United Nations General Assembly resolutions and the Declaration of the International Conference on Kampuchea. China firmly supports the eight-point proposal of the Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea and all the proposals and suggestions conducive to a just and reasonable settlement of the Kampuchean question put forward by the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and other countries.
We stand for a political settlement of the Kampuchean question. After the withdrawal of the Vietnamese troops, just and reasonable solutions to Kampuchea's internal problems should be worked out by the Kampuchean people and by the various political forces in Kampuchea through consultations on an equal footing, free from external interference. China hopes that Kampuchea will be a peaceful, independent, neutral and non-aligned country and would not like to see any single group monopolize power. China seeks no selfish interests in Kampuchea. We are ready to join other countries concerned in an international guarantee that Kampuchea will enjoy the status of a peaceful, independent, neutral and non-aligned country. This is China's basic position on the question of Kampuchea.
The occupation of Afghanistan by foreign troops is an encroachment upon its independence and sovereignty and poses a grave threat to the security of the adjacent countries and peace in Asia. The international community has all along strongly demanded a just and reasonable settlement of the Afghan question at an early date in line with the relevant United Nations resolutions. The eight rounds of indirect talks in Geneva held under the auspices of the United Nations have failed to achieve substantive progress on the crucial question of the withdrawal of foreign troops. If the Soviet Union sincerely desires a political settlement of the Afghan question, it should implement the relevant United Nations resolutions and present a time-table acceptable to the international community for an early withdrawal of all its troops from Afghanistan.
It is the desire of the people to see relaxation of tension on the Korean Peninsula. We support the positive efforts made by the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea for the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea and its reasonable proposals and demands for dialog between the North and the South, tripartite talks and the withdrawal of United States troops from South Korea. We hope that the parties concerned will work together to ease the tension on the Korean Peninsula so as to promote the peaceful reunification of Korea.
It is disturbing that the situation in the Middle East remains tense and turbulent. We have consistently supported the just struggle of the Arab countries and the Palestinian people. For them to sink their differences, strengthen unity and act in concert is a basic guarantee for victory in the Arab and Palestinian national causes. We hope that the parties concerned in the Middle East will seek a just and comprehensive settlement of the Middle East question through political negotiations so as to bring peace to the region. To this end, the national rights of the Palestinian people must be restored, and Israel must abandon its policy of aggression and expansion and withdraw from all the Arab territories it has occupied since 1967. At the same time, the right to existence of all countries in the Middle East should be recognized and they should live in friendship on the basis of the principles of peaceful coexistence.
The widening and escalation of the Iran-Iraq war has posed a grave threat to peace and stability in the Gulf region and brought enormous suffering to the people of the two countries. Both Iran and Iraq are China's friends. We hope that the two neighboring countries will exercise restraint and refrain from intensifying the war so as to create an atmosphere necessary for conducting peace talks and bringing about a cease-fire. We sincerely hope that in accordance with the norms of international law, they will settle their disputes on mutually acceptable terms through peaceful negotiations and bring an early end to the war.
Owing to external intervention, the situation in Central America is becoming more complicated. In order to put an end to the prolonged turmoil and bring about a just peace in Central America, it is imperative to respect the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of all countries in the region and do away with all external interference and power politics so that the people of these countries will be able to solve their own problems. Foreign military threat against, and intervention in, Nicaragua in violation of the norms governing
international relations have aggravated the situation in this region and naturally met with the opposition of the international community. We support the just and reasonable principles put forward by the Contadora Group for solving the problems in Central America and hope that the Group will succeed in its efforts,
The situation in southern Africa is deteriorating and becoming even more volatile, as the South African authorities perpetrate racist atrocities, cling to their illegal occupation of Namibia and engage in grave provocations against the neighboring countries. The Pretoria regime's sanguinary suppression of the black people in South Africa is a challenge to human dignity and international justice, which has aroused the great indignation and strong protest of the international community. The World Conference on Sanctions against Racist South Africa held by the United Nations and the special session of the General Assembly on Namibia have played an important role in mobilizing the international community for intensified struggle against South African racism. We firmly endorse effective sanctions against the South African authorities and support the South African people in their heroic struggle against racism and for racial equality. We support the just struggle of the Namibian people for national independence and the efforts of the independent States in southern Africa to safeguard national security and bring peace and stability to the region.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the adoption by the United Nations of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. These two instruments are of positive significance to the realization of the purpose and principle of the United Nations Charter concerning respect for human rights. The Chinese Government has consistently supported this principle of the Charter. Just as in all other countries which were victims of imperialist and colonialist oppression, there were no human rights to speak of in the semi-colonial, semi-feudal old China. It is only following the founding of the People's Republic of China that Chinese citizens are able to enjoy extensive democratic rights. In accordance with the provisions of the Constitution of China, the Chinese Government has adopted various measures to ensure the enjoyment by its citizens of all kinds of fundamental rights. With the progress made in economic development and structural reform in the past few years, there has been a steady improvement in socialist democracy and the legal system in China. Never before have the Chinese people enjoyed such a high degree of democracy and freedom as they do now.
We have noted with concern that, although the United Nations has formulated and adopted a number of international instruments on human rights, gross and massive violations of human rights continue to occur in many parts of the world as a result of colonialism, racism, foreign aggression and occupation. Moreover, interference in other countries' internal affairs in the name of protecting human rights is also a common occurrence. We call on the international community to make joint efforts to check these violations of the principles of the Charter.
In discussing the current international situation we must pay close attention to the question of development in the world. Over the past year the developed countries have maintained a low economic growth rate and many developing countries are still in grave economic difficulties. International economic relations are becoming increasingly imbalanced and irrational. The prices of most raw materials and primary products for export by the developing countries have kept falling and the export of their manufactured products has run into numerous obstacles owing to trade protectionism in the developed countries. External debts are weighing more and more heavily on the debtor countries. The developing countries are in desperate need of development funds, but,, while capital inflow keeps dwindling, an abnormal phenomenon of reverse flow of funds has occurred.
Such developments serve to widen the gap between the developed and the developing countries, which will not only do great harm to the developing countries but also have grave consequences for the developed countries in the long run. The developed countries account for only one quarter of the world population of nearly 5 billion while the remaining three quarters are in the developing countries. The world economy cannot grow steadily without the economic growth of the developed countries, but at the same time its steady growth also depends to a great extent on whether the developing countries can overcome their difficulties and revitalize their economies. Therefore, helping to boost the economic growth of the developing countries will contribute both to the common prosperity of the world economy and to world peace and stability.
Following political independence, the developing countries are all committed to their domestic economic development. In the process they have made headway in a search for development strategies, economic structures and economic policies suited to their respective national conditions. Many of them have made readjustments and introduced reforms in their economies, with gratifying results. In addition to their own efforts and promotion of South-South co-operation, it is of great importance to the economic growth of the developing countries to improve North-South relations. As the developing countries are still fettered and harmed
by the inequitable international economic relations, it would be difficult for them to attain the goal of economic development smoothly by merely relying on their own efforts. He hope that the developed countries will, in the overall interest of the world economy, help create an international environment favorable to the developing countries. The international community should take practical measures in trade, finance, development and other international economic fields to facilitate the flow of capital and transfer of technology to the developing countries, further increase their access to markets and reduce their debt burden, thus contributing to the overall growth of the world economy.
The special session of the United Nations General Assembly on the critical economic situation in Africa, held last May, gave expression to the concern of the international community for Africa's economic recovery and development. We hope that the parties concerned, particularly the developed countries, will fully honor their commitments so as to ensure the full implementation of the United Nations Program of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 198C—1990, which was approved unanimously by the session.
International relations are now undergoing a great change. The newly independent countries which emerged in the post-war period, the numerous non-aligned and other small and medium-sized countries, regardless of their different situations, all treasure independence and oppose power politics. They desire peace and stability and oppose war and tension, and they all want to get actively involved in international affairs and play their part in maintaining peace and promoting international co-operation. It is no longer realistic simply to take ideology and social system as a criterion for differentiating countries and international political groupings. The time is gone for ever when a big Power or power center could manipulate international relations according to its wishes. The
recently concluded Eighth Conference of Beads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries proved once again that the Non-Aligned Movement is playing an important role in the international affairs of the day. The trend towards multipolarity in international relations and the growing aspiration of the peoples to take their destiny into their own hands are an inevitable historical development and constitute a positive factor making for peace.
We are of the view that all countries, regardless of their ideologies and social systems, should establish and develop relations on the basis of the five principles of mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence.
We are in favor of dialog, which is the correct way for the peaceful settlement of international disputes. Facts show that only through peaceful negotiations and consultations on an equal footing is it possible to remove contradictions and differences between States, forestall international conflicts and ensure international security.
Obviously, in order that dialog can be conducted and yield positive results, the use or threat of force must be abandoned, the sovereignty and security of all States respected and all acts of aggression and expansion stopped. In no circumstances should a country be allowed to impose its will on others.
The Chinese people are now going all out in the drive for China's material, cultural and ethical advancement, determined to turn China into a modernized socialist country with Chinese characteristics through the efforts of several generations. China firmly pursues an independent foreign policy of peace, whose fundamental aim is to preserve world peace and secure an enduring peaceful international environment for its socialist modernization. Peace and development are inseparable. To have peace and development, we need friendship, co-operation and strengthened relations with other countries on the basis of the five principles of peaceful coexistence.
This year we in China have started to implement the Seventh Five-Year Plan for National Economic and Social Development. In the coming five years we shall basically complete the overall restructuring of our economy. Meanwhile, we shall adhere to the policy of opening up to the outside world, improve the environment for investment and expand our external economic relations. We are promoting the sustained and steady growth of China's economy by carrying out reform and the policy of opening up to the outside world, and we want to ensure successful and uninterrupted economic development by pursuing an independent foreign policy of peace. China's current domestic and foreign policies have proved to be sound and effective and in the interests of the people. We shall adhere to these policies with unshakable determination.,
The United Nations has entered upon its fifth decade since its founding. It has tremendous successes to its credit, but it also faces problems and difficulties. Since the restoration of its rightful seat in the United Nations China has always abide by the purposes and principles of the Charter, actively participated in the work of the Organization and endeavored to perform its duty as one of the permanent members of the Security Council.
The financial crisis confronting the United Nations at the present time has caused widespread concern. We are of the view that the United Nations should undergo rational structural reforms, but such reforms must be aimed at strengthening, not weakening, the role of the Organization and must observe, not violate, the principle of the sovereign equality of all Member states, as provided for in the Charter. It is our sincere hope that the United Nations will, with the joint support of all Member States and through consultation^ on an equal footing, take the necessary measures to overcome the difficulties it faces and improve its efficiency, so as to achieve even greater success in its endeavor to safeguard world peace and promote international co-operation.
In this autumn of 1986, the community of nations is again facing serious problem* and momentous decisions that affect the destiny of our peoples.
We are threatened by embroilment in hostilities as well as by famine and misery. Dangers threaten international economic and financial co-operation. The dignity of man is being violated in a thousand ways. Wars are taking place in many parts of the world. In the Republic of South Africa there is a threat of civil war. Natural disasters are compounded by man-made disasters with far-reaching
effects that transcend national boundaries.
But we see hopeful signs also. In Europe co-operation across the ideological boundaries is developing into a strong force for the preservation of peace. Negotiations between West and East on confidence-building and disarmament are being conducted in unprecedented depth. Encouraging progress has been registered. New negotiations are being prepared. Throughout the world the hand of those who seek co-operation instead of confrontation is becoming stronger. More and more people realize that we have become a community in pursuit of survival. There is a prevailing awareness that the survival of mankind requires co-operative solutions -for the prevention of war, for the protection of our ecological basis, for the new technological developments, for the peaceful use of the sea-bed and the peaceful use of outer space, for the fight against famine and disease, for solutions to international economic problems, including that of indebtedness. The peoples of the world want their Governments to recognize these signs.
The quest for superiority and hegemony, the quest for unilateral advantages,
the exploitation of political, military and economic power, the attempt to bring
others to their knees, the attempt to force one's own social order on others: all
these are outdated aspirations. Again and again they have dragged mankind into
catastrophe. The peoples of the world are no longer prepared to tolerate such policies.
My country, the Federal Republic of Germany, is on the side of progress,
co-operation, human rights, self-determination and peace. We regard man, in his
unalterable dignity, in his uniqueness and in his freedom, as the focus of all
action. Those values are the cornerstone of the alliance between democratic
Europe, the United States and Canada.
The President of this session of the General Assembly himself comes from a
country that has sought international co-operation time and again to overcome
difficult economic problems. I wish him and the United Nations good fortune and
success.
I should like thank Mr. Perez de Cuellar for his excellent work, his wise decisions and his sensible initiatives as Secretary-General of the united Nations.
The 12 States members of the European Community, on their way towards European union and a common foreign policy, are speaking here from a common position. As representative of the Chairman of the Community, Sir Geoffrey Howe has spoken for all of us. Going on from there, I shall outline the views of the Federal Republic of Germany, which has irrevocably committed its destiny to that of Europe and which
is a firmly established member of the Western Alliance.
Europe, so often torn by wars in the course of its history, a continent from which conquest, force and repression have spread to all parts of the world, today's Europe wishes to be a continent of peace and an example of good-neighborly relations. The peoples of the European Community - first and foremost the Germans and the French - have shown that it is possible to replace centuries-old rivalry and deadly conflict with friendship and to grow together into a union of equals.
However, Europe is more than the Community of the Twelve. After all, Europe does not end at the Elbe and Werra Rivers. Hence, in taking our decisions we never forget that there are also Germans and Europeans to the east of us. As a nation in the center of Europe, we consider it our historical duty as Germans to defuse and eventually surmount the antithesis between East and West. We should be bad Germans and bad Europeans were we to do otherwise. That is why, during the 1970s, we put relations between the Federal Republic of Germany and its eastern neighbors on a new contractual basis, a basis that remains an unshakable cornerstone of our policy. Conscious of the course of history, we seek steady development of German-Soviet co-operation, which is an essential prerequisite for a realistic policy of European detente.
We shall consistently pursue the process of German-Polish reconciliation, we seek a peaceful modus vivendi in the whole of Europe based on co-operation and mutual trust. An ever-more important role in this effort falls to the two German States by virtue of the 1972 Treaty cm the Basis of Relations. We Europeans must develop and design our European home, which comprises Europe in its entirety, as a place fit to live in. We must not continue to accept the enormous commitment of resources and energies to the conflict between West and East.
If today Europeans are becoming more fully aware of their common identity and seeking to live peacefully in their common home, the doors in that home must be opened much wider. This means that it must not be a capital offense to pass through those doors from one part of the home to the other, we must rid borders of their awesome and divisive character, thereby enabling States with varying social systems to pursue their common and complementary interests and their responsibility for their common future in peaceful competition, so that their peoples no longer live in fear of each other but can get to know one another. The Europeans must, through a gradual process of reducing conflict potential and of fostering co-operation, elevate their relations to new forms, what we seek is a peaceful order in Europe based on the equality of all and on equal entitlement to security.
We seek a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will regain its unity through free self-determination.
The defusing of the East-West antithesis depends greatly on the development of relations between the two super-Powers. For that reason, it is important that the second summit meeting between President Reagan and General Secretary Gorbachev should take place before the end of this year.
United States-Soviet nuclear and space negotiations must lead to positive results. The negotiating objective agreed upon by both parties in Geneva on 8 January 1985 to prevent an arms race in space and terminate it on earth has become an obligation towards all the peoples of the world. That obligation must be honored without reservation.
We attach particular importance to the negotiations on the American and Soviet intermediate-range missile systems. In recent months progress and rapprochement have been achieved in that field. We desire the global elimination of all American and Soviet land-based intermediate-range nuclear force of longer range. If that aim cannot be fulfilled in one step, we should like to see an interim result which leaves the lowest possible number of missiles cm both sides and sets equal ceilings on a global scale and for Europe.
We want the arms spiral finally to be reversed. We Germans will bring all our influence to bear to help negotiations to that end to an early result. We also desire drastic reductions in strategic nuclear potentials. The relationship between offensive and defensive weapons must be discussed in its proper context, as was agreed on 8 January 1985.
We consider it necessary that the provisions of the SALT II agreement continue to be observed and that the 1972 Treaty on the Limitation of An ti-Ball is tic Missile Systems be adhered to until the establishment of a new contractual basis.
Last weekend the 35 States participating in the Stockholm Conference on Confidence and Security Building Measures and Disarmament in Europe adopted a final document. That document is a signal of hope. The Conference derived from a Franco-German initiative. At the beginning of this year the joint appearance of the French and German Foreign Ministers injected a fresh impetus. Its success is a triumph for common sense, responsibility and sound judgment. The measures agreed upon will apply to the whole of Europe from the Atlantic to the Urals. They will make the military behavior of the participating States more calculable, thereby helping to reduce distrust. They can facilitate progress at the Vienna mutual and balanced force reduction negotiations and, above all, initiate negotiations on conventional stability in the area between the Atlantic and the Urals. There are also too many conventional arms in Europe, and there is an imbalance to our detriment.
The offer of negotiations made by the Halifax meeting of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Foreign Ministers still stands. The Warsaw Pact has responded favorably. Action must be taken before this year is over. The aim of future negotiations must be to create a situation in which the size of the forces of both sides is determined solely by defensive requirements. On our side this is already the case. We must never forget that even a war waged with conventional arms alone would in today's Europe be a thousand times more horrific than the Second World War and would amount to multiple genocide in Europe.
Negotiations on the world-wide prohibition of chemical weapons have reached the stage at which it is possible for the community of nations as a whole to be freed from the scourge of chemical weapons. There is no longer any reason to delay an agreement.
In the important issue of a nuclear test ban, too, progress is possible. Stable and lasting peace requires co-operative structures in all areas. Apart from confidence-building and disarmament, this implies the establishment of an ordered system of political interaction as well as the broadest possible economic, technological, environmental and cultural co-operation. Peoples must have a part in exchanges and co-operation and be permitted to exercise the rights set forth in
the Helsinki Final Act.
We in Europe are endeavoring to bring about such a development within the framework of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, whose key elements are security and co-operation. The participation of the United States and Canada in that process corresponds to the reality of the security situation in Europe. The multilateral nature of the process gives all Europeans in Western, Eastern, neutral and non-aligned countries the opportunity to help build the Europe of the future, in which all States, irrespective of their social systems, will determine their own fate and their engagement in co-operation with their neighbors.
The follow-up meeting in Vienna to the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, due to be opened at ministerial level in November, must point the way towards a peaceful order in Europe.
We seek a mandate for the continuation and expansion of the negotiations on confidence-building measures and disarmament in the whole of Europe on the basis of the encouraging results in Stockholm. We must take co-operative steps towards the establishment of more stable security structures in the conventional sphere.
In the field of economic co-operation, we seek greater transparency of markets, more exchanges and division of labor, and new forms of co-operation.
Everyone will benefit if the latest reactor-safety and environmental technology becomes accessible to all countries.Chernobyl was a warning signal.
Isolationism and trade wars are of no use to mankind; exchanges and co-operation are the way to accomplish common tasks, to increase the prosperity of all and to ward off dangers. Co-operative solutions to security issues will further extend the basis of trust, to the benefit of economic and technological co-operation.
We want human rights to be respected*, we seek more contacts and improved opportunities for human encounter, we seek even more youth exchanges, educational co-operation and progress in the field of information.
At this very moment there are real prospects of substantial progress, both in the relations and negotiations between the two super-Powers and in the multilateral process of detente, progress that will lead to a new end more lasting phase of fruitful relations between West and East. Tangible progress in Europe serves to promote development, security and stability throughout the world.
The European Community is already shouldering its responsibility for co-operation in the development of the third world. We do this without ambitions for political power and without wishing to impose our social model on others or to establish spheres of influence. We seek a world in which self-determination, social justice, human rights and fundamental freedoms are the paramount principles of interaction among all peoples.
International terrorism, the scourge of mankind, is directed against peaceful interaction among nations, the right to live and human dignity. It is the common task of the community of nations to fight this evil. The decisions of the General Assembly and the Security Council are an encouraging sign that awareness of this task is growing.
The continually worsening international refugee problem is a symptom of grave injustice in some parts of the world. The recommendations deriving from the discussion of the refugee initiative that I introduced in the General Assembly six years ago must lead to an improvement in international co-operation in this area. We hope that this session of the General Assembly will adopt by consensus the recommendations made by the Group of Experts.
Respect for the right of self-determination and respect for human rights are absolutely essential if peace is to be safeguarded. There is a direct path leading from the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights through the two covenants on human rights to the prohibition of torture. By adopting the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the community of nations has reaffirmed its desire to combat systematically this particularly abhorrent form of violation of human rights,. The next step should be the prevention of arbitrary executions. He shall continue to support the abolition of the death penalty.
Two years from now, in 1988, 40 years will have passed since the united Nations in its Universal Declaration of Human Rights took the vital pioneering step to embed human rights in international law. The United Nations needs institutions that will guarantee better protection of human rights. To this end, the appointment of a high commissioner for human rights is just as indispensable as the creation of a United Nations court of human rights. By such actions we could lend real significance to the year 1988. The persecuted and the suffering await a decisive and effective step on the part of the international community^
We roust not remain silent with regard to serious violations of human rights. If we find something intolerable, we have a duty to say so. Today this applies particularly to the inhumane and immoral system of apartheid, the systematic form of racial discrimination and segregation. The state of emergency in the Republic of South Africa has bred arbitrary and lawless action. An increasing death toll is the horrific outcome of a policy directed against people who wish only to live in their own country and to enjoy equal rights and freedom from discrimination. If the inhumane system of apartheid is not eliminated, the inevitable consequence will be even more violence, even more bloodshed and ultimately chaos and civil war.
Just as inhumanity cannot be reformed but only eliminated, apartheid is not
reformable and must therefore be abolished.
We demand the immediate initiation of dialog among the authentic representatives of all sections of the population and are preparing an initiative with that aim. We demand the immediate release of Nelson Mandela and all other political prisoners. We demand that the ban on the African National Congress and other political groups be lifted. We demand the termination of the state of emergency. The measures adopted by the European Community on 16 September 1986 lend emphasis to this political demand.
The internal tension generated by apartheid in South Africa reverberates through the entire region and is exacerbated by the South African policy of destabilizing its neighbors. This situation is further aggravated by the continuing illegal occupation of Namibia, whose people are denied their independence and their right of self-determination. The Federal Republic of Germany will not waver in its support for the earliest possible establishment of Namibian independence on the basis of Security Council resolution 435 (1978), as called for by the General Assembly at its fourteenth special session. There is no alternative to the United Nations proposed settlement as outlined in resolution 435 (1978).
The eighth summit conference of the non-aligned countries at Harare provided further evidence that genuine non-alignment is an important factor for peace and stability in inter national relations. We support the call addressed to the warring States of Iran and Iraq to put an end to the bloodshed in the Gulf region. We support the call made by the summit conference for the withdrawal of all foreign troops from Afghanistan and Cambodia. In Afghanistan, as in Cambodia, the right of peoples to self-determination must be realized.
In the same way, we advocate the right of the Palestinian people to exercise self-determination and to decide on their own future. This must come about within the framework of a peace settlement for the Middle East that guarantees all countries of the region, including Israel, safe and recognized boundaries and hence a secure existence as States.
We appeal to the regional groupings in all parts of the world to render their contribution to international stability.
We also need co-operative approaches to solve international economic problems and to align the international economic system with the needs of tomorrow. My country regards development co-operation between North and South as a central pillar of its policy in pursuit of peace. This is demonstrated by the rate at which our official aid has increased-, in 1985 its growth of 9 per cent far exceeded the growth of our gross national product. At the same time, our help is directed to areas where the need is greatest-, for that reason, the share of our aid devoted to Africa has been raised from 37 to 47 per cent. The Federal Government will also give its most vigorous support to the ProgramF of Action adopted at the special session of the United Nations General Assembly on the critical economic situation in Africa. We know that our world is facing a common fate, and we act accordingly. Our aim is a system of world-wide co-operation based on partnership and awareness of the interdependence of nations, in which private initiative and autonomous efforts have their place.
The first and elementary goal of development co-operation must be to free the world from hunger. To this and, we must enable farmers in all parts of the third world to produce enough food for themselves and for their domestic markets. In most of the developing countries rapid agricultural growth can prove to be a locomotive for national economies. All the aid devoted to rural development can bear fruit, however, only if the industrialized countries do not engage in ruinous competition with third-world food producers by subsidizing their own products. A stop must be put to the world-wide dumping of agricultural products.
We have managed so far to keep the problems of indebtedness under control by means of a co-operative strategy, but the crisis of indebtedness itself remains unresolved. It continues to pose a political challenge, but if it is to be overcome the international financial institutions, the governments of creditor countries and the private banks must play their part. Capital must at last begin to fl<w again from North to South instead of financing budgetary deficits in industrialized countries. It is of central importance that the private transfer of capital should be set in motion again. For this reason, the Federal Government has signed the Convention on the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency, which can become an effective means of attaining that goal. However, the indebted countries must also act. They must create conditions which will restore the confidence of domestic as well as foreign investors in the future of their countries. Only thus can the flight of capital be halted.
Another crucial task is that of revitalizing the international free trade system. The Punta del Este agreement on the opening of a new round of trade liberalization is an encouraging sign. We must strengthen and develop the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). We must prime radically the proliferation of agreements on voluntary restrictions; we must thin out the jungle of agricultural subsidies*, we must modernize GATT, and that means gradually incorporating services and foreign investments into the GATT system.
In an increasingly close-woven international economy, economic policies can no longer exist in isolation. Each country must see and consider the effects of its own economic policy on other countries. Here, too, co-operation and solidarity are called for. The greater a country, the greater is its economic responsibility to the rest of the world.
To establish the world-wide co-operative structures that will enable us to master our common future, we need a comprehensive dialog between industrialized and developing countries. I therefore consider it urgently necessary that we should at last inject new life into the North-South dialog and that we should orient that dialog towards the major issues affecting the future, thereby making it a potent factor in international politics and economics. In 1975, which is already 11 years ago now, as we took the first steps towards a large-scale North-South dialog, our thinking was determined by the study drawn up by the Club of Rome on the limits to growth. Shortages of energy, raw materials and foodstuffs, limits on the tolerance of the environment, seemed to be the law that would determine the future of the world. But we are beginning to sense that sane thing completely different is taking places a new technological revolution, which is establishing new and wider horizons for growth. New forms of technology -space technology, information technology and gene technology - permit a new type of growth that conserves energy and raw materials and which protects, indeed heals, the environment. This departure from the industrial age into a new era is not by any means peculiar to the Western countries but is a world-wide phenomenon. The new forms of technology can also bring decisive benefits to the developing countries in particular.
The potential of gene technology is immense. Let us remember that in the sixties high-yield varieties of rice and wheat led to the green revolution. India, which had hitherto been an importer of grain, became self-sufficient and even began to export grain. The new varieties were produced in the traditional manner by cross-breeding. Gene technology now offers far quicker and more effective ways of cultivating "made-to-order" plants, which are resistant to disease, can withstand drought and cold, can grow in over-saline soil and are rich in protein, and plants which breathe in nitrogen from the air, thereby relieving farmers of the need to buy expensive fertilizers.
A second green revolution seems set to take place in the nineties, its effects far exceeding those of the first. Above all, it will include regions hitherto at a disadvantage and be of great importance to arid zones such as the Sahel. Major improvements can also be expected in livestock breeding. Then there are the opportunities that gene technology opens up for medicine. For example, it gives us reason to hope that we can develop vaccines against tropical diseases that are at present incurable.
Great and new though the opportunities deriving from these new forms of technology may be, the risks associated with them are equally great and new. Gene-technology in particular raises issues of immense importance, since it gives man unprecedented power to interfere with the hereditary genes of living creatures.
The accident in the Chernobyl reactor brought home to us overnight how the task of mastering safely the risks of high technology has become a common responsibility, one that welds the nations of the world into a community in pursuit of survival. In Vienna the special International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) meeting on reactor safety has just begun. We hope that it will set negotiations in motion which will lead to universally binding safety standards and an international liability law. It is significant that that conference should take place under United Nations auspices, for the United Nations has become the indispensable forum for dealing with the issues that will determine our global future.
We must not, however, accept nuclear energy as the final answer to man's energy requirements? here, too, we must jointly seek new answers. The protection of the environment cannot today be guaranteed by an individual State when it relies on its own resources. Radioactivity, as we have seen, does not stop at national boundaries, nor do air and water pollution. It follows that environmental protection is no longer an affair to be dealt with by each individual State as it sees fit.
For thousands of years the inroads made by human technology into nature seemed so minimal that their overall impact could be disregarded. Nature appeared indestructible and inexhaustible. It is now realized, however, that technology has assumed dimensions that threaten to destroy the ecological balance of nature. We are living today with the shock of that discovery. Nothing is the same any more. International environmental policy has become a vital task. It is a safeguard for the future, a course of action dictated by our responsibility to future generations. In this field, we are confronted by fundamental tasks under the
heading of international domestic policy, a term which implies the need to act
together.
Those few references alone demonstrate the challenge facing all of us in this new technological revolution. What must be done - and here let me cite the Secretary-General's report to our Assembly - is;
"to manage safely, and to common advantage, the inventions of the human mind".
We need a North-South dialog that devotes itself to those new questions. It must be a dialog that takes as its starting point the immense structural upheaval currently taking place in the world and faces up to it in a courageous and forward-looking manner. What is needed is a global policy in which the problems of mankind are understood as tasks for mankind. Mankind, which has become a community in quest of survival, must recognize its responsibility to its contemporaries as well as to all future generations.
The United Nations is the forum where this policy must be discussed. This development must take place with due regard for the identity of all peoples, which have all made unique contributions to human history and to the civilizations of the world. Respect for others also entails respect for their cultural identity. Our international Organization must therefore promote a world-wide cultural dialog that sill prevent the submersion of native cultures by foreign influences and highlight the variety of cultural achievements for the benefit of all.
I have again stated the case for world-wide co-operation in a spirit of mutual confidence to resolve the major international issues facing us. To this end we need the United Nations as a sound international Organization, as the forum where openness prevails and as an indispensable negotiating framework. It draws its strength not least from its universality. That is why all peoples, including the Korean people, should be represented here. We must do everything possible to maintain the effectiveness of the United Nations. To this end, it is necessary for us, the Member States, to observe fully the obligations deriving from the Charter. It is also necessary for this session of the General Assembly to achieve positive results in its discussion of measures to increase the efficiency of the United Nations, based on the report of the 18 experts.
My Government supports the views outlined by the Secretary-General in his report on the role of the United Nations in international relations and the structural reforms needed to strengthen the Organization. My delegation welcomes the fact that the President has so clearly defined the operative objectives of the reforr process. The United Nations needs reforms to remain strong and effective. For our part, we need a strong and effective United Nations so that through our co-operation here in the Organization the survival of mankind may be assured.
It is a great honor for me to address the Assembly on behalf oFrance.
The French Government is pleased, Sir, that the General Assembly is meeting this year under your distinguished guidance. Your election is a tribute to Bangladesh, whose commitment to peace and international co-operation is known to all of us here. It also bears witness to the confidence our delegations have in you, sure in the knowledge that you will carry out your mandate with the authority necessary to direct our work successfully. You can count on the whole-hearted co-operation of the French delegation, which offers you its warmest congratulations and its best wishes for success.
It is also a pleasure for me to salute our Secretary-General, whom I was delighted to receive in Paris a short time ago. I am happy to see him restored to health, and to be able to express again, here, the French Government's gratitude for the services he has rendered our Organization, and in particular for the decisive contribution he made to settling the dispute that had arisen between New Zealand and France. I hope he will obtain from all Member States the assurances he has every right to seek in order to continue the mission entrusted to him nearly five years ago, which he has carried out with such competence and skill. The fortieth anniversary of our Organization, while an occasion for celebrating our achievements, also reminded us of the limitations reality imposes on the implementation of the Charter.	^
To review the disillusionments and disappointments is in itself a salutary exercise. Today, as the Secretary-General emphasized in his remarkable report, our Organization faces not only the problem of its financial situation, but also the inability of its Members to agree on priorities and tasks. It is my feeling, however, that the general realization of past disarray and inadequacies has, foe the first time, led to a commitment to real reform, as evidenced by the conclusions of the Group of 18.
No one disputes the existing shortcomings in co-operation between Members of the United Nations, but this necessary clear-sightedness should not lead us to take a pessimistic view. On the contrary, France considers that only a display of demonstrating realism can give us assurance that we shall be able to resolve the problems of today and those of the future.
The San Francisco Charter made the preservation of international peace and security the primary goal of the United Nations. Looked at uncompromisingly and without ideological bias, the world in which we live is seen to fall far short of the expectations of the founders of the United Nations.
One of the outstanding features of our age, accentuated by changes in attitudes and by technological progress, is the shrinking of our planet, which is leading to increasing overlapping of problems at the world level. No serious event, however localized, can leave us indifferent any more. Today neither conflicts nor alliances take account of frontiers or distances. They transcend differences of culture and race, without, however, eliminating them. Cn the contrary, in many cases, the internationalization of problems has triggered a backlash, sometimes very extreme, in the form of clannish behavior of every kind.
Paradoxically, therefore, while the world is tending to become a single entity, it has not been able to overcome th.; threats and collective challenges confronting it. Conflicts and violations of human rights are increasing, while the cancer of terrorism is spreading. The arms race is continuing, spurred on by technological progress, the benefits of which ought rather to be shared throughout the world. The economic and financial situation of many third world countries remains very critical.
In the Middle East, France has long maintained that peace must be based on principles which, for us, are self-evident. Israel's security and right to existence must be acknowledged and guaranteed; the Palestinian people must be permitted to exercise its right to self-determination. Peace presupposes first of all mutual recognition by the parties concerned and the primary responsibility of the parties in the quest for a settlement, which cannot be achieved by outside Powers, although their contribution may be very useful.
That being so, there is now talk again of convening a properly prepared conference with the presence of all the parties concerned. He approve of this in principle and are ready to play a full part in helping to find a solution to a conflict that is too serious for the international community to have the right to regard itself as powerless.
Among the favorable signs that may be noted is that the idea of the need for dialog is gaining ground, albeit slowly. France has always welcomed indications to that effect.
Unfortunately, these rays of hope do not allow us to forget the unending crisis that is tearing Lebanon apart. It has tragic consequences for a people linked to France by age-old ties of every kind, a people France loves and respects.
Whatever else may have been said, Lebanon was once a very model of coexistence, tolerance, freedom and culture to the entire world. It would be an irreparable loss if this center of intellectual vitality, whose light shone throughout the Mediterranean world, were to be engulfed in the rising tide of fanaticism and hatred. It is my fervent hope that this battered and ravaged country will one day find the path to reconciliation through the restoration of its independence and territorial integrity.
For the past several years, by virtue of its historical ties with Lebanon -but also because the issue far transcends Lebanon itself - France has made
ceaseless efforts, at the price of considerable sacrifice, to promote the return to peace longed for by the vast majority of Lebanese. To that end, France decided to participate in international action wh<ch made it possible to limit the chaos in the aftermath of the Israeli invasion. Our Ambassador in Beirut, Louis Delamare, was among the first to pay with his life for his untiring efforts to renew dialog between fraternal enemies. Dozens of French soldiers have been killed in the attempt to permit a return to the rule of law and to restore a minimum of normal life to the civilian population of Beirut.
In the south of that suffering country the international community is endeavoring to prevent a new escalation in the fighting and senseless violence. Side by side with other national contingents in the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), French soldiers have all too often paid with their lives in a peace mission.
But of late the situation has become intolerable. The united Nations Force is no longer merely being caught in sporadic clashes between the enemies it is meant to be keeping apart; it has become the target of methodically prepared attacks which will soon leave it no alternative other than to retrench in order to ensure its own safety.
We must note that since its formation in 1978 UNIFIL has been unable to carry out the mandate entrusted to it by the Security Council. That is why last April France drew the attention of the Council to this state of affairs and to the concern it was causing us. The events of the past few weeks have, unfortunately, confirmed our assessment. The sacrifices we have accepted to date give us the right to demand that each of us should shoulder his responsibilities and that the means available to the Force should be commensurate with the mission entrusted to it. We are facing a serious challenge to our Organization, its authority and its ability to carry out peace-keeping operations. That challenge must be met.
For sore than six years Iraq and Iran have been tearing each other apart in a war which, because of its intensity and the resources and tremendous losses it has entailed, can no longer be considered simply as a regional conflict. Freedom of navigation has been imperiled on shipping routes of vital importance for the world economy. The dogged prosecution of this absurd war threatens to shatter the equilibrium of a region of strategic importance. Like all other members of the international community, France is aware of and deeply concerned by this situation. We can but express our hope for a reasonable negotiated outcome to this protracted conflict, and we urge that the relevant Security Council resolutions finally be implemented. France supports all efforts to bring an end to this war, in particular the Secretary-General's offers of mediation.
Although We have dwelt at length on crises in the Middle East that our Organization has thus far, unfortunately, been powerless to resolve, I have no intention of forgetting all the others which have thwarted the peace efforts of our Organization for many years. These include: Cyprus, where a de facto situation which France does not recognize has been established; Afghanistan and Cambodia, subjects to which I shall return in this statement; the Korean peninsula, where division and tension have persisted for 40 years and where it is our earnest hope to see dialog established between North and South, which is the only way to ease tension and then to resolve the Korean question. We wish the United Nations to be a truly universal body and, hence, for all the Korean people to be represented here. Other crises include the situation in Central America, where I hope that with the active assistance of all the countries in the region a solution nay be found to the current crisis; and Western Sahara, where I hope that the joint efforts of the Secretary-General and of the past and current Chairmen of the Organization of African Unity will make it possible to resolve a conflict involving States friendly to France, a conflict which has already lasted too long.

The international community cannot fail to express its indignation at the continuing daily violations of the most basic human rights throughout the world, whether such violations result from the wars raging in several areas or from deliberate policies. No pressure, regardless of its source, and no sophism can ever make us accept such violations. Transcending all ideologies and arguments prompted by expediency, there can be only one concept of human dignity.
I am pleased to see that in many States, especially the Philippines and Latin America, the return to democracy has shown that people have never forgotten it.
For several years now, with the courage born of determination to defend their independence and dignity, the Afghan and Cambodian peoples have been resisting foreign occupation and the authorities it has imposed on them.
In Afghanistan one third of the inhabitants of the country have had to seek refuge outside its borders. The elite of the population has had to leave the country in large numbers, and every day women, children and old people have been paying the price of the acts of war perpetrated against their villages in violation of all humanitarian principles.
In Cambodia the Khmer people, a friend of France, is the victim of increasingly oppressive foreign occupation. We are even witnessing a new form of colonization in that country.
Were the Afghan and Cambodian peoples to be given back their pride and freedom they would not constitute a threat to anyone in the region any mere than they, have in the past, and certainly not to their powerful neighbors. The invasions of which they are victims must be seen as wars of conquest belonging to another age, and France will continue to say, along with the vast majority of States, that the Soviet Union and Viet Nam must, in their own interest and for the sake of world peace, end their respective ventures in Afghanistan and Cambodia.
Speaking on behalf of the Twelve, Britain's Foreign Secretary has just stated once again that the institutionalized racial discrimination that the South African authorities persist in maintaining is unacceptable. The measures announced by Pretoria have so far not touched on essentials, and no one should be surprised that they have failed to check the spiral of violence.
While recognizing the complexity of the problems involved, France, together with its partners in the European Community, has decided to put into effect an additional program of sanctions but believes that these arrangements should be supplemented by positive measures. Everything possible must be done to promote genuine dialog, which of course presupposes the freeing of political prisoners.
Together with all those who are working to encourage moderation and conciliation in that country, we should like to believe that it is not too late to lay the foundations of a society in which, without exception, the right to dignity of all the communities that have built South Africa is at last recognized.
The tragic events in Istanbul, Karachi and Paris have proved once again that terrorism has become the systematic weapon of a war that knows no frontiers and is mostly faceless.
Admittedly the phenomenon is not a new one and instances of it are only too numerous. However, I am struck by the recent upsurge of terrorism and the growing number of victims. Here I must mention in particular the French, American and British hostages being held in Lebanon.
Unless it wants to delude itself, the international community should recognize that it has not always faced up to the scourge as unflinchingly as it should have. Some would have us believe that it is the only means of expression of oppressed peoples. The odious methods it uses, the slaughter of innocent people in free societies and the continuing blackmail over the lives of hostages make it impossible for us to confuse, even for a moment, those actions with genuine resistance.
Certainly no one would deny that the persistence of unresolved conflicts and the injustices they bring in their train is one of the sources of terrorism. But we must also denounce many other causes such as the rising tide of intolerance and fanaticism and the complicity of States that are willing to close their eyes to the activities of terrorist organizations or do not hesitate to use them to their own advantage and even go so far as to encourage them.
In a world in which indiscriminate terrorist violence can affect the citizens of all States, there was bound to be a reaction.
We are gratified to note that the General Assembly, reflecting that world-wide realization, last year condemned these cowardly and criminal practices and that the Security Council and the Commission on Human Rights have taken a firm stand against the taking of hostages. However, France, which took the initiative in submitting this question to the Commission on Human Rights, wishes to emphasize the need to supplement these texts, whose political significance is evident, with the concrete measures the situation calls for.
The determined action required would be made easier if all States were effectively to meet the obligations incumbent upon them under international law and conventions to which they have subscribed.
I venture to hope that the appropriate reaction of the international community expressed here will encourage all States to co-operate, particularly in the strengthening of air and maritime security, and convince them of the need to work through all appropriate channels, national and other, to eradicate terrorism.
Since the United Nations was founded the Organization and the entire international community have had to face up to the strategic realities of the -nuclear age.
France is convinced that nuclear deterrence, which has prevented a direct confrontation between the two super-Powers for the past 40 years, remains an
irreplaceable factor for peace and that there is no alternative within human grasp in spite of the rapid progress taking place in advanced technology, progress in which France has equipped itself to play a full part. t
In view of the considerable disproportion in existing arsenals, any progress towards nuclear disarmament must begin with verifiable, progressive and balanced reductions in the entire range of American and Soviet strategic weapons systems. These reductions must be carried out under such conditions that the balance of nuclear deterrence is not called into question.
All the speakers here have stressed the importance that progress in the current negotiations in Geneva between the Soviets and theAmericans could have for East-West relations. France has already said many times that it would welcome a priori such prospects as might be opened by a Soviet-American summit meeting this year. It recognizes in particular the political importance that an agreement on a global limitation on intermediate-range weapons systems could have in the world. It must, however, observe that the reduction of those systems would affect only a very small part of the nuclear arsenals of the United states and the Soviet Union.
The President of the French Republic recalled in 1983 from this very rostrum the conditions which France has set for its participation in a nuclear disarmament process when the time comes. I should like to repeat here that these conditions will not change and that France will not agree to its forces being take) into account, directly or indirectly, in negotiations to which it is not a party.
As long as French security rests on nuclear deterrence, the first requirement f or ray corn try is to maintain the credibility of its strategic forces at the necessary level. For that reason, France has naturally declined to go along with any form of planned obsolescence of its forces while other Powers retain a huge excess nuclear capacity. It will accept neither a quantitative nor a qualitative freeze on its arsenal nor will it halt its nuclear tests. That arsenal does not exceed the level considered indispensable for our security and our independence. The nuclear tests are being carried out in unquestionably safe conditions that have been recognized as such by independent and undisputed experts from the countries of the Pacific to whom France has allowed access to its test site, other States regularly carry out many tests and none of them provides or has provided such guarantees on the international level.
With regard to Europe, the problem of security cannot be reduced solely to its
nuclear aspects. What distinguishes our continent from all the others is that the
permanent wound of its division is compounded by an unequal arms build-up of 
conventional and chemical weapons unmatched elsewhere in the world.
Several years ago France proposed that in the framework of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe an approach should be sought that would make it possible, in stages, to bring greater transparency to military activities and hence greater trust throughout our continent before initiating a gradual return to a lower level of the balance of armaments. In that spirit and, I would recall, on the basis of the French proposal, the Conference on disarmament in Europe was convened. It completed its work at Stockholm last week. We are pleased that the first East-West agreement on security to be reached in nearly 10 years came about in that context. This result should enable the follow-up conference of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, which will meet shortly in Vienna, to make headway in all fields covered by the Helsinki Final Act - among them, human rights, the free movement of individuals, contacts among people -which, just as much as security and disarmament, affect the progress of East-West relations.
In regard to nuclear energy, France, like the rest of the world, was disturbed by the Chernobyl accident. The accident must be judged with due gravity and seriousness. On the other hand, it should not serve as a pretext for those who seek to speculate on fear and irrational sentiment. The analysis recently completed in Vienna by international experts confirms the specific nature of the Soviet reactor; the lessons of the Chernobyl tragedy cannot be transferred as such and applied to Western-type installations.
France decided several years ago to base its energy independence on nuclear energy. That goal is well cm the way to being reached today and cannot be brought into question. Conscious of what is at stake, France will naturally work for greater co-operation on safety already under way in the framework of the International Atomic Energy Agency. But I should liKss to make the point here that the power to regulate in such an area must belong quite clearly to those who alone have the responsibility, capability and means to put into operation both the installations themselves and the regulations - in other words, national Governments, in the same spirit, France will continue to help interested countries acquire the benefits of the civilian applications of the atom once there is appropriate international monitoring to guarantee that the fruits of such co-operation are not diverted.
France and its partners in the European Space Agency have decided to confront the great challenge of the peaceful exploration of space. We for our part are resolved to prevent a gap from developing in this field between nations that would move ahead for their own advantage and the others, which would be denied the benefits of applications vital for their development: earth observation, meteorological applications, navigation, communications transmission and direct television. France will continue to work to further existing international co-operation and develop the co-operation planned for the years ahead.
We are bound to note today that the economic and financial situation of numerous third-world countries, especially the least developed among them, appears to have grown much worse. The situation is especially critical in Africa, and the special session which once again this year the General Assembly fortunately devoted to the problem highlighted the dimensions of the problem.The African corn tries know from experience that the efforts they have courageously decided to undertake will have the resolute and fraternal backing of France. Our commitment stems from the close relations we have with our partners to the north and the south of the Sahara. It also results from our awareness of the exceptional seriousness of the crisis, whose internal and external causes have been analysed with exemplary lucidity by the States concerned. The crisis affects almost the entire continent, which still encompasses two thirds of the world's least-advanced countries. France provides more aid to sub-Saharan Africa than any other country. Its contribution to the development of the continent as a whole has not flagged over these past years. No one should doubt that this will continue in the future.
Certain regions in the third world whose economic development has been disastrous are also victims of threats to their security, and I should like to say a few words here about the sadly telling case of Chad. The difficulties and handicaps of every kind that that country's leaders have had to face are widely known. They have once again been compounded by attempts on the part of its neighbor, Libya, at destabilization, by occupation of part of the territory and, lastly, by overt military aggression. The Government of Chad received, when it has so requested, the support of France. The aid we provided, and in particular the
military assistance, was intended, while deterring Libya from pursuing its offensive activities, to prepare what will doubtless be a long and difficult road towards national reconciliation and reconstruction in Chad.
In the case of Chad, as in many other cases, the relationship between underdevelopment and insecurity and, consequently, the level of armaments, has been constantly demonstrated. Some years ago France proposed that this crucial problem as a whole should be the subject of political examination at the United Nations. Following the debates of the experts, it now remains to give concrete substance to this plan, either at the next special session of the General Assembly on disarmament or, if a consensus emerges, at a special conference to be held at an earlier date.
I should like, finally, to say a few words about the question of debt. For all too many developing countries debt has now become a dominant concern. The day-to-day effort to meet payments on due dates mobilizes all their energies. It does not permit Governments the freedom necessary to resolve their long-term development problems.
Over the past few years, there has been a great deal of consideration of this question. The very volume of such discussion shows that the international community has awakened to the seriousness and, at the same time, the complexity of the situation. Debt, in itself, is the consequence of the distorted development of the international economy which has brought us to the situation in which we find ourselves today.
It is for that reason that no one can any longer claim that the issue can be resolved in a purely mechanical manner by granting short-term facilities or through the simplistic application of miracle remedies. If we are to solve the problem in a lasting manner, we must tackle the root causes of the situation and not simply its effects.
The world facing a crisis of exceptional gravity, a phase of structural
adaptation in the international economy requiring greater international
cooperation so that it will be more imaginative, more active and more pragmatic. I am fully aware that not everyone is convinced that this is necessary, but I think that the movement is in the right direction. France, for its part, believes that we must increase international co-operation in three areas. First, there must be increased financing for developing countries to loosen the grip of debt. I should add that there is no instance of a country that has not had to have recourse to substantial external financing during its industrialization phase. This is obvious, and in this area I note some progress, both in thinking and in conduct.
Broad agreement is now emerging on the need to expand the role and enhance the intervention capabilities of multilateral development institutions Each of us recognizes that every other kind of financial assistance is also needed, in particular from international commercial banks and from States, in the form of aid for development and commercial credit.
With regard to bilateral aid for development, France will again increase its effort in 1987 over 1986, with a view to reaching its goal of 1 per cent of gross national product.
Secondly, the remarkable efforts to ensure economic recovery embarked on by developing countries, especially by the most heavily indebted among them, must be continued. Outstanding results" have already been achieved in the battle against internal and external deficits, in curbing inflation and in implementing bold economic policies that emphasize the long-term interests of nations rather than favor illusory, fragile short-term solutions. It takes courage to set up and implement such policies, and I should like to pay tribute to those who have taken such initiatives.
A single statistic will suffice to illustrate the importance of such efforts: the balance-of-payments deficit of non-oil-exporting countries has fallen from $73 billion in 1982 to $29 billion in 1986.
Lastly, it is absolutely essential to correct the current disorders in the international economic and financial system. The solution to the debt problem must be based on the resumption of sustained economic growth in the world economy. This should be a key objective of the industrialized countries> which have a primary responsibility in this regard.
The progress made in the war against inflation should enable us to continue to lower real interest rates, without which any lasting solution of the debt problem would be illusory, and to continue to move towards greater stability of the international monetary system.
The correction of financial imbalances should also be actively sought. It is not a healthy situation when the world's greatest industrial country continues to drain off such a sizable 
In this context, France welcomes the success of the Punta del Este conference and hopes that the new round of negotiations to be launched will make it possible to liberalize world trade and to strengthen solidarity among nations.
Freedom in all its dimensions - political, economic, cultural and religious - is being flouted in too many countries. War and terrorism are spreading insecurity and fear. The dignity of the human person is in jeopardy in every part of the world where hunger, poverty and violence reign.
Whatever ideologists may say, the values of dignity and freedom are inscribed in the conscience of all mankind. France, for its part, intends to defend those values wherever it is present in the world, as well as within this Organization, which would be failing in its mission if it resigned itself to compromise or impotence.
Off all the challenges I have mentioned, two seem to me of more urgent response than the others.
One is terrorism, which would take us back to a time we thought long past if we allowed it a free hand to undermine democratic societies and destroy the basic rules of international life.
The other is the critical situation of many third-world countries, particularly the least advanced among then. It is inconceivable that we should allow them to be crushed under the weight of their economic and financial difficulties - inconceivable, inhuman and irresponsible.
Over and above the problems encountered by our Organization, even in its day-to-day functioning - problems which I am convinced will be resolved - the wisdom and intelligence so often demonstrated by this Assembly encourages me, in turn, to make a confident appeal to all the Member States.
As I said at the beginning of my remarks, the internationalization of problems does not of itself entail international solidarity. In this regard, the development of co-operation at the regional level is an encouraging first step. Everybody knows that France in particular sets great store by intensifying its co-operation with its partners in the European Community.
The urgency of the challenges that I have just mentioned compels us to set awareness of the need for this solidarity above our economic differences and political divergences. Let us all, therefore, understand that the dangers confronting mankind are common to us all and that the only response is to be found in solidarity.
The PRESIDENT; On behalf of the General Assembly, I wish to thank the Prime Minister of the French Republic for the important statement he has just made.
Mr. President, I welcome you to your prestigious office with the same warmth which exists between our two countries - both members of the CeraHonweaifcu. I share with you some knowledge of the English Bar and know that you will show the dedication, wisdom and objectivity which, if I may say so, is the hallmark of our legal profession.
I cannot fail at the same time to pay a tribute to your predecessor, who represents a fellow member of the European Community. Ambassador de Pinies has had a distinguished career at the United Nations, crowned by his handling of the fortieth anniversary session, which captured world attention. He did not disappoint the high expectations we all had of him.
Nor can I omit to pay a tribute to our Secretary-General and to say how happy I am, how happy we all are, to see him restored to health. His modesty and patience - qualities which once again showed through in his annual report - are an example to us all.
I have the honor to address the General Assembly today on behalf of the European Community and its 12 Member States.
Forty years ago, on 19 September 1946, Winston Churchill had this to say of Europe:
"Over wide areas a vast quivering mass of tormented, hungry, care-worn and bewildered human beings gape at the ruins of their cities and homes and scan the dark horizons for the approach of some new peril, tyranny or terror." A generation later it is sobering for us in Western Europe to remember those words. They remind us of the full destructive force of what Churchill, in a later speech described as:
"Ancient nationalistic feuds and modern ideological factions [which] distract and infuriate the unhappy, hungry populations."
The destructive power of Churchill's "feuds and factions" is undiminished, and it is for that reason I wish to dwell for a moment on the more hopeful experience of the European Community. I say this with great humility; for in this century, as often before, we Europeans have feared and distrusted, fought and plundered one another. Yet today 12 free countries of Western Europe can speak to the world with a single voice; and we can do so in the conviction that we shall never attack one another again.
The Community is an ambitious undertaking. The decisions we take in our Community can change the laws of all our countries. They touch the life of all our citizens. Of course it sometimes takes us time to agree; but we believe other nations could profit from the same stability and trust which we have built in Europe since 1945. This mutual trust has allowed us to build up our joint political and economic strength. We are determined to go on advancing our interests together. Let there be no doubt: a challenge to one of us is a challenge to all: whether it be to our liberties, interests, rights or well-being; whether it comes from terrorists or drug-dealers, from bullies or from tyrants.
Last year my predecessor, Jacques Poos, the Foreign Minister of Luxembourg, spoke here as representative of 10 members of the European Community. It is my privilege to address you on behalf of 12 member States, for the Community has welcomed two new members - Spain and Portugal. Their accession weaves two more strands of European culture and history into one ever-thickening cable. Meanwhile the construction of Europe goes on. We are ratifying new treaty provisions on foreign policy co-operation. And by the end of 1992 we mean to have broken down the barriers that still divide the Community; so that, from Aberdeen to Athens, from Copenhagen to Cadiz, goods, services and capital and, by no means least, people, can move freely between us.
Our Community has learns to work together in domestic affairs. It is now the world's single greatest trading bloc.Individually we have made powerful contributions to world affairs: our contribution must and will grow, now that we act together. The principles of the Charter of the United Nations have always been basic to our Community. He believe that our history imposes on us a particular responsibility to work for those principles and to promote in the world the ideal of dialog and peaceful co-operation which has served the member States so well.
But Europe, the wider Europe, remains divided. Twenty-five years ago the Berlin wall cast its shadow between East and West. Barbed wire and concrete set neighbors and families apart from each other. These man-made divisions oblige us, as Europeans, to search for reconciliation and the rebuilding of trust between nations. Our common history and culture encourage us to believe we can succeed.
The accident at Chernobyl, to which the Soviet Foreign Minister has just referred in his own speech, has added a new dimension to exchanges between East and West. Let us hope that the lessons of that accident will be well learned. As Martin Luther King Jr. said, in a different context:
"We must learn to live together as brothers or perish together as fools."
For us in Europe, as for the rest of the world, better relations between the two super-Powers are of the greatest importance. We warmly welcomed the Geneva summit meeting last November between President Reagan and General Secretary Gorbachev. We share the widespread hope that there will be another summit this year. That prospect has already produced major proposals by both sides. We therefore much regret that the arrest of a respected American journalist in Moscow has cast a cloud over those hopes. We look for its early removal.
The Geneva negotiations have as one priority the prevention of an arms race in outer space. The other urgent priority is deep cuts in the strategic and intermediate forces of the United States and the Soviet Union. We believe that the United States, the Soviet Union and Europe can make significant progress towards disarmament without compromising their security. An early agreement on the world-wide elimination of chemical weapons should and must be obtained.
Even if the objective of general and complete disarmament can only be gradually achieved, it nonetheless remains our ultimate goal. But agreements will have lasting value only if they are fair, balanced and verifiable. And if confidence is to grow, existing arms control agreements must be respected by all parties. We are approaching a critical period: there is an opportunity for major decisions. Future generations will not forgive failure.
Arms control and disarmament negotiations are only part of East-West
relations. Practical steps are needed to overcome the tension and divisions that lie behind the high level of armaments.
That is why the Helsinki Pinal Act is so important. It is fundamental for the health of East-West relations that all the Helsinki commitments should be honored. We look to all the participants in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) process to do so. At the CSCE follow-up meeting in Vienna, we will press for the sort of steps which ordinary people in our countries can see and understand.
The Twelve warmly welcome the successful conclusion of the Stockholm conference last weekend. The agreement that has been reached there is a significant contribution towards reducing the risk of war in Europe and towards establishing greater confidence between East and West. The Twelve, who made a substantial contribution to that result, will seek to build on it both in the field of arms control and, more widely, in the CSCE process.
Although Afghanistan and Cambodia are two countries far distant from our own, the outside interventions there symbolize many of the problems we face in East-West relations and in working for greater stability in the world at large. In Afghanistan in particular, some small detachments of Soviet troops may be withdrawn, but over 110,000 Soviet troops will still remain.
Tens of thousands of Afghan citizens have been killed as a result of the Soviet occupation. They will not return to life. Four million people remain outside their country, living as refugees. Many of them have been taken in by Pakistan, which has been rewarded by numerous attacks launched across its border from Afghanistan.
Speaking for a moment as the Foreign Minister of the United Kingdom, I cannot refrain from observing that it was in this context that the Foreign Minister of the
Soviet Union said that "the time has come to learn to call things by their proper names." I cannot refrain from expressing my astonishment and dismay that the facts which I have just described - the events which have taken place in the past six years in Afghanistan - were described by the Soviet Foreign Minister as "a national, democratic revolution". If that be their view, then it is not a view that can be shared by the rest of the world.
Speaking again for the Twelve, the principles we seek are those that must underlie a solution. They have been massively endorsed by the Assembly on many occasions. The Soviet Union should implement those principles, withdraw all its troops from Afghanistan and agree an acceptable timetable without delay. We support the efforts of the Secretary-General of the United Nations to resolve the conflict. Only the success of those efforts - and soon - can prevent further suffering.
Few parts of the world have suffered more than the Middle Bast from the ancient feuds and modern factions of Churchill's phrase. Our approach is the same: to counsel dialog and co-operation. There are no military answers to the conflict in the Middle East or in North Africa.
A just, lasting and comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israel dispute can be achieved only through negotiation. We take encouragement from the agreement between Egypt and Israel over Taba. We have made our own views known on many occasion, and we stand by them. An international conference could make a major contribution if the gap between the parties could be narrowed and if they could agree on the principle and nature of such a conference.
All parties should clearly and unambiguously accept two principles: the right to existence and security of all States in the area, including Israel, and the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination and all that that implies.
We appeal to the parties concerned - the Arab States, Israel and the Palestinian people - to open the door to peace by recognizing each other's rights.
The Twelve are working individually and collectively to help development in the occupied territories. We call on Israel, pending its withdrawal in accordance with Security Council resolution 242 (1967), scrupulously to fulfill its obligations as the occupying Power and to ease restrictions on political activity and economic development. But such measures must be a prelude to, not a substitute for, true peace negotiations.
Six years ago this month, the conflict between Iran and Iraq broke out. It has claimed well over half a million casualties and gravely damaged both countries. It is a source of great concern to their neighbors in the Gulf, with whom we sympathize. We have unreservedly condemned the use of chemical weapons and the escalating attacks by both sides on shipping in the Gulf. The two countries should ask themselves what possible good is served by continuing this conflict. We would deeply deplore any further escalation.
It should be accepted equally by both parties that this conflict can only be brought to an end by negotiation. Security Council resolution 582 (1986) forms the best basis for such a negotiated settlement. We urge Iran and Iraq to agree an immediate ceasefire and to seek a peaceful, honorable solution to their differences, co-operating fully with the Secretary-General in the exercise of his good offices.
In the Western Sahara, as well, we appeal to the parties to respond positively to the Secretary-General's efforts to find a peaceful solution.
The United Nations is doing vital worth the effort to preserve Lebanon's sovereignty, unity independence and territorial integrity. We deplore recent
incidents which have put new obstacles in the way of the mission of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). We extend our sympathies to the victims. We wish to underline the urgency and importance of taking measures to enable the Force to carry out its mission safely and effectively. The latest events have demonstrated how intolerable the present situation has become.
I now turn to the problem of Cyprus, which after too many years remains an important matter of international concern. The island remains tragically divided. The Twelve reaffirm their strong backing for the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of Cyprus, in accordance with relevant United Nations resolutions. We stand fully by our previous statements.
In particular, we reject any action that purports to establish an independent State within Cyprus. As we have made clear on many occasions, we support the Secretary-General in his mission of good offices for a just and viable solution to the problem. We ask all concerned to co-operate with him and not to take any action that would make his task more difficult.
In South Africa, the Twelve have worked to promote the genuine national dialog that is so obviously and urgently needed if there is to be a peaceful solution to the country's problems. South Africa's policies also affect its neighbors. We have forcefully condemned its armed incursions against neighboring countries. There must be no recurrence of those armed raids.
The Twelve have repeatedly made clear their revulsion at apartheid, we have demanded that it should be abolished. We utterly reject a philosophy which denies opportunity or liberty to one child yet gives ordinary rights and privileges to another solely on the basis of his or her colour. Such a system breeds hatred and violence. There have been reforms in South Africa, but too few and too slow to stem the surging bitterness and bloodshed in the country. The present state of emergency has brought desolation to the homes of many thousands of people imprisoned without trial and has worsened, not improved, the prospects for peaceful change.
Violence will not end apartheid. Instead, conditions must be created in which dialog can begin., But dialog is impossible while black leaders remain imprisoned or detained and black organizations proscribed. That is why the Twelve have repeatedly called on the South African Government to release unconditionally Nelson Mandela and other political prisoners and to lift the ban on the African National Congress, the Pan African Congress of Azania and other political parties.
In September 1985 the European Community countries agreed on a series of measures - some restrictive, some positive - designed to impress on the South African Government the inescapable need for fundamental reform. In June this year, at The Hague, the European Council decided to take additional action. As part of that action, Heads of State and Government of the Twelve asked me to undertake a mission to southern Africa. In the course of two visits to the area ^r July I sought to explain the policies of the Twelve to South Africa's neighbors and to impress upon the South African Government our deep concern and the need for steps to encourage a peaceful negotiated solution.
In the absence of any progress in that direction, and having consulted the major Western industrialized countries, the Twelve agreed at Brussels last week to
impose a ban on new investments in South Africa and on the import of iron, steel and gold coins from South Africa. Those measures represent a further step reinforcing the measures we took last year, which included bans on all exports to and imports from South Africa of arms and paramilitary equipment, a ban on oil exports and a ban on all new co-operation in the nuclear field.
In addition we are implementing a concerted European program to help the victims of apartheid, both individually and collectively. We are helping those arrested under the state of emergency and we are putting heavy emphasis on programs of training and education for black South Africans. We are also helping South Africa's neighbors, for example over the improvement of transport facilities in the region.
We shall keep up our effort in all these areas and do everything we can to promote urgent and peaceful change.
Time is short. We appeal to the South African Government to look to the future, to accept that fundamental change is inevitable. That Government clearly understands the demographic and economic challenge. South Africa's white leaders are sowing the wind; unless sincere negotiation begins now, their own children will reap the whirlwind.
The South African Government also bears a heavy responsibility in Namibia. Last year it set up a so-called transitional government of national unity. That body has no status whatsoever under the United Nations plan. We cannot accept unilateral moves by South Africa to transfer power in Namibia. We call upon the South African Government to implement the United Nations plan without further delay.
Central America is another area where armed force will solve nothing. dialog and peaceful negotiation are the only way forward. A political solution is
of the highest importance and it must emerge from the region itself. We support the Contadora peace process, which is a major step in the right direction, but further effort is needed by all concerned to reduce regional tensions. .*t Luxembourg last November we established a political dialog with Central America to underline our active support for that process in the interests of stability and pluralistic democracy. We also signed a co-operation agreement. We reiterate our intention to increase our aid to the region substantially in order to encourage regional co-operation and economic development.
On behalf of the United Kingdom I shall be circulating a document, a separate national communication, on the FaIklands.
More widely in Latin America, we have been encouraged by the continuing consolidation of democracy in most countries of South America. We hope that this process will continue throughout the region. But problems certainly remain in some countries. We have made plain our particular concern about human rights abuses and the continuation of violence in Chile. The Chilean Government has re imposed a state of siege following the attempted assassination of General Pinochet, we view this development with deep concern and reiterate our hope that the Government will immediately release political prisoners and initiate without delay a dialog with the democratic opposition about a peaceful restoration of democracy.
The human rights abuses in Chile and South Africa are by means unique. This Assembly cannot remain indifferent in the face of the systematic violations of individual liberties, of the tyranny, oppression and indiscriminating violence which persist in many countries and of the fact that hunger, disease and lack of opportunity deny the most basic economic and social rights to countless people.
On 21 July this year we issued a statement setting out our principles in this field. That was a signal of the high priority we attach to human rights in our
international relationships. This Assembly has established clear standards - in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other international instruments. We seek the universal observance of those instruments. That is, what our people expect, not just fine words, so we attach particular importance to maintaining and strengthening the mechanisms established by the United Nations for the protection of human rights.
The scourge of international terrorism has brought a new precariousness to modern life. It has killed innocent people in airports, shopping arcades and crowded streets. We utterly condemn cowardly attacks like the Karachi hijack and the recent atrocities in Istanbul and Paris, which can do nothing to help the political causes that their perpetrators profess to believe in. Our horror is greater when sovereign States lend their support - moral or material - to the terrorists. This year we have taken certain steps to deter State-supported terrorism, particularly in the case of Libya. No country which supports terrorism can expect to enjoy normal relations with the Twelve. We are determined to do more, and a ministerial meeting of the Twelve will be taking place on 25 September to consider future action. We shall not tolerate such behavior by supposedly responsible Governments.
So, too, the problem of drugs demands an urgent collective effort. International drug trafficking is now on a scale that threatens to undermine whole societies. Close international co-operation is required to defeat this evil trade. We shall play our part at the World Conference in Vienna next June - a valuable initiative by the Secretary-General.
Economic issues have been central to the development of the European Community. It is now the world's largest trade grouping, accounting for 20 per cent of world trade. We are the world's largest importer, in particular of products from developing countries, amounting to $US 105 billion in 1985. Our
320 million citizens are linked to some 400 million people in Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific through our trade and aid agreements with their countries. We are collectively the largest donors of aid in the world. This economic weight gives us certain responsibilities towards the world's trading systems and we take these responsibilities seriously.
Since the Second World War, growth in world trade has been stimulated by the progressive dismantling of the tariff barriers that existed between the two world wars. Nevertheless there are strains in the world trading system. Old traditional industries in the Western world have faced massive contraction as comparative advantage has passed to the newly industrialized countries, with traumatic social changes for those involved. Pressures for import controls have grown. They look like easy solutions, but they are not.
Protectionism above all penalizes developing countries by reducing access to prime markets in developed countries. In the developed countries themselves, protectionism penalizes consumers by increasing prices and restricting choice and exporters by increasing their production costs. ProtsGfeicnisa is self-defeating. A spiral of retaliatory protectionist measures would have disastrous effects on world trade, particularly for the third world. Let us always remember that trade fosters growth.
The contracting parties of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) have just concluded their ministerial meeting at Punt a del Este at which an important agreement has been reached to launch a new round of multilateral trade negotiations. The Community has worked hard for a successful outcome. Multilateral trade negotiations serve two purposes: to renew the GATT system, bringing it up-to-date with the realities of world trade, and to pursue trade liberalization by allowing countries to make concessions multi later ally that they may find difficult to make bilaterally. If we all share the burden of adjustment, we spread the pain. We are fully committed to this process.
You may ask what the Community is doing to give effect to these admirable principles. Let me give two brief examples:
First, in the textiles sector, the Community has achieved a. remarkable degree of restructuring. The Community is glad that the new Multi-Fiber Arrangement agreed in July foresees the application of GATT rules to trade in textiles as a final objective and calls for all participants to co-operate in the progressive liberalization of the textile trade. The Community also argued strongly for the particularly favorable treatment that the new Multi-Fiber Agreement gives to the
least developed countries.
Second, agriculture is a major political issue, and one that mnst be tackled urgently. There has been a revolution in food production in the last 10 years. New technology has meant new fertilizers, fatter cattle, new types of grain and rice, more efficient storage. India is now exporting food. China is virtually self-sufficient. These are great success stories which serve as an inspiration to those struggling to overcome food shortages.
Ironically, more plus more can equal less. Too much food in some countries can aggravate food shortages in others.Expensive producers growing more can cause poorer producers to grow less. The result is a tragic paradox: that even in an age of plenty, famine persists. Meanwhile trade disputes become political conflicts, as countries compete to subsidize their food exports, and dispose of their growing surpluses.
We have to address these problems now. While recognizing the importance of agriculture for the well-being of rural communities, the Tokyo Summit agreed on the need "to redirect policies and adjust the structure of agricultural production in the light of world demand". The Community is committed to this. Heads of Government agreed at the European Council in The Hague in June that "a better control of total production must be ensured so that it is better adjusted to the market situation". This is not the responsibility of one country or group of countries. The problem is world-wide, and we can only deal with it - in the words of the Tokyo declaration - in co-operation with each other. Last week, GATT Ministers agreed to launch a new GATT round, including negotiations on agriculture. We have no more important task than to make this a success. The Tokyo Summit was also an important opportunity to review progress on the debt problem. The annual meetings of the International Monetary Fund (IMP) and World Bank are less than a week away, so I shall be brief.
The last year has seen important changes. International recovery may be in its fourth year, but the international economic environment remains unfavorable. Growth is still unevenly distributed throughout the world and growth rates are still lower than we want. Lower interest rates help us all, even if in real terms they are still high by historical standards. Oil price falls help many but severely affect others, and commodity prices generally remain weak. Many debtors have undertakes courageous adjustment programs of the industrialized
countries have reduced the imbalances of the early eighties which aggravated the difficulties facing debtors.
The debt burden remains heavy for a number of countries. The Community fully supports the United States initiative for sustained growth, which aims to meet the legitimate aspirations of debtor countries for growth through structural adjustment and economic liberalization with the necessary external financing. Or, in plain language, it recognizes that we sink or swim together. Those who expected instant results misunderstand the initiative and the problem's complexity. But much has been achieved. The World Bank has stepped up its policy-based loans. The IMF and World Bank are working more closely together. And, in recent weeks, they have shown a flexible and imaginative approach to the very difficult problems faced by the oil-producing countries.
There has been much criticism that resource flows have declined. This may be so for the banks in the short term: it partly reflects falling short-term demand for loans. But the banks have a crucial role to play in support of the United States initiative. We are confident they will rise to that challenge. For their part the creditor countries are responding to the need to ensure adequate finance for adjustment through rescheduling at the Paris Club-, new export credits; aid program; and support for the international monetary bodies. The Twelve will support a general capital increase for the IBRD at the appropriate time, and they welcome progress towards a 3US 12 billion replenishment, IDA-VIII, to help the poorer countries.
One way or another, be it bilaterally, multilaterally or through the institutions of the European Community, we provide one third of the world's official development assistance. We shall maintain and, where appropriate, expand
these flows to meet the commitments we have made individually to targets established by the United Nations.
The problems of Africa are particularly acute. As the special session recognized in May, many countries face grave economic problems. But natural disasters such as droughts and man-made disasters such as civil war have made them far worse. We extend particular sympathy to the people of Cameroon who have suffered the appalling natural calamity of Lake Nyos.
At the special session on Africa, African countries acknowledged the role they themselves must play. The industrialized countries, including the Twelve, agreed on the importance of increasing official development assistance to Africa, and on improving its quality and effectiveness. We maintain substantial bilateral aid programs and contribute to international and regional development agencies; in addition, we are making a substantial collective contribution through the Lome III Convention and other association and co-operation agreements.
Finally, this Organization itself faces a very serious problems how to confront its own financial crisis. A number of countries, over the years, have either delayed payments or withheld contributions. The Twelve collectively provide just under 30 per cent of the United Nations budget. We believe that every State should sect its legal obligations. The Secretary-General has shown courage in proposing certain measures, endorsed by the General Assembly at its resumed session in the Spring, to deal with the short-term problem. But further measures are required. There is a clear need for changes in the system which will produce broader consensus on financial issues and help overcome the reluctance of some Members to meet their financial obligations.
We are grateful for the work done by the Group of 18 high-level experts. We shall make a positive and constructive contribution to the discussion of their report. We support the creation of a new mechanism to consider the program and budget, structured so 53 to ensure effective decision-making and to contribute to greater rationalization and efficiency within the system. He are firm in our support for the Charter and for a strong and effective United Nations. Greater budgetary discipline, improved co-ordination, and rigorous adherence to priorities can only strengthen the Organization and ensure its future stability and vigor.
As this Session will once again demonstrate, the world faces many grave problems - too many to cover in one speech; and I have not attempted to do so. So I am also circulating today as document A/41/634 a memorandum as a companion piece to this speech, describing our position on a number of other issues to.which we also attach the highest importance.
Voltaire once observed that, in India and China, they believe that a prophet will come out of the West, whereas people in Europe expect their sages to come from the East. The lesson of this, perhaps, is that we all have something to learn from each other. The United Nations is a place to listen as much as to speak. And if we do so, perhaps we shall find to our surprise that we can learn from each others' experiences and profit from each others' good will.
I have tried to show how our experience of co-operating together in the European Community has shaped our positions on a number of key issues facing this Assembly. I believe those positions, though ambitious in aim, are fair and realistic in practice. It is an approach which we believe fulfills the ideals to which this Organization is committed. In our search and support for freedom, peace, justice, democracy and prosperity for mankind, in offering our friendship to all who wish us well, we shall continue to pursue our duty to other nations, notably to those less fortunate than ourselves. At the same time we shall uphold and defend what we have built together.

At the outset. Sir, I extend to you once again the felicitations of my delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the forty-first session of the General Assembly, it is a matter of immense pleasure for me and the rest of my delegation that a distinguished diplomat from a close and friendly neighbor country has been elected to that high office. You bring to your position rich and varied experience. We are confident that you will guide the deliberations of this Assembly with distinction.
I also take this opportunity to express our appreciation to your predecessor, Mr. Jaime de Pinie's, for his skillful leadership during the deliberations of the fortieth session of the General Assembly.
I should like to convey our greetings to the Secretary-General, whom we are happy to see once again actively discharging his many onerous responsibilities. I hope that our Organization will continue to have the benefit of his experience and guidance for many years to come.
In the past year the United Nations - indeed the entire multilateral system -
has been subjected to severe strain and challenge. I am glad that, as he states in his report on the work of the Organization, the Secretary-General has found notable unanimity in the recognition of the continuing validity of the principles of the United Nations Charter and the need to strengthen title United Nations so that it may better meet the needs of the future. India is a founder BSeaber and its allegiance to the Organization and commitment to the principles of the Charter remain firm and unswerving.
As all of us are aware, the United Nations came into being in the wake of unparalleled death and destruction. The founding of the United Nations reflected the hopes and aspirations of humankind, which saw the need for a more rational world order. That vision is even more relevant today.
The international situation remains tense. The nuclear arms race and its extension into outer space, conflicts around the world and the world economic crisis endanger peace and international security. Nuclear weapons no longer threaten only States and nations, they threaten the very survival of man. In her address at the seventh summit of non-aligned Heads of State or Government, in New Delhi in March 1983, Prime Minister Indira Gandhi warned that
"Never before has our earth faced so much death and danger. The destructive power contained in nuclear stockpiles can kill human life, indeed all life, many times over and might well prevent its reappearance for ages to come."  What is at stake is civilization itself.
Last year, at the Geneva summit, the leaders of the Soviet Union and the United States declared that a nuclear war cannot be won and must not be fought. We call upon those two nations, which bear the major responsibility with regard to disarmament, to reinvigorate their dialog and take the logical follow-up steps to that assertion. We are glad that after a period of anxiety the two countries
appear to have resumed their efforts to make progress in this vital field. Their decisions will have consequences not only for their own peoples but for humanity as a whole. We trust that at their next meeting President Reagan aid General Secretary Gorbachev will reach important and meaningful agreements.
Other nuclear-weapon States must not shirk their responsibility either. A decision on their part in favor of nuclear disarmament could only have a positive effect. They should no longer take shelter behind the position that they will disarm only if the two super-Powers do.
Tl-e desire for peace is universal. There is increasing articulation of that feeling around the world, including in nuclear-weapon States, in legislatures and deliberative bodies, in universities and peace movements, aroong scientists and professionals - indeed, among all citizens.
Early this month, Heads of State or Government assembled at Harare for the eighth summit of non-aligned nations appealed to the two most powerful nuclear-weapon States to arrest the trend towards confrontation and conflict. Earlier, the leaders participating in the six-nation, five-continent peace initiative urged an immediate moratorium on nuclear tests and offered a concrete Program of verification. A large number of Governments have welcomed this; many Parliaments have expressed enthusiasm and support. We welcome the positive response of the Soviet Union to the appeal by the Six in the Mexico Declaration by extending its unilateral moratorium on nuclear testing for a third time, now until January 1987. We hope the United States will respond positively.
The United Nations has a unique role to play in all issues of disarmament. Regrettably, the negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament have failed to bring about any positive steps on the vital issues of a nuclear test ban, the cessation of the nuclear arras race, nuclear disarmament and the prevention of nuclear war. It is thus more urgently necessary for the General Assembly to put forward new ideas and mobilize support for disarmament measures. Many issues that were before the United Nations at the time of its inception continue to linger on its agenda. Our pride in the freedom achieved by formerly dependent peoples is abridged by the failure to remove the last vestiges of colonialism in Africa and the still unfulfilled promise of a homeland for the Palestinian people.
Last week we focused on Namibia at a special session of the General Assembly. Namibia, which is solely the responsibility of the United Nations, mirrors a situation where every value enshrined in the Charter stands challenged. ECforts towards freedom there have been continually frustrated by those who had concurred in the plan for independence of Namibia charted in Security Council resolution 435 (1978). This is the bitter twist of irony. Necessary consequent action by the Security Council has received support from all Members except those that have direct commercial stakes in the area and that also have the power to annul the collective will with their veto. It is not Namibia that is isolated; it is those who have sought to isolate Namibia that are.
In South Africa apartheid survives and is the root cause of violence and instability in the region. Every initiative for a peaceful resolution has been rejected by the Pretoria regime. Since the last session of the General Assembly a major effort was made by the Commonwealth to bring about a dialog between the minority who rule and the majority who are ruled in South Africa. An Eminent Persons Group comprising distinguished personalities from seven Commonwealth countries visited South Africa for this purpose. However, the authorities in Pretoria live in a world all their own. Every meaningful proposal was spurned. The international community has no option but to impose comprehensive and mandatory sanctions against South Africa in accordance with Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter as the only peaceful means to compel the South African regime to dismantle apartheid. The alternative would be too ghastly to contemplate.
South Africa cannot withstand the tide of history. The abhorrent system of apartheid will collapse. In the words of Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi:
"Racism cannot last. People's aspirations cannot be uncaged in a prison. Nelson Mandela and his people will be free"-
The presence of' great Powers continues to increase in the Indian Ocean. Formation of command structures and other forms of outside military presence and pressures negate the decision of the General Assembly to declare the Indian Ocean as a zone of peace. The convening of the Conference on the Indian Ocean at Colombo has been inordinately delayed because of the unhelpful attitude adopted by some. The Non-Aligned Movement has suggested 1988 as a finite target at which we must aim, and we hope the early convening of the Conference no longer remains an illusion.
We remain deeply concerned over the situation in west Asia. The people of Palestine continue to languish without a homeland of their own. Israel's arrogant defiance of the will of the international community, the consolidation of its stranglehold over the occupied territories: all constitute sad chapters in a seemingly endless tragedy.
We call for the complete and unconditional withdrawal of Israel from the Palestinian and other Arab territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem. We support the exercise of the right by the people of Palestine, under the leadership of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), to self-determination and the establishment of an independent sovereign State in Palestine. The right of all States in the region to live in peace within secure and recognized borders, including the independent State of Palestine, must be assured.
We would like to underscore once again the importance of the early convening of the International Conference on the Middle East in accordance with General Assembly resolution 38/58 Cj that would constitute a major contribution by the United Nations towards the achievement of a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict.
The continuing conflict between Iran and Iraq causes us deep concern and anguish. Both these nations are heirs to great and proud civilizations. Both are
endowed with the riches of nature and talented peoples. Yet for six long years death and destruction have prevented the channeling of their resources to productive activities. As a country which has friendly ties with both, we have had and shall continue to have close consultations with them to bring this tragic conflict to an end.
Of late, we have seen a disturbing trend of violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States by powerful nations. Nicaragua has the right to follow its national policies without outside intimidation or interference. All differences must be settled through negotiations. We have extended our full support to the Contadora process. Whether in Central America and the Caribbean or in the Mediterranean, the security and independence of non-aligned countries must be respected. No nation has the right to take the law into its own hands. Policies of domination must give way to greater understanding and respect for the aspirations of the States.
Cyprus remains divided, with part of its territory under foreign occupation. We reiterate our solidarity with its people and reaffirm our support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a non-aligned and unified Republic. We have noted the efforts made by the Secretary-General to bring about a satisfactory resolution of this issue.
In relation to Afghanistan and South-West Asia, I reiterate that the situation can be resolved only through an overall political settlement based on the principles set out in the New Delhi Declaration. We support the efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
The differences in South-East Asia call for a political solution. There can be no military solution, what is needed is a balanced approach that takes into account security and other considerations of all the countries in the region and
eliminates outside interference. We urge all States in the region to undertake a dialog to resolve the differences and establish durable peace.
The menace of terrorism is spreading. Assassinations, hijackings, bombings have meant the death of hundreds of men, women and children and have resulted in the loss of innocent lives, the mindless destruction of property and the jeopardizing of fundamental freedoms. I wish to reiterate the total opposition of my delegation to all acts of terrorism, whether committed by individuals, groups or States. All countries must co-operate in fighting this common scourge within the framework of internationally accepted norms.
At the same time, we support the struggle of people under colonial and racist regimes and all forms of foreign domination and occupation and of the national liberation movements against their oppressors. Their struggle is legitimate and must not be confused with terrorism.
The process of regional co-operation in South Asia, with which you, Mr. President, have such a close personal involvement, culminated in the formation of the South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation (SAARC). The seven nations of the region, which face similar problems, are determined to nurture and foster this process of regional co-operation. SAARC will provide a vehicle for this purpose. India will have the privilege to serve as host to the second summit of SAARC leaders this November.
Tensions and instability can arise also from the unsatisfactory state of the world economy. The economic situation continues to cause concern and is fraught with uncertainties which carry grave implications for the future,, Expansion of world output and trade has slowed considerably, and developing countries in particular continue to be confronted with exceptionally difficult circumstances. Mechanisms of international co-operation which might have helped to mitigate their problems have been rendered largely ineffective. The international economic system remains inherently iniquitous.
The developing countries have been urged to undertake drastic adjustments in the face of an unhelpful' international economic environment. Their efforts are hampered by intensified protectionist barriers, sharply declining prices of commodity exports and an increasingly intolerable debt burden. The severity of adjustment measures demanded of them has not only affected development prospects but has in many cases led to social and political tensions and unrest. Such adjustment to an adverse environment, which the developing countries have had no hand in shaping, really means accommodation by them to the policies and national interests of developed countries. There is thus a real danger that outside pressures may lead to an infringement of the economic sovereignty and be inimical to the political stability of developing countries. While it is obviously necessary for the developing countries to implement economic policies which will restore momentum to their economic growth, they must resolutely reject so-called solutions which would have the effect of undermining stable, democratic political structures.
Along with the economic slow-down that has characterized the first half of this decade, there has been a marked change in the attitude of the developed countries, to the detriment of the interests of the developing countries. This attitude can be described as apathy with regard to the fundamental problems of poverty and development. It is, therefore, necessary to restate the basic consensus that has guided the international community in the post-war period; namely, that the development problem is a common concern of mankind and requires the co-operation of rich and poor nations alike. A retreat from that consensus and from the responsibilities associated with it will lead to an even deeper economic crisis. Enlightened co-operation in our interdependent world is no longer a luxury of choice but a necessity.
The uncertainties of today can be turned into the opportunities of tomorrow. This would, however, require breathing new life into mechanisms and modalities of economic co-operation. On their part, the developing countries are ready in the most pragmatic and constructive spirit to resume such a dialog. In this context, we have noted with interest the proposal of the Secretary-General to convene a ministerial-level meeting of the Economic and Social Council to reach an agreement on the issues which need to be addressed most urgently. We are willing to explore all avenues which could lead to a resumption of meaningful dialog and co-operation in the areas of vital economic concern.
The major economic imbalances which exist in the world economy also reflect the choices before us. If traditional approaches are continued, the vast surpluses and the corresponding deficits which are accumulating in some parts of the world could have a dangerous destabilizing effect. Alternatively, with bold and imaginative measures, they could be used to expand the productive capacity and the potentially vast markets of the developing countries, which could lead to a quantum increase in trade and growth rates around the globe. Low inflation rates and the benefits which industrial countries derive from the low commodity and energy prices should make it easier for them to undertake such measures. It is our firm belief that sustained growth in the world economy for the benefit of all would not be possible without a reactivation of the development momentum of developing countries. It is not sufficient merely to promote growth in the developed countries. Any significant improvement in the material conditions of life - which is the fundamental purpose of development - cannot come about entirely through the trickle-down effect of growth in industrial countries. We have to face the development issue squarely and evolve co-operative action to deal with it.
The major imbalances in the world economy, the mounting burdens of external debt, the intensifying protectionism and the falling commodity prices reflect deeper structural deficiencies in the international economic order which need to be urgently addressed. In this regard, we support the proposal made by the Group of 24 in Washington to constitute a representative committee of ministers to examine further the different proposals for monetary improvement and reform. Such an examination could be an important preparatory process leading towards the convening of an international conference on money and finance for development. The forthcoming meeting of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) would also provide an important opportunity to consider in an integrated and comprehensive manner the interrelated areas of money, finance, trade and development; and we would urge all countries to co-operate fully in reaching an early agreement on the agenda and other issues related to it. It is particularly important that the role and mandate of UNCTAD in dealing with trade and development policies should be pursued and further strengthened.
In Punta del Este last week agreement was reached on the launching of a new round of multilateral trade negotiations to be called the Uruguay Round. We hope that these negotiations will result in the removal of protectionist barriers against the export products of developing countries.
One of the most critical issues as regards the development problem in the years ahead was highlighted by the 1986 report of the United Nations Committee on Development Planning, namely, that developing countries face a serious financing
gap over the next decade and that, without the restoration of development finance, prospects for growth would remain negligible and unable to satisfy even minimum aspirations for employment creation and higher living standards. We fully support the proposal of the eminent persons comprising the Committee on Development Planning for the doubling of development finance to provide an additional $25 billion per year, which they have contended is the minimum necessary condition for restoring moderate sustained growth in the developing world.
The General Assembly has decided to put on its agenda a separate item entitled -External debt crisis and development". This is an appropriate recognition of the severity of the debt and development crisis. Ke believe that in our search for a solution to this important issue measures to prevent the recurrence and spread of this problem should form an important element.
The developing countries and the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries remain deeply concerned about the critical economic situation in Africa. Within their capacities, the developing countries, including India, are doing their utmost to help the African countries overcome the critical situation. On earlier occasions ny delegation has outlined the concrete steps that we have taken. These are being continued and further expanded, in the context of the United Nations Program of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990, adopted by the General Assembly at its thirteenth special session, we shall continue to do our utmost to support the efforts of the African countries in areas where the skills and capabilities that we have acquired in our development experience have particular relevance.
We are concerned that the current financial crisis facing the United Nations remains acute, despite the efforts made by many Member States to expedite their payments. Thus, the United Nations faces a situation in which it will not be able to carry out the work Program mandated by its legislative bodies. The crisis is above all a political crisis, arising from disregard for obligations flowing from the Charter and from lack of agreement among Member States on how to finance the Organization and its activities. We hope that wisdom will prevail and that a consensus will be achieved.
At the same time, it is also necessary to pay due heed to economies which can be achieved without undermining the Organization itself. In that context, we express our appreciation of the work done by the Group of High-level Intergovernmental Experts to Review the Efficiency of the Administrative and Financial Functioning of the United Nations. The United Nations must continue to play its vital role in the maintenance of international peace and security and in the promotion of development and international cooperation. We pledge our full oo-operation to that end.
In his very first cress to the General Assembly Jawaharlal Nehru warned that it was becoming increasingly apparent that if we did not move with speed towards a world order, we should be left with order in the world. Secretary-General Perez de Cuellar in his first report to the General Assembly similarly warned of the approach of a "new international anarchy". Nearly 40 years separate us from Jawaharlal Nehru's warning; only four years from the caution addressed to us by the Secretary General.But their strength and relevance endure. A stable world order my be one which is founded on ethics and international morality. Political stratagems divorced from morality may hold out the promise of short-term advantage, but they cannot provide the basis of any ensuring settlement. The durable world order to which we aspire must be based on justice, equity and mutual advantage. That is the goal to which the United Nations and all countries individually must dedicate themselves.




This session of the Assembly opens the fifth decade of the United Nations. I hope that it will begin an era in which this body will come closer to realizing the dreams of its founding fathers.
Their ideals were inspired and inspiring: safeguarding the principles of universality and equality, a genuine desire to maintain international peace and security, encouraging international cooperation in solving global problems and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Unfortunately, those lofty principles have been vitiated and perverted beyond recognition. Extremists have seized this body. They have compelled it to shun the only peace treaty in the Middle East - the Camp David Accords. They have forced upon it an annual ritual of adopting dozens of distorted and irrelevant resolutions relating to my country. In clinging to these barren exercises, the United Nations spends precious time and funds, resources that could profitably be used to combat
hunger and poverty.
These and other issues remain unresolved, however, and they demand serious and responsible attention. First among them is the repugnant reign of apartheid in South Africa.
Israel, founded upon basic moral and democratic values, cannot remain silent in the face of racial discrimination, wherever it nay occur.. We reject and condemn apartheid as a political, social and economic system. Israel also believes that violence is not the path to reform in South Africa. We must urgently foster a climate that will facilitate a political settlement if we are to avoid a further drift towards economic chaos, suffering and bloodshed. We hope responsible leaders on all sides will act to create such a climate and that the Government of South Africa will initiate negotiations that will satisfy the legitimate political aspirations of all South Africans, regardless of race or color.

In the heart of the African continent many continue to suffer from hunger, disease and poverty. There is a growing awareness around the world of the need to provide help. People must be fed right now. We have contributed to that effort, but we also believe that we must help countries afflicted by hunger to develop the long-term means to prevent its recurrence and to set their economies on the road to development and growth.
This past year the General Assembly convened a special session on the critical economic situation in Africa. The Organization of African unity (OAU) has outlined a development strategy that is reminiscent of Israel's own development experience. Israel announced at that special session its readiness to make immediate contributions to the attainment of those goals. We offered to share our experience in agriculture and desertification, in medicine and education and in the general field of economic development. Many in Africa remember our earlier contributions in this field. Our experience has been gained in 28 years of assistance by Israel to more than 100 countries in Asia, Africa and Latin America. We have trained over 55,000 professionals from developing countries. We have shared our experience with the specialized agencies of the United Nations. And we are ready and willing to do more.
Many of those African States that severed relations with Israel in 1973 and 1974 are now in the process of resuming those relations. I wish to commend the leadership and courage of the Heads of State who have gone on to re-establish formal diplomatic ties with us despite the pressures exerted upon them. We extend the hand of friendship and co-operation to all African nations and we expect many more countries to resume full diplomatic relations with Israel in the near future.
The Middle East, with its vast resources of land and minerals, has within it the potential to leap into a new age in the twenty-first century - an age of great economic prosperity and a better life for millions. But that hope hangs on the outcome of a precarious contest between those who seek progress and those who continually plunge the region into turmoil and hatred.
Perhaps the most tragic instance of the fanaticism that plagues our region is the cruel war waged by Iran and Iraq for the past six years. That war has claimed well over a million casualties; it has reintroduced outlawed means of warfare such as gas and chemical weapons and the wholesale torture of prisoners; it has hurt the entire world by threatening freedom of navigation and the free flow of oil. It is a sad commentary that, despite their various proclamations, those two warring Governments show no intention whatsoever of genuinely seeking ways to stop the horrible carnage.
Another instance of the reign of fanaticism and its terrible human cost is Lebanon. The tragedy is rooted in the chronic absence of an effective Government able to control and reconcile the warring factions. Without such a strong central authority, Lebanon has been unable to discharge the most elementary obligations of government - the control of one's territory against lawlessness and terror, terror directed against one's own citizens and against the citizens of neighboring States.
The first to pay for that anarchy have been the Lebanese themselves. Over 100,000 were slaughtered in the civil war of 1975-1976 and thousands of others have been killed since in sectarian clashes. Lebanon's Government has set no effective jurisdiction over any part of the country: not over the Bekaa Valley or Tripoli, where 20,000 Syrian troops physically occupy Lebanese territory; not over the Shouf Mountains; not even over Beirut itself. Such conditions encourage the reign of the gun, the rocket and the bomb throughout Lebanon. Naturally, the southern part of the country has not been exempt from that dismal pattern. Beginning with the PLO, various terrorist groups have used the south as a staging area for terrorist attacks against Israel. Those who expected that a "Pax Syriana" would pacify Lebanon were hopelessly deluded,.for Syrian domination of Lebanon has meant that Syria has been playing off one factor against another, as well as using Lebanon as a base for proxy terror attacks against Israel
and against targets world-wide.
That Syrian strategy, now shared by Iran, should concern the entire international community. As for Israel, we have one, and only one, objective regarding Lebanon: to protect northern Israel against attacks launched from Lebanon. This is self-defense in its simplest form. We shall not let Israeli citizens pay with their lives for Lebanon's failure to control its territory. We shall continue to take the necessary measures to defend our people. We hope that Lebanon will produce an effective Government with which we can agree on permanent security arrangements. In the meantime we shall continue to work with any Lebanese party genuinely interested in preventing terror in the South of Lebanon and in the North of Israel.
The United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) has tried to assist in bringing stability to the area. It has performed a useful role. It has suffered painful casualties in the process, including losses sustained in a recent rash of murderous attacks. We extend ou£r deepest condolences to the bereaved families end their Governments. We must be clear, however, on what role UNIFIL can and cannot play. International forces are most effective when they serve as buffers between two States that share a commitment to pacifying their common border. Unlike Israel's neighbors on two other borders, that is not the case with Lebanon. That is why UNIFIL, unlike the multinational Force in the Sinai and the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) in the Golan Heights, has been unable to act as an effective buffer, since the day it was established by the United Nations. Peace-keepers cannot be asked to combat terrorists. That role must be left to the Governments and the peoples in the area of turmoil. We shall continue to co-operate with UNIFIL, as we maintain the necessary security arrangements to defend our norther border.
Israel watches with concern the larger conflicts waged in our region: those between radicals and non-radicals, between conservative regimes and revolutionaries, among militant religious movements, and among the various dictatorships themselves. But there is little we can do to affect this tragic and chronic violence. Where we can act - where we have acted and shall continue to act - is in the limited confines of the dispute between the Arab States and Israel.
Ever since Israel's independence we have made every effort to achieve peace with our neighbors. Peace for us is a natural and integral part of our heritage. The Jewish people is a democratic and free people striving to rebuild its national life in the ancient - the only - homeland of the Jews. Israel is a haven for the persecuted, a land where ever Jew from whatever background feels at home. We can best achieve our ideals and goals in an atmosphere of peace and security. Hence, we cherish peace? we pray for it and we teach its blessings to our children. Our entire people rejoiced when, after decades of war which were forced upon us, we were able to build a bridge of peace with one of our Arab neighbors.
During the past year we have made special efforts to broaden that peace. In July, Prime Minister Peres visited Morocco for talks with King Hassan. We have made efforts to reinforce the peace treaty with Egypt and to solve the problems that are still outstanding. We hope we are on the threshold of a substantial improvement in the relations between our two countries. Such an improvement is vital in and of itself, and of even greater importance for the prospects for peace
with other Arab States.
A few days ago we marked the eighth anniversary of the signing of the Camp David accords. With the passage of time we can see that those accords were a turning-point in the history of the Middle East. They have proved decisively that there is a way out of the cycle of belligerency, and they have demonstrated unequivocally that there is no alternative to direct negotiations. To this very day they remain the one and only blueprint for accommodation and peace between Israel and its Arab neighbors. All attempts to bypass, nullify or denigrate the Camp David accords have failed. Those attempts have been unsuccessful because they have disregarded the minimal needs of all parties, because they were not rooted in achievable proposals acceptable to all the sides.
Camp David accords are still the leading parties to which everyone concerned with peace in the Middle East turns. Together they hold the key to progress towards peace. With its commitment to the accords, Egypt has gained in prestige and stature. Many of those in the Arab world who once attacked and boycotted it are now looking to Egypt to play a leading role in peace negotiations. The United States, of course, is equally sought after. Many have come to appreciate the positive influence it brings to bear on the political process in our region.
For its part, Israel remains anxious and willing to move the peace process forward without delay. The peace treaty with Egypt was intended to be the first in a series of treaties that together would constitute a comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israel conflict.
Those who are afraid of peace or who are seeking to evade peace with Israel are trying to promote an alternative to direct negotiations, and ultimately to peace itself, through an international conference. Let me repeat again: Experience proves that the only path to peace is through direct negotiations. Substitutes for such negotiations can only lead us away from peace. The history of our region provides anple evidence of this simple truth.
The Government of Israel has repeatedly called upon King Hussein of Jordan to enter into direct peace negotiations with Israel. We recognize that once he decides to respond to our call Jordan may face considerable opposition from some Arab quarters. That opposition, however, will not be deflected or appeased by such devices as an international conference. Ultimately, Jordan will have to decide whether the advantages of peace with Israel outweigh the risks and difficulties involved in making such a move. But Jordan must understand that its peace will have to be with Israel, not with an international body. The first sign of a
genuine willingness to move towards peace is a declared readiness to deal directly with one's former adversary. There is no other way to a genuine reconciliation.
We firmly believe that the absence of democracy and freedom in our region is a major obstacle to peace. Only democracy offers the guarantee of freedom, the hope of progress and the prospect of peace. We do not believe any people want war. We do not believe the Arab peoples want war. Wars of aggression are initiated by Governments that do not represent the will of their peoples and fail to reflect their aspirations. That is why we must hope that democratic Governments will prevail throughout the Middle East on a not too distant day, for on that day true and permanent peace will come to our region. To hasten the coming of that day we call on all countries interested in peace in the Middle East strongly to support direct talks between Jordan and Israel. We call on them strongly to signify their willingness to buttress and strengthen a peace settlement by declaring their readiness to endorse it immediately. In addition, the supporters of peace should undertake to extend whatever assistance and support may be needed by the Government and the people of Jordan to embark on an ambitious development Program that will accompany the implementation of the peace treaty. The rewards of peace must be swift and exemplary, and serve to belie the words of its opponents.
Our region - the entire world in fact - is plagued by the spread of Arab terrorism. There is no limit to its atrocities. Even places of worship are not immune to this wanton murder. The recent attack on a synagogue in Istanbul was merely the latest and deadliest in a series of such attacks on Jewish places of worship. But Jews are not the only victims. Arab terror has made a blood pact with terrorists from all over the world to fight the common enemy, of which Israel and Jews are merely a part. That enemy is the community of democratic nations. The fight against this menace is therefore the fight of all civilized and free nations.
The so-called PLO was the linchpin of this alliance in terror; it pioneered the art of hijacking, bombing, kidnapping and massacre on an international scale. In the decade preceding 1982 the PLO used its mini-State in Lebanon to train and arm terrorist groups from five continents, from left-wing extremists to neo-Nazi gangs. Libya, Syria and Iran joined in financing, training and arming the terrorists and providing them with safe havens.
Since our action in Lebanon in 1982, the PLO has disintegrated into a number of rival terrorist gangs, most of them mercenaries in the service of various Governments. Their one common objective is to sabotage any attempt at peace and stability. The legacy of terror that they have created has encouraged other terrorist groups, many of them possessed by a mad desire to spread anarchy and terror for no reason whatsoever.
Much has been said about ways to combat international terrorism, but little has been done. Terrorism will continue to take its toll as long as the terrorists believe they can kill with impunity and achieve legitimacy and their political goals in the process. They must be denied these victories. They must never be appeased. They must never be "understood". They must always be condemned and fought vigorously. If we are serious in our desire to rid ourselves of international terrorism, we must adopt a broad and comprehensive campaign against the terrorists.
We must expel the representatives of terrorist organizations, starting with the PLO, from all countries committed to the fight against terror. We should hunt down the terrorist killers. They must always be on the run. But no matter what measures we take against the killers themselves, they will not be enough. If we do not go to the source, to the regimes whose support and protection make terrorism possible, we will not succeed in rolling back the tide of terror. We must isolate
and punish those terrorist States. We should shut down their embassies, expel their diplomats, curtail trade with them, and co-ordinate a military response if they persist in attacking us. Those who refuse to address the problem of State-supported terrorism are not merely failing to solve the problem? they are
facilitating its expansion.
Last year, from this rostrum, I spoke of three major threats facing the countries of the Middle East: the escalating race in conventional arms, the dangers of nuclear weapons, and the grave problem of chemical warfare. Unfortunately, little if anything has been done to reduce those threats. In fact, in some ways the situation has worsened in the past year.
The most dramatic development has been the increased use of chemical weapons by Iraq in its war with Iran. This has been investigated by the united Nations and condemned by the President of the Security Council on behalf of its members. There is also considerable evidence that other States in the Middle East, most notably Syria, are developing a chemical warfare capability. The free world should pool information on this subject and adopt concerted measures to prevent the development or acquisition of chemical and biological weapons. We cannot afford to cower before dictatorships that stockpile these inhuman inventories, especially since these regimes have shown no hesitation in using them.
To our disappointment, negotiations on a nuclear-weapon-free zone among the States in the region have yet to begin. It is our firm belief that, in an area as sensitive as the Middle East, the most effective and credible barrier to proliferation would be a freely and directly negotiated convention establishing a zone free of nuclear weapons. The Soviet Union and other socialist countries were among those which supported the establishment of our State in 1948. But things have changed. With the exception of Romania, all the Eastern-bloc countries have severed their diplomatic ties with us and adopted a one-sided policy towards the Middle East. We welcome, of course, any sincere attempt at improving relations and re-establishing diplomatic ties between us and any Eastern European country.
This year, for the first time in nearly 20 years, an official meeting took place in Helsinki between representatives of Israel and the Soviet Union. We hope that it is a sign of a positive change in the policy of the Soviet Union towards Israel. Without such a renewal of diplomatic relations and without a major change in the Soviet Union's policy towards Soviet Jews - especially the policy that prevents them from exercising their basic right of repatriation to Israel - it is difficult to see how the Soviet Union could contribute in any way to the attainment of peace in our region.
The plight of our Jewish brethren in the Soviet Union has been raised countless times by Israel's representatives and by world leaders; yet the tragic suffering continues. The hope that a new leadership in the Soviet Union would bring with it an improvement in the situation of Soviet Jewry has, so far, not been borne out. The condition of Soviet Jews, especially those among them wishing to leave for Israel, has deteriorated still further.
In a country of over 100 nationalities, speaking over 100 languages, Jews remain the only officially recognized nationality in the Soviet Union denied the right to maintain its cultural heritage and pass it on to the next generation. They are forbidden to study their ancient language, Hebrew. Throughout the entire length and breadth of the Soviet Union there is not a single Jewish school where Jews may study their history, literature and traditions.
In recent years, hundreds of thousands of Jews from the Soviet Union have expressed their desire to join their people in Israel. But the Soviet authorities have effectively stopped Jewish emigration; less than 500 Jews were allowed to leave during the first eight months of this year. Thousands have had their requests for exit permits repeatedly refused on the flimsiest of pretexts; as punishment for daring to apply to leave, they have been subjected to all manner of harassment and reprisals. Among those "refuseniks" are the prisoners-of-Zion, who have been subjected to arrests and lengthy terms of imprisonment on trumped-up charges. The real reason for their imprisonment is painfully clear: it is their insistence on their right to emigrate to Israel and their right to study Hebrew and persevere in their Jewish heritage.
The Soviet policy towards Soviet Jews is a flagrant violation of the International Convention on Human Rights, to which the Soviet Union is a signatory. It is totally contrary to the letter and spirit of the Helsinki Accords. The refusal of the Soviet Government to fulfill its most elementary humanitarian obligations must weigh heavily in the considerations of all who would contemplate entering into agreements with the Soviet Union on any subject.
Prom this rostrum, I call upon Governments and people of good will everywhere to urge the Soviet Government to bring its behavior towards Soviet Jews into line with universally accepted international standards. We in Israel will not rest until every Jew in the Soviet Union is permitted to exercise his right to emigrate and until Jews are free to follow their ancestral traditions and faith.
Another beleaguered Jewish community are the Jews of Syria. They are subjected by the Syrian regime to discrimination and restrictive policies. They are not free to live wherever they wish. Several hundred young Jewish women cannot
find husbands in the Jewish community. The Syrian Government has callously refused to allow then to leave the country so that they may marry within their faith and establish families. Jews who wish to travel abroad must leave their families behind as living hostages to ensure the travelers return. All that, too, is another instance of flagrant violation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, to which Syria is a signatory.
None of the problems I have described, including those relating to our region, is insoluble. They can be resolved if the Governments involved muster genuine good will, we turn again to the leaders of our Arab neighbors with an outstretched hand of peace. Let us bring an end to belligerency and hatred. Let us make real the hopes for a new era of understanding and coexistence. We shall not spare any effort in this quest, nor will we give up hope that it will bear fruit.
The eyes and hearts of millions of human beings who are wasting away from hunger and poverty, who live under oppressive regimes that deny them basic human rights, who are victims of barbaric terror, are turned towards us in the hope that we can alleviate their suffering. They look to us, to this body, for the hope of a better future. We cannot let them down and still claim fidelity to the ideals of this Organization. We bear the responsibility to begin action now for their sakes and for the sake of our place in history. Let us not forsake them, or our aspirations for a better and safer world.
Mr. President, I congratulate you on your election. We have a great deal of work to get through at this session. I know from my meeting with you yesterday that you will guide us skilfully through the rough water we will inevitably meet. Let me say, too, how good it is to see the Secretary-General restored to full health. We need his wisdom and courage at this time.
I appear here today as the representative of a small country from the southern reaches of the vast Pacific Ocean. Forty years ago my country was amongst those which pledged their commitment to the objectives of this world Organization. How much nearer are we, today, to achieving those ideals? Enormous problems confront us. Technology has expanded humanity's horizons into outer space. But here on earth we have not yet succeeded in providing basic human needs - food, shelter, and at least a minimum degree of security - for all. Under the Charter we have all abjured the use or threat of force. Yet the most powerful nations among us seem unwilling to take the decisive step of rejecting the weapons of mass destruction that threaten us all. Today, more than ever before, small States need the protection that the Charter and this Organization were intended to give. The United Nations was intended to represent our interests, for the powerful are better able to look after themselves. If we who are small are not to be ignored by those who are mighty, then we must work together here to ensure the survival of this planet.
New Zealanders know from recent experience that this Organization can respond quickly and fairly to the needs of small States which call for its help.
In 1985 my country was suddenly embroiled in a dispute with France. It concerned the detonation of bombs fixed to a ship at a wharf in one of our harbors. A crewman of Dutch extraction lost his life. The circumstances were widely blazoned across the world press and need not be further recapitulated.
Despite lengthy bilateral negotiations we were not able to solve the problem. With France, we then turned to the United Nations for help in finding an acceptable solution. Both countries undertook to abide unconditionally by the United Nations arbitration. The Secretary-General took on the task himself. He made a ruling which both Governments accepted without reservation. It has been carried out by both of us. I want to record my Government's profound gratitude to the Secretary-General for the commendable way he carried out that task. Through his mediator efforts we have been able to bring to an end that unhappy episode.
Our experience in the field of decolonization has also shown us, once again, how this Organization can help us in fulfilling our obligations to bring dignity and self-respect to all people. My country is responsible for helping bring to nationhood a tiny territory in the South Pacific: Tokelau; remote, beautiful, but with few resources other than the fish in the sea around the three small atolls and the determination of its peoples. Our Government invited a United Nations visiting mission there in July to see the unique development issues confronting that atoll community. I am pleased to see members of the mission here today. We have found, as in the case of other island nations whose histories have been entwined with ours, that the United Nations could indeed make a useful and innovative contribution to the process leading to self-determination. That is an example that could well be followed again in another case in the South Pacific; and I shall return to that later.
It is clear that the United Nations can help if small nations shew that they want it to do so. Nobody believes that problems that have bedeviled us for years will be solved overnight. But one thing is clear: whatever the issue -international security, the right to live in freedom and peace, or freeing the shackles on international trade - the small and the vulnerable have much more in common with one another than with the big Powers. Separately, we may achieve a little*, together we may yet move mountains, perhaps even the Rockies and the Urals.
Today there is no greater incentive for us all to work together than the need to bring under control the fast-quickening nuclear-arms race. Arms control and disarmament are not pious goals; they are immediate and desperate imperatives. Nuclear weapons have become the subject of a monstrous exercise in self-perpetuation. We know now that none of us, even those in as remote a place as New Zealand, or more remote still, could escape the consequences of their use. All too graphically the scientists have shown us that.
The central point, surely, must be that, when you have arsenals that can destroy humanity, you can have no security. By their very nature, nuclear weapons subvert and distort the intention of Governments to provide security for their people. So-called nuclear logic always seems to require the next terrible step: the production of a new weapon to prevent the last from being used. The ceaseless search for balance is really endless escalation; security, like a desert mirage, is never reached. We sink further into insecurity and fear. The balance of terror has been raised one more notch. It is well named. And despite the truly awesome consumption of resources, it seems we are edging towards yet another new and uncontrolled level of arms technology and spending. An arms race in outer space must not be permitted. Where one nuclear giant leads, the other will surely follow.
Of course, the arms race does not exist in a vacuum. It is a reflection of deep-seated distrust and scarcely concealed hostility. Only earnest diplomatic action aimed at sincere detente will remove the distrust. Only decisive political action can end the arms race itself. No one underestimates the difficulty of managing the transition to a world without nuclear weapons, which must be the ultimate goal - but the nuclear "logic" that equates more nuclear weapons with greater security cannot be allowed to go on sabotaging the process of arms control and disarmament negotiations. What security is there, I ask, in a system under which mischance, malevolence or madness may entomb not only the nuclear Powers, but all of us?
With the fate of the world in their hands, how can the two major nuclear Powers continue to refuse to respond promptly and positively to the overtures each has made to the other? The leaders of the United States of America and the Soviet Union, separately and together, have given indications that progress can be made. The tentative steps they have taken seem to shew that there is common ground. They agree on the need for deep cuts in nuclear weapons. Their proposals now lie on the negotiating table. They must not just lie there. The political will of the major Powers to end the arms race will be judged by what they do now to narrow the negotiating gap between them. An old adage says: "Procrastination is the thief of time." Time is fast running out. The nations of the world, all but a handful of them non-nuclear, cannot wait much longer; they have waited too long already.
Nor can we, the small countries, simply conclude that it is a problem only for the nuclear Powers to solve. He must take a hand, together. New Zealand welcomes the successful conclusion earlier this week of the Stockholm Conference on Confidence-Building Measures and Disarmament in Europe. As earlier speakers from both East and West have noted, the agreement should make a significant contribution towards reducing tensions in Europe. That benefits not only Europe, but the wider international community. The agreement is most welcome after a long period of stalemate on arms control and disarmament negotiations. But it is only a beginning. We urge the larger Powers to get on with resolving their wider differences. Meanwhile there are things which the small can do, steps which we can take in co-operation with one another to encourage disarmament.
Among practicable arms control measures, the most urgent is a comprehensive test-ban treaty; one that would ban all testing by all nations, in all environments and for all time. No other single step would do so much to slow the remorseless advance of nuclear-weapon production and experimentation, or to establish confidence in the will of the nuclear Powers to eliminate nuclear weapons from the world's arsenals. It would be a truly universal arms control measure.
There may be more than one route to a comprehensive test-ban treaty. The ending of testing by any State, even temporarily, is a step forward and should be welcomed. A mutual moratorium by two or sore would be better still, even if a temporary one. All such steps give time for talk and delay disastrous escalation.
There may be other provisional measures involving all the nuclear-weapon States which would help establish confidence and encourage a commitment to negotiate a permanent ban on testing. But none of these can be a substitute for a comprehensive test ban. The New Zealand Government will again join with others in calling on the Conference on Disarmament to start immediately with the work of drawing up a comprehensive test-ban treaty. New Zealand, too, is ready to take part in an international system for monitoring a test ban. We have some facilities in place for monitoring testing in our own region and are preparing to improve them.
There is room for smaller powers to act in the regional sphere, too, in practical ways that the United Nations has recognized as valuable. For its part, New Zealand will not permit nuclear weapons in our country, even temporarily, as on visiting ships or aircraft. We intend to keep our land, our waters and our ports, and our air space nuclear-free.
With the members of the South Pacific Forum, an annual gathering of 13 independent states, we have moved to establish a nuclear-free zone in the South Pacific. The Rarotonga Treaty was adopted over a year ago now. It prohibits the acquisition, stationing or testing of nuclear weapons by any of its parties. This year's forum at Suva adopted three Protocols to the Treaty. These call on the major nuclear Powers to respect the zone. I am glad to be able to tell you that some have already indicated their willingness to sign these Protocols. The New Zealand Government, along with others in the region, hopes they will soon be endorsed by all those countries eligible to sign. But, the South Pacific will not be free of the scourge of nuclear testing until France accepts that the security concerns of a distant European Government should not thwart the legitimate desire of the nations of the South Pacific to live in peace and safety in a nuclear-free environment. For too long, far too long, the Pacific has been used as a testing-ground by the nuclear Powers. Two of them stopped testing there long ago. It is time for France to follow their example. I would note also, in passing, that contrary to what has been said earlier in this debate, the report of the Scientific Mission that visited the French testing site at Mururoa Atoll in 1983 does not provide a basis for asserting that those tests "are being carried out in unquestionably safe conditions," (A/41/PV.8, p. 71). That report specifically refused to rule out the possibility of serious damage to the Atoll and its surrounding environment in the longer-term future.
The South Pacific countries are increasingly confident of their place in the international community, certain of what binds them together, determined to preserve their cultures, committed to the principles of democracy and consensus and willing to work closely with those nations that genuinely pursue co-operation.
The micro-States in the vast ocean region that I come from present unique development challenges. New Zealand makes a major contribution, and we welcome the assistance of other countries in the region's development. Such assistance, however, is only one contribution towards economic growth. Equally important are fair and equitable returns for the region's limited resources, the produce of its |	land, its slowly expanding manufacturing exports and, most important, its fish.
All that calls for international co-operation.
The United Nations was involved earlier this year in another major step forward in the development of the Pacific. On 28 May the Trusteeship Council recommended that the Trusteeship Agreement over the Federated States of Micronesia, the Marshall Islands, Palau and the Northern Marianas should be terminated. At its
meeting at Suva, the South Pacific Forum welcomed that development. New Zealand was a party to the Forum's consensus. The peoples of those Territories have said what they want. That is decisive. The United Nations has discharged its responsibilities, and the process of decolonization is coming nearer to completion in the South Pacific.
There is a lesson here for New Caledonia. Our experience of decolonization has shown us that the United Nations can help bring about peaceful evolution. The South Pacific Forum has always regarded New Caledonia as a neighbor that should take its place as an independent member of the South Pacific community. It is, by history as well as by unchangeable geography, an integral part of the region. Unless its stability is preserved, the stability of the whole region and all its member States will be seriously affected. Forum members are concerned that the Territory's move to independence should take place peacefully. That means by negotiation. France clearly has the power to bring about change peacefully. It is deeply disappointing to us and to our South Pacific neighbors, therefore, that in the approach recently outlined by the present French Government it seems that independence is no longer its goal for New Caledonia. I noted this morning the statement of the French Minister for Overseas Departments and Territories, reported in today's Herald Tribune. He said:
"When Australia and New Zealand are advocating independence for New Caledonia, they are advocating independence for a territory that would be under Libyan control."
Such a claim is farcical. We are not supporting any faction of the independence movement in New Caledonia. We support true self-determination for all real New Caledonians. The South Pacific Forum leaders have made it clear that they want to maintain a dialog with all the parties to see if a more promising situation can be brought about. The Heads of Government of the countries members of the South  Pacific Forum decided last month to seek the re-inscription of New Caledonia on the United Nations list of Non-Self-Governing Territories. That move was strongly endorsed by the Heads of State or Government of the countries of the Non-Aligned Movement at their meeting at Harare. My delegation, with other South Pacific com tries, welcomes that support. We look forward to a positive decision by the Assembly and to a constructive solution to New Caledonia's travail.
We all know that economic stability and prosperity are a necessary condition for real security. The need for international action by the vulnerable is as pressing here as it is in any other field. New Zealand, like many developing countries that are reliant on commodity exports, depends for long-term economic growth on its ability to trade fairly in those areas in which it has a comparative advantage. Yet we are being prevented from doing so by the absurdities of a distorted world trading system. Agricultural trade has generally been excluded from the international trade rules and disciplines. It is the first area to be hit by new protectionist measures, especially non-tariff barriers; it is the main victim of domestic production subsidies which, in the large developed countries have reached a level that even they now recognize as unsustainable. But it is the rest of us, the efficient producers, who have to deal with the massive over-production dumped cm world markets and that brings down returns for everyone.
The problems of agriculture are a time-bomb ticking away under the world trading system. An explosion would threaten not just the prosperity of individual countries but global economic and political stability. That is why New Zealand attaches great importance to progress in a particular United Nations forum, that of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). The new round of negotiations recently launched at Punta del Este offers a vital opportunity for the international community to establish just and equitable rules for the conduct of agricultural trade. That will be the measure of the new round's success. It has to succeed. It will not succeed without pain, as New Zealand well knows. But if it fails, the credibility of the whole multilateral system will be thrown into question.
There is a need for international action on Africa, too. New Zealanders have been deeply moved by the plight of the sub-Saharan people, who continue to be afflicted by drought and famine. New Zealanders continue to work alongside the Government in supporting churches and other organizations undertaking rehabilitation projects. In the week before the special session on the critical economic situation in Africa they contributed substantially yet again to an international appeal, in this case Sport Aid.
The outcome of the special session was welcomed as a starting point for planning strategies for the future. The endeavors to work out practical measures to bring about an end to Africa's economic and developmental problems are encouraging. The co-operation and commitment with which the special session's deliberations were conducted must be sustained if its sound recommendations are to be put into effect.
New Zealanders have also been shocked by events in southern Africa - the violence in South Africa's black townships, the South African Government's further repression of rights and freedoms, the attacks on defenseless targets in neighboring countries, carried out simply to give a political message, and South Africa's obstruction of Namibian independence. For a while, it looked as though the entirely reasonable approach adopted by the Commonwealth Eminent Persons Group might be successful in bringing all parties in South Africa together to negotiate a new political dispensation. The South African Government's rejection of those efforts, signaled as it was by the contemporaneous and wanton bombing of neighboring capitals, is to be deplored. Negotiation is always the preferable way to bring about necessary and lasting changes acceptable to the majority. The chances of a negotiated end to South Africa's troubles now look slim indeed. Such as they are, they must be grasped, or a holocaust will surely follow.
The common theme in each issue I have raised is the need for united action. And in each case it is clear that the United Nations can play a crucial part, provided it has the support of those - the overwhelming majority of its Members -who are small, whose individual power is slight. It is disturbing, therefore, to see a weakening - even a conscious undermining - of the commitment to multilateral action. It is long-standing political indifference or, in some cases, hostility, which is the cause of the United Nations financial crisis. The selective withholding of contributions - a practice in which one major contributor has recently joined another - cannot be condoned. Nor can the action of those who allow dues to fall into arrears. But we have all contributed to the current crisis. We have pretended to believe that political problems could be solved simply by calling for more financial resources, more studies, more staff. Well, we were wrong. Entirely new measures are necessary, at once more drastic and more constructive.
The Secretary-General took prompt and decisive action earlier this year to avert the immediate cash crisis. His package of measures was designed to contain the crisis this year. This Assembly must look at the longer term. It must be resolute.
For we are in no better shape financially now than we were in April. We must recognize this in looking at the proposals before us both for economies and for reform. By a positive approach we emphasize to those owing funds that, while we cannot accept their disregard of binding Charter obligations, we are prepared to help ourselves. We small States have the most to lose - so we must find a way forward.
We in New Zealand welcome the report of the High Level Group. We strongly endorse its consensus findings. We commend them to the membership. We must go on to develop quickly an agreed approach to the reform of the program and budget process,, We must begin to run this important Organization like any self-respecting business - in the interests, that is, of its shareholders, the Member States. In the process, all of us are going to have to accept some curtailment of our favorite programs. We accept that. Compromise from all will be required.
Reform of our finances, management and administration is the first requirement, for it is the prerequisite to efficiency.
More important in the end, though, is the way this Organization goes about fulfilling the objectives of its Charter. I found myself in complete agreement with some observations two days ago of the Foreign Minister of the Netherlands and I- cannot do better, in conclusion, than to refer to them. He said:
"Differences in ideologies and cultures are a fact of life. But polarization and mutual recrimination are not their inevitable corollary." (A/41/PV.9, p. 46)
I would add that although they are a possible and, as things stand, all too likely corollary, they are the very things this Organization was founded to dispel and to avoid for the future. They can only lead to ever deepening mistrust and hostility. It is no use pretending we are not going to disagree and from time to time disagree bitterly. What we must do is face that reality and instead of papering over differences by what the Netherlands Minister rightly called "the practice of false consensus", we must seek in a real spirit of reconciliation, and friendship, to find constructive and hopefully permanent solutions to the great and serious questions that today threaten to divide much of the world into two hostile camps. We must not risk being seen by future generations as having spent our brief and precious time here preparing for war, rather than working for peace.


We all come in turn to this important rostrum to speak of our perception of the world, our combined efforts produce a picture of present day international realities.
What is the picture that we see today?
 At first glance, the interval since the last session of the General Assembly has done nothing to brighten the panorama of our time. The intervening period has been marked by a number of factors which have aggravated existing concerns. The arms race has not been halted; it is advancing in a steep spiral. The danger of its spreading to outer space has become more real. Dangerous hotbeds of armed conflict persist. In many parts of the world, misery and poverty are becoming more acute.
Despite all this, we still believe that the International Year of Peace will go down in history as something more than just a symbol of peace.
I should like to draw the Assembly's attention to some trends which enable us to speak of glimmers of light on the world's horizon. They should be noted by everyone of us, for they should strengthen our resolve to act even more vigorously. They should be noted by all the peoples, who are tired of bearing the burden of fear and anxiety. They should be noted by the world as a whole, which is becoming an increasingly interdependent and indivisible whole, and which may no longer be able to withstand strain and destruction.
Hope breeds optimism. In the words of Mikhail Gorbachev: "Everywhere in the world there is a growing conviction in the minds of the peoples and in political public circles and widely differing in their orientation and outlook that what is at stake is the survival of mankind and that the time has come for decisive and responsible action." Wfe see a glimmer of light in the fact that at a time so crucial for mankind the peoples of the world, and an increasing number of Governments, are becoming aware of the need to adopt a new way of thinking in line with the realities of the nuclear and space age.
The time is at hand when considerations of groups, blocs or ideologies are beginning to give way to the understanding that peace is the supreme value. Only if peace is translated from declarations >a x> practical action is there a chance for survival. This new way of thinking is bringing that truth into the foreground. Whole groups of countries, the Non-Aligned Movement, political parties, public organizations and anti-nuclear forces are putting forward promising ideas for ending the nuclear deadlock. A favorable background is emerging for
developing a dialog.
An exception to this trend is the policy pursued by the imperialist forces. This contrast, however, only emphasizes the general will for action, for concrete practical deeds.
It is becoming a fact of life that vast territories are being declared nuclear-weapon-free zones. Democratic majorities are taking such decisions through
democratic procedures.
Political leaders who claim that they are committed to democracy, should
become aware of the contradictions between their behavior and their declared principles. Instead of building up and counting warheads, they should be counting the votes of these who call for the complete elimination of weapons of mass destruction.
Unfortunately, in some countries the institutions of democracy are being outweighed by the immoral arithmetic of military superiority. But it is an indisputable fact that the call for action is no longer a voice crying in the wilderness. On the contrary, even in the wilderness of the Nevada desert calls are being heard for an end to nuclear testing. The Nevada explosions are new registered not only by us but also by United States scientists with their instruments installed near the Soviet city of Semipalatinsk.
At the same time, not a single seismograph in the world is registering nuclear explosions on our territory - not because of any lack of sensitivity on the part of the instruments, but because the Soviet Union is responsive to the will of the world community.
In pursuing the foreign policy proclaimed at the Twenty-seventh Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, our co lei try is taking specific, practical steps. One of the most important is the unilateral moratorium on nuclear explosions. This is precisely the kind of action that proves the sincerity of our intentions and the seriousness of our concern for the future of the world.
For more than a year now the Soviet testing sites have remained silent. Listen to this silence? it is very eloquent. If it were accompanied by a similar silence at United States test sites, that more than any words would tell mankind that what we are witnessing was the beginning of a movement towards realizing the
idea of a nuclear-free world.
Stopping the tests means not allowing the emergence of new types of nuclear
weapons and barring the way to the creation of nuclear space weapons. We call upon
the United States to join us in this forward march and not call us back to carrying
out explosions, as it proposed here yesterday. A bilateral moratorium, followed by
a multilateral one, is one of the most important links in the chain of actions
which could lead to the creation of a comprehensive system of international peace and security.
In its determination to make this a reality, the Soviet Union, together with other socialist countries, has submitted proposals on this subject for the Assembly's consideration. We are convinced that the creation of this system that would embrace the political, military, economic and humanitarian fields would be in
keeping with the interests of all States and peoples.
The sponsors of this proposal make no claim to have discovered a hitherto unknown political "continent". If there are any blank spots today they exist mainly in the field of concrete, practical measures. To clear the way for such action would indeed be a discovery of the highest order. The proposed bases for security are consonant with the principles of the United Nations Charter and designed to promote their implementation within the specific conditions of our day. Here, we are looking forward to a most democratic and constructive discussion and the collective creative efforts of all countries.
The idea of comprehensive security presupposes first and foremost material guarantees of peace, political and international legal safeguards and the establishment of principles of civilized and respectful relations among States. A safe world is a world of law and order, in which there is strict compliance with the united Nations Charter and respect for all rules of international law, for human rights and freedoms.
Our initiative contains an answer to the question of what should be done to save life on Earth. As we speak of this the abandoned villages in the area of the Chernobyl nuclear power plant stand before our eyes. That accident has meant for us more than grief over our losses and compassion for its victims. It has reinforced our anxiety for the future of the Earth. Chernobyl was a tragic mistake on the part of human beings working with the peaceful atom. But still less are there any guarantees against mistakes with the military uses of the atom. Given the existence in the world of 50,000 nuclear warheads, we are living on borrowed time and no one knows when that time will run out.
What should be done? Continue to play the game of nuclear roulette? It is
clear even now that, sooner or later, this could lead us to collective suicide and
self-destruction. There is only one way out: before it is too late, while there
is still time, the game played for insane stakes and in which there can be no
winner must be stopped. Stop once and for all this deadly gambling with nuclear death.
It is within the powers of the international community, the sole sovereign master of its own fate to do this. No single nuclear Power has the right to take decisions on behalf of all, and the USSR refuses to do so. In his historic statement of 15 January, the Soviet leader proposed something quite different - to scrap all nuclear weapons. Once again the criterion is experience.
Political responsibility is the opposite of political arrogance. The problem of nuclear testing clearly highlights these mutually incompatible approaches.
There are other facts. Look at the fate of the SALT I and SALT II treaties. They are being torn up now because they allow no room for equipping a 131st bomber with cruise missiles. One thousand, five hundred such missiles seemed too few, so
it was necessary to add 20 more.
The tribunal of history is merciless in its verdicts. If political leaders fail to take timely and responsible decisions, history will not forgive them. We have a chance to lay the foundations for lasting peace. Of course it is not just a matter of adopting yet another resolution. The United Nations must establish a system of values which gives the highest priority to practical actions.
Let ma emphasize that this is being stated by the representative of a nuclear Power. We never wanted to acquire nuclear weapons, but from the time we were forced to acquire them we have constantly sought to limit, reduce and eliminate them. We are not the last member of the "nuclear club", but we are proposing its dissolution. Let there be no mistake - we have our pride like anyone else. However, the prestige and dignity of a great Power are things we associate with the
equal security of all.
We are motivated by our sense of responsibility both to our own people and to other peoples. It is for this reason precisely that we are willing to agree to sensible compromises and make realistic concessions when we put forward proposals for the reduction of strategic offensive weapons and medium-range missiles. This reflects the new approach to the realities of the nuclear space age outlined most fully and comprehensively in Mikhail Gorbachev's report to the Twenty-Seventh Congress of our Party.
The sincerity of our intentions and the integrity of our position are matched by our determination to put an end to the dangerous course of world events. We are putting so much emphasis on the renunciation of nuclear-weapon tests because it is precisely this that is the real test of the sincerity of declarations.
Yesterday we heard the statement of the President of the United States. It is regrettable that the rostrum of the General Assembly was used in such a way. To respond point by point to that statement presents no problem. However, to enter into polemics would be to show a lack of respect for our audience. The subject under discussion is far too serious to turn it into a grindstone for sharpening political wit. Time is too precious to be wasted on refuting misconceptions and prejudices that distort reality and facts.
Nevertheless, there is one key point to which we must refer, because it is of fundamental importance. I am referring to the attempt to provide a philosophical rationale for the assertion that new sophisticated military technology is capable of reliably ensuring security. It is precisely that kind of philosophy that caused the tidal wave of armaments which has been growing year after year and now threatens to obliterate the Earth.
There is only one path to security - destroying existing weapons instead of replacing them with new ones. The technology of destruction must not be allowed to determine policy.
One can imagine the sigh of relief among people if they heard that in this International Year of Peace the United States, too, had decided to stop nuclear testing. That is what they had been expecting from the United States President,
I have been authorized to state that the Soviet Union is ready, at any time and anywhere, to sign a treaty on the total prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests. We are ready to do so here at the United Nations, so that the entire world community could become part of this great act and historical turning-point which would be a sign of respect for its will.
Words not matched by deeds are worthless, but words supported by deeds are a country's gold reserve.
We urge those who make verbal pronouncements in favor of eliminating nuclear weapons to follow up with practical deeds. Otherwise whatever they say about the inhumanity of nuclear weapons is no more than a rhetorical mirage behind which there looms an altogether different policy.
Its proponents iWe a favorite argument, verification. But that argument
increasingly resembles a tattered curtain. Broadly speaking, there is no longer
any problem of verification. In the conviction that there can be no trust without
verification, the Soviet Union is open to any form or method of verification.
In our view the summit conference of the non-aligned countries at Harare made some very valuable recommendations in this respect. The United Nations could support the proposals of the Delhi Six - Argentina, Greece, India, Mexico, Tanzania and Sweden - on monitoring compliance with the obligation not to carry out nuclear tests. The Soviet Union will accept recommendations formulated under the auspices of the United Nations.
We agree with those States which believe that the question whether mankind will live in a nuclear or a nuclear-free world must be decided by the whole world community and not by a small group of nuclear Powers.
This also applies fully to the future of outer space, for near-Earth space is the common heritage of mankind and should be used for the benefit of all. However, if weapons gat into space, this heritage would become a threat to all? just two or three States enjoying the status of military-space Powers would then dominate the rest of the world.
Is that what we want? Do we want a military-space fiefdom to be established? The question is posed by the course of events, which may become tragic for
international relations as a whole. Therefore we shall continue to work to protect outer space from attempts to turn it into a military domain of one or two Powers.
Today those designs are being camouflaged with high-sounding pronouncements about a defense program, which supposedly would do away with the threat of attack once and for all. One hears moving and soul-stirring stories about a dream which when realized would free mankind from the fear of nuclear death. Evil designs are being purveyed as good intentions, and swords as shields.
Let no one be misled by such talk. It serves to conceal an attack against the main pillar of stability, the anti-ball is tic-missile Treaty. The intention is to get the Treaty out of the way within a time frame of seven years. Here everything is being very carefully calculated, for it is precisely in seven years that they plan to prepare space weapons for deployment.
The question is. What for? Would it not be more sensible to work for an agreement on the complete elimination of nuclear missiles, whether strategic, medium-range or any other, as we are proposing?
The answer is simple; whatever is done to disguise it, the so-called defensive space shield is being designed to carry out a first strike with impunity. The first strike could become the last one, and not just for the country being attacked. Space weapons, like nuclear arms, do not recognize national boundaries, and they do not choose whom to spare and whom to destroy. And in any circumstances they could threaten, not one country or several countries, but the entire world.
Therefore we consider it necessary to warn everybody that if space is to remain peaceful everyone must protect it.In this, the United Nations, the only legitimate trustee of peace in outer space, should make its voice heard.
We also call for the help of the United Nations in regard to a matter of extreme importance - the elimination of chemical weapons. Encouraging progress has been achieved at the Geneva Conference.
The historic goal of ridding the earth of chemical weapons is new closer to attainment. The only thing that could hinder the attainment of that goal is the position of the United states, which is seeking to develop binary weapons. However, obstacles can be removed if political will is evinced - and this Organization is quite capable of stimulating it.
A comprehensive system of international security has more than nuclear, space or chemical parameters. Security implies the non-use of any force, including conventional armaments and armed forces.
The Soviet Union calls for a significant reduction in the level of military confrontation, above all between politico-military alliances. Radical proposals to that effect, based on the concept of reasonable sufficiency, have been made by the States members of the Warsaw Treaty.
I shall say even more. We would certainly not want our troops to be present anywhere beyond our national borders. This question is also open for discussion and can be resolved in an atmosphere of increased trust and with the implementation of measures of military detente.
A beginning has already been made in the Stockholm forum, and all of us - not just the Europeans - can congratulate ourselves and each other on this triumph of reason and good will. It has given us something more than just a major agreement. It has demonstrated that when we really want something, we can achieve it. It has confirmed that the Helsinki process is being successfully developed and has taken deep roots in European soil. It is now extremely important that the forthcoming meeting in Vienna should become yet another milestone in Europe's advance towards reliable security and improved co-operation.
The Asian and Pacific region should also be allowed to breathe freely. Our ideas in this regard are incorporated in a concrete program of action that was outlined in Mikhail Gorbachev's address in Vladivosfaock. We are encouraged that this program has proved to be in harmony with the feelings of many States of the region.
We are aware of all the sore spots existing in the region. First of all, there is the Korean peninsula. The people of Korea yearn for an aid to the division of their country. There is only one impediment to that, namely the presence of United States troops, which in effect occupy the southern part of the country.
The situation around Kampuchea is another source of tension. Here again the fate of the entire people is being sacrificed to the geopolitical interests of certain States. To serve those interests, some are trying; to consign to oblivion the millions of human lives destroyed by the reactionary anti-national clique. This must not be allowed to happen.
The constructive proposals of Kampuchea, Laos and Viet Nam open the way for resolving the region's problems on a broad political basis and stabilizing the situation in South-Bast Asia.
Untying those and many other knots would undoubtedly contribute to the strengthening of peace and security in the Asian and Pacific region, and we are doing our best to promote this.
The positive changes new under way in our country's relations with the People's Republic of China are important not only in terms of bilateral co-operation; they are also conducive to the improvement of the overall situation.
New and increasingly rich substance is being added to our traditional friendly relations with the people of India and its Government. The Soviet Union values good relations with many Asian States and wishes to discuss with them, in particular with the members of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), ways of upgrading relations where they are as yet below the desired level.
Measures to eliminate regional conflicts would form an organic part of the concept of comprehensive security. Of course, there is not, nor can there be, a uniform model for a political settlement here. Nevertheless, concrete expression must be given to some general principles. Those are, first, unconditional respect for sovereignty, independence and the right of nations themselves to choose their way of development; secondly, a respectful attitude towards legitimate Governments; thirdly, respect for the obligations and agreements concluded between States in full conformity with international law.
Every regional conflict is a difficult test for the United Nations This is particularly true with regard to those territories where the emblem of the United Nations symbolizes special responsibility. Unfortunately, it is all too often darkened by the shadow of unfulfilled hopes.
The time has long since come to put to effective use all the powers of this Organization, to exercise all its rights. This applies above all to the fate of the Namibian people and to the Trust Territory of Micronesia. Their problems are as old as the United Nations.
The Middle East problem is somewhat "younger". There must not be many people present in this Hall who participated in the adoption of the resolution on the division of Palestine. Today, we are once again voicing our view that along with the State of Israel, which owes its existence to, among others, the Soviet Union, an Arab Palestinian State should become part of the world's political map.
We believe that the United Nations should again take the matter of a Middle East settlement into its hands. As a practical step in that direction, the Soviet Union proposes that a preparatory committee be set up within the framework of the Security Council to do the necessary work for convening an international conference on the Middle East.
The tragedy of the people of Cyprus has been going on for so many years now. Here as well there has been no lack of mediation efforts and plans for a settlement. Various options have been tried, but the proposal that the problem of Cyprus be settled at a representative international conference under the auspices of the United Nations has been studiously evaded. Who stands to gain from that? Only those forces which intend to use the island for their military and political plans. Raising the stick of "neo-globalism" over the Mediterranean, they would like to turn the entire region into a hotbed of tension. They sometimes use that stick without giving any thought to the consequences, as was done with barbaric cruelty in Libya.
Since the very beginning of the war between Iraq and Iran, the Soviet Union has been calling for a stop to that senseless mutual extermination. Being sincere friends of both nations, we are making use of the possibilities available to us to convince the parties to the conflict that they should make peace. We shall continue to do so.
It is our conviction that were it not for the racist regime of Pretoria the black, white and colored people in South Africa would have long ago found a common language - a language of equality, concord and racial peace. The dividing line is drawn not by ethnic differences but by the cruel policy of apartheid, which is hostile to everyone, irrespective of the color of the skin. To fail to see that is to encourage, wittingly or unwittingly, genocide against the majority of the South African people.
The world community has just spoken out unequivocally about the situation in southern Africa, and it is up to the Security Council now to adopt binding decisions, embodying in them the will of the absolute majority of the world's nations.
Recently, a new and ugly phenomenon of "prepaid" regional conflicts has appeared in international practice. A graphic example is Nicaragua, into which millions of dollars are being channeled to finance the massacre of peasants and the destruction of villages and plantations - only because that small country has dared to choose its own way of development which, in the eyes of the administration of the world's largest and most powerful capitalist nation, appears to pose a threat to its security.
The undeclared wars against the legitimate Governments of Afghanistan, Kampuchea, Angola, Mozambique and Ethiopia are paid for in exactly the same way. And quite often the country financing a conflict maintains diplomatic relations or conducts negotiations with the Government concerned, while at the same time seeking to overthrow it by any means. Indeed, it does not mind the cost when blacklisting Governments and countries which, for some reason or other, it finds inconvenient. Thus, the entire range of reprisals, from direct military to economic and ideological, has been used against the Republic of Cuba for more than a quarter of a century. But surely it is high time to understand that such a policy is bankrupt and that it can only be described as insane.
Political wisdom dictates acknowledging the established realities and not seeking to undo them arbitrarily. Describing gangs of mercenaries as "freedom fighters" - which is attempted in the war against Afghanistan - does not help. The time has come to learn to call things by their own names. With regard to Afghanistan, a national democratic revolution has taken place there. Its social base is constantly becoming broader and stronger; it relies on the support and participation of all social strata and ethnic groups in that country without any exception. They have a clear-cut program for a peaceful settlement of crisis phenomena, and all that is needed is not to hamper that positive process. Here again, the Soviet Union is in favor of seeking new solutions and a fresh approach, unobscured by prejudice, that would help to identify ways of solving the problem with due regard for the legitimate interests of the Afghan people and of its friends and neighbors.
A comprehensive system of international security can give us the keys to many of the most intricate locks.
We have outlawed, as most other States have, any form of terrorism. At the same time, we are prepared to contribute, and are already contributing, to fighting that plague. No sane person can live with it. Terrorism must be mercilessly eradicated, for innocent people suffer and die because of it. But to combat it effectively we also should see its causes. One should not ignore the nature of that abhorrent phenomenon: outbursts of individual and group terror are sometimes engendered by imperialist violence against entire peoples. An improvement in the overall international situation would do much to help stamp out terrorism.
An obstacle to an improved international climate is posed by neo-globalism. It entails diktat and aggression; it tramples upon the independence of nations. The alternative to it is a comprehensive system of security.
The arms race and regional conflicts inevitably have an adverse effect on the world economic system. And while politicians, futurologists and experts are trying somehow to model a structure of security in a world with or without weapons, no one can come even close to predicting the economic consequences of the situation as it evolves. Yet the explosion with which it is fraught would be no less catastrophic than a possible malfunction in the technologies of war.
Today, militarism is not only jeopardizing man's physical survival but his socio-economic progress as well. The cost of the arms race is reaching a level comparable to the material damage caused by past world wars. All of this makes disarmament imperative.
Against the background of the uncontrollable crisis affecting the world economic structure we see with particular clarity the increasingly prevalent process of purging out resources from the national economies of the developing countries of Latin America, Africa and other regions. In the early 1980s the developing world, exploited by imperialism, was pushed into a vicious circle of development via debt, and it now finds itself hung up in the noose of a trillion dollar indebtedness. This, in effect, means that regions with the world's greatest concentration of population, resources and future markets are sliding towards economic catastrophe.
That is why we regard economic security as an integral part of a comprehensive system of international security. When it begins to function, it will be possible to set up a fund for assistance to the developing countries and to draw up, under United Nations auspices, a global program of scientific and technological co-operation.
In our opinion, a comprehensive system of international security is inconceivable without wide-ranging and open co-operation in the humanitarian field. We are strongly in favor of expanded international co-operation in implementing political, social and individual human rights, and we urge everyone to take a fresh, unbiased look at that problem. Specifically, at the Bern meeting the Soviet Union proposed that steps be taken by all States bring their domestic legislation on the whole range of humanitarian problems into conformity with international norms. Unfortunately, another approach emerged at the Bern meeting, one that ignores the consensus among most of the participants in that dialog. Here, the United States of America undermined the adoption of any agreement.
The path of detente is a path towards greater openness in societies, towards a better level of objective information, towards nations' mutual familiarization with each other's life and towards the strengthening of the spirit of mutual understanding and accord in their relations.
Whatever the field of international relations we turn to, the role of the United Nations can be seen as indispensable and its responsibility as great, "today, with the emergence of a new consolidation of the forces of progress and peace, the members of the Organization should have as their common concern the enhancement of United Nations authority and prestige and the increased effectiveness of its decisions. The dedicated work of Mr. Perez de Cuellar as Secretary-General of the United Nations at a difficult time for the Organization evokes deep respect, and we would like to thank him cordially.
The United Nations is on the verge of serious changes. It is impossible to restructure relations among States without taking into account altered realities. The Organization could only gain were the country presiding as Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement to participate, in one form or another, in the work of the Security Council.
Recent events have once again focused attention on an odd phenomenon, the country that once offered the site for United Nations Headquarters today all-too-often shows intense hostility towards the Organization. It slams the door and refuses to fulfill its obligations, as has been the case with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), or tries to assert the principle that whoever has the most money is right. It puts spokes in the wheels of the collective machinery with the notion that by so doing that machinery can be made to function according to its will. The United States has adopted the practice
of lecturing, punishing and arbitrarily threatening the Organization as a whole and those of its members it dislikes for some reason. Lately, the States Members of the United Nations have begun to ask with increasing frequency whether the United Nations can function normally in a country whose Government shows such undisguised disrespect for them and for the Organization itself. Perhaps that question should be heeded. It might be useful to hold a special debate in the United Nations on the numerous accumulated problems of the operation of the Organization.
The Organization's universality implies a forward thrust towards rapprochement and towards the elimination of centrifugal forces. In light of the proposed concept of comprehensive security, the East-West, North-South polarities can and must be expunged from the political vocabulary. That is what socialism is calling for. Whatever its antagonists assert, socialism is opposed to confrontation and intransigence in the most important pursuit of mankind: the construction of a durable and guaranteed peace. We have adopted that system of priorities in our relationship with the United States as well. This question has already been addressed here yesterday. Let me say that we are far from regarding our relations with the United States as holding no promise particularly since we have a high regard for the American people. Lately, encouraging outlines of meaningful agreements have been emerging. A summit meeting is also a realistic possibility. We could move forward fairly smoothly, if that is what the United States side wants. We are realists, and we do not draw inspiration from Utopian ideas. At the end of the last century, people envisioned the coming twentieth century as a golden age. But reality has dashed those expectations. Today, on the threshold of the twenty-first century, the objective reality is such that it could become either the golden age of science or the age of nuclear permafrost. The material means for bringing about either outcome already exist. The question is, which of them will be put to use?
The danger for civilization is ail-too evident. Hence the need for responsible, concerted action to prevent any possible catastrophe. We have made our choice. The Soviet Union - and I quote the words of Mikhail Gorbachev - will "continue to use every opportunity for productive dialog, for progress towards arms limitation and reduction, as well as towards the settlement of regional conflicts and the development of international co-operation in all areas of importance."
We think that in our deliberations it is very important that we never lose sight of the real scale of time and of the world. The language of which some politicians are so fond obscures that scale in a fog of nebulous abstract concepts, as if what is involved were not the Earth, but some other, remote, planet. Yet it is the Earth that we see before us in the images of our children and grandchildren, our fathers and mothers, our sisters and brothers, all those who are close and dear to us and with whom each of us identifies the concepts of "nation," "country" and "mankind."
This is the only acceptable yardstick. And one should not adjust his political telescope as though his sole interest were whether there is, indeed, life on Mars. All of us must answer one question, a question that is equally important to all: whether there will be life on Earth. We would very much like to answer, with confidence: Yes, there will be!
A short walk from this Hall is the delegates' Meditation Room, a refuge from a world deafened by the noise of strife and violence. "We want to bring back the idea of worship", Dag Haramarskjold once said about this room, "devotion to something which is greater and higher than we are ourselves".
It is just such devotion that gave birth to the United Nations: devotion to the dream of world peace and freedom, of human rights and democratic self-determination, of a time when, in those ancient words, "... they shall beat their swords into plowshares ... nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more".
The United States remains committed to the United Nations. For over 40 years, this Organization has provided an international forum for harmonizing conflicting national interests and has made a significant contribution in such fields as peace-keeping, humanitarian assistance, and eradicating disease. Yet, no one knows better than those in this Hall how the noble ideals embodied in the Charter have often remained unfulfilled. This Organization itself faces a critical hour - that
is usually stated as a fiscal crisis. But we can turn this "crisis" into an opportunity. The important reforms proposed by the Group of Experts can be a first step towards restoring this Organization's status and effectiveness. The issue, ultimately, is not one of cash but of credibility. If all the Members of this universal Organization decide to seize the moment and turn the rhetoric of reform into reality, the future of the United Nations will be secure. And members have my word for it: My country, which has always given the United Nations generous support, will continue to play a leading role in the effort to achieve its noble purposes.
When I came before the Assembly last year, an important moment in the pursuit of those purposes had not yet occurred. The leaders of the Soviet Union and the United States were to meet in Geneva. These discussions have now been held. For over 15 hours, the Soviet and American delegations met. For about five hours, General Secretary Gorbachev and I talked alone.
Our talks were frank. The talks were also productive - in a larger sense than even the documents that were agreed. Mr. Gorbachev was blunt; so was I. We came to realize again the truth of the statement: Nations do not mistrust each other because they are armed; they are armed because they mistrust each other. And I did not hesitate to tell Mr. Gorbachev our view of the source of that mistrust: the Soviet Union's record of seeking to impose its ideology and rule on others. So we acknowledged the deep and abiding differences between our systems of government, our views of history, and the future of mankind. But, despite these differences, we resolved to work together for real reductions in nuclear arms, as well as progress in other areas.
Delegates to the forty-first session of the General Assembly of the United Nations, today I want to report to you on what has transpired since the summit, notably the important letter X sent on 25 July to Mr. Gorbachev. In that letter, I dealt with the important issues of reducing nuclear arms, agreeing on strategic defenses, and limiting nuclear testing. In addition to those issues, which concern the military aspects of Soviet-American relations, I would also like to address other essential steps towards peace: the resolution of political conflicts, the strengthening of the international economy, and the protection of human rights.
Before I do this, however, let me, in the tradition of candor established at Geneva, tell you that a pall has been cast over our relations with the Soviet Union. I refer here to a particularly disturbing example of Soviet transgressions against human rights.
Recently - after the arrest of a Soviet national and united Nations employee accused of espionage in the United States - an American correspondent in Moscow was made the subject of fabricated accusations and trumped-up charges. He was arrested and jailed in a callous disregard of due process and numerous human rights conventions. In effect, he was taken as a hostage - even threatened with the death penalty.
Both individuals have now been remanded to their respective ambassadors. But this is only an interim step, agreed to by the United States for humanitarian reasons, it does not change the facts of the case: Gennadi Zakharov is an accused spy who should stand trial; Nicholas Daniloff is an innocent hostage who should be released. The Soviet Union bears the responsibility for the consequences of its action. Misusing the United Nations for the purposes of espionage does a grave disservice to this Organization.
The world expects better. It expects contributions to the cause of peace that only the leaders of the United States and the Soviet Union can make.
It is for this reason that I wrote last summer to Mr. Gorbachev with new arms control proposals. Before discussing the proposals, let us be clear about which weapons are the most dangerous and threatening to peace. The threat does not come from defensive systems, which are a shield against attack, but from offensive weapons - ballistic missiles that hurtle through space and can wreak mass destruction on the surface of the Earth - especially the Soviet Union's heavy, accurate ICBMs, with multiple warheads, which have no counterparts in size or number in any other country.
That is why the United States has long urged radical, equitable, verifiable reductions in these offensive systems. Note that I said reduction; for this is the real purpose of arms control: not just to codify the levels of today's arsenals, not just to channel their further expansion, but to reduce them in ways that will reduce the danger of war. Indeed, the United States believes the prospect of a future without such weapons cf mass destruction must be the ultimate goal of arms control.
I am pleased to say that the Soviet Union has now embraced our idea of radical reductions in offensive systems. At the Geneva summit last November, we agreed to intensify work in this area. Since then, the Soviets have made detailed proposals which, while not acceptable to us, appear to represent a serious effort. So we continue to seek a 50 per cent reduction of American and Soviet arsenals - with the central focus on the reduction of ballistic missile warheads. If the Soviet Union wants only a lesser reduction, however, we are prepared to consider it but as an interim measure. In other provisions as well, we have sought to take account of Soviet concerns. So there has been movement.
Similarly, in the area of intermediate-range nuclear forces, the United States seeks the total elimination of such missiles on a global basis. Again, if the Soviet Union insists on pursuing such a goal in stages, we are prepared to conclude an interim agreement without delay.
All this gives me hope. I can tell representatives that the exchanges between our two sides this summer could well have marked the beginning of serious, productive negotiation on arms reductions. The ice of the negotiating stalemate could break, if both sides intensify their effort in the new round of Geneva talks and if we keep the promises we made to each other last November.
For too long a time, however, the Soviet response has been to downplay the need for offensive reductions. When the United States began work technology to make offensive nuclear weapons obsolete some day, the Soviets tried to make that the main issue - as if the main danger to strategic stability was a defense against missiles that is still on the drawing boards, rather than the menacing ballistic missiles themselves that already exist in excessive numbers.
Still, the United States recognizes that both the offensive and defensive sides of the strategic equation must be addressed. And we have gone far to meet Soviet concerns expressed about the potential offensive use of strategic defensive systems. I have offered firm and concrete assurances that our strategic defense initiative could never be used to deploy weapons in space that can cause mass destruction on earth. I have pointed out that the radical reduction we seek now in offensive arsenals would be additional insurance that strategic defense initiative cannot be used to support a first-strike strategy. Our preference from the beginning has been to move forward co-operatively with the Soviets on strategic defenses, so that neither side will feel threatened and both can benefit from the strategic revolution that strategic defense initiative represents.
The United States continues to respect the anti-ballistic missile Treaty - in spite of clear evidence that the Soviets are violating it. We have told the Soviets that, if we can both agree on radical reductions in strategic offensive weapons, we are prepared right now to sign ah agreement with them on research, development, testing and deployment of strategic defenses based on the following.
First, both sides would agree to confine themselves, through 1991, to research, development and testing, which are permitted by the anti-ballistic missile Treaty, to determine whether advanced systems of strategic defense are technically feasible.
Secondly, a new treaty, signed now, would provide that, if after 1991 either side should decide to deploy such a system, that side would be obliged to offer a plan for sharing the benefits of strategic defense and eliminating offensive ballistic missiles. This plan would be negotiated over a two-year period.
Thirdly, if the two sides cannot agree after two years of negotiation, either side would be free to deploy an advanced strategic defensive system, after giving six months* notice to the other.
As the United States has repeatedly made clear, we are moving towards a future of greater reliance upon strategic defense. The United States remains prepared to talk about how - under what ground rules and process - we and the Soviet Union can do this co-operatively. Such strategic defenses, coupled with radical reductions in offensive forces, would represent a safer balance and give future statesmen the opportunity to move beyond it - to the ultimate elimination of nuclear weapons from the face of the Earth.
In addition to our proposals on offensive reductions and strategic defense, we have suggested new steps in another area - nuclear testing. Just as eliminating all nuclear weapons is our long-term goal, so too is a total ban on nuclear
testing; but both must be approached with practical steps. For the reality is that for now we still must rely on these weapons for the deterrence of war; thus the safety and reliability of our deterrent are themselves critical to peace.
The United States is proud of its record of nuclear safety and intends to maintain it. Nevertheless, we are as I said, ready now to take two important steps towards limiting nuclear testing: first, we ace ready to move forward on ratification of the Threshold Test Ban Treaty and the Treaty on Peaceful Nuclear Explosions, once agreement is reached on improved verification procedures. We have proposed new ideas to make this possible; secondly, upon ratification of those treaties - and in association with a program to reduce and ultimately eliminate all nuclear weapons - we are prepared to discuss ways to implement a step-by-step parallel program of limiting and ultimately ending nuclear testing.
Those are steps that we could take in the near future to show the world that we are moving forward. I therefore call upon the Soviet Union to join us in practical, attainable progress in limiting nuclear testing.
Just a few days ago I received a reply from General Secretary Gorbachev to my letter of 25 July - and, for the moment, let me say simply that we are giving it
As we move towards our goal of eliminating nuclear weapons, it is vital that we also address important imbalances in other kinds of weapons. This is why the United States has proposed a comprehensive global ban on all chemical weapons and why we and our allies have tried hard to break the stalemate in the conventional force negotiations in Vienna. In the Stockholm Conference a major advance has been achieved: a concrete new set of military confidence-building measures which
But we must remember from the experience of the 1970s that progress in arms control cannot be divorced from regional political developments. As I said at the beginning, political tensions cause military competition, not the other way around.
However, while the United States and the Soviet Union disagree over the root causes of political tension, we agree that regional conflicts could escalate into global confrontation. Last year, from this rostrum, I presented a formula for peace which would apply to five critical regional conflicts that are potential flash points for wider conflicts. I pointed out how difficult it is for the United States to accept Soviet assurances of peaceful intent when 126,000 Soviet troops prosecute a vicious war against the Afghan people; when 140,000 Soviet-backed Vietnamese soldiers wage war on the people of Cambodia; when 1,700 Soviet advisers and 2,500 Cuban combat troops are involved in military planning and operations in Ethiopia; when 1,300 Soviet military advisers and 36,000 Cuban troops direct and participate in combat operations to prop up an unpopular, repressive regime in Angola; when hundreds of millions of dollars in Soviet arms and Soviet-bloc advisers help a dictatorial regime in Nicaragua try to subvert and betray a popular revolution.
The danger inherent in these conflicts must be recognized. Marxist-Leninist regimes tend to wage war as readily against their neighbors as they routinely do against their own people. In fact, the internal and external wars often become indistinguishable. In Afghanistan, for example, the puppet regime has announced its intention to relocate tens of thousands of people from border areas, Can anyone doubt this will be done in classic communist style - by force? Many will die, to make it easier for the Soviets and their satellite troops to intimidate Pakistan.
It is just such transgressions that make the risk o£ confrontation with democratic nations so acute. So, once again, I propose a three-point peace process for the resolution of regional conflicts: first, talks between the warring parties themselves, without which an end to violence and national reconciliation are impossible; secondly, discussions between the united States and the Soviet Union - not to impose solutions but to support peace talks and eventually eliminate the supply of arms ^and the proxy troops from abroad; thirdly, if the talks are successful, joint efforts to welcome each country back into the world economy and the community of nations that respect human rights.
In addition to regional disputes, the grave threat of terrorism also jeopardizes the hopes for peace. No cause, no grievance can justify it. Terrorism is heinous and intolerable. It is the crime of cowards - cowards who prey on the innocent, the defenseless, and the helpless.
With its allies and other nations, the United States has taken steps to counter terrorism directly - particularly State-sponsored terrorism. Last April, the United States demonstrated that it will defend its interests and act against terrorist aggression. Let me assure all of you today, especially let me assure any potential sponsors of terrorism, that the American people are of one mind on this issue. Like other civilized peoples of the world, we have reached our limit. Attacks against our citizens or our interests will not go unanswered.
We will also do all in our power to help other law-abiding nations threatened by terrorist attacks. To that end, the United States believes that the understandings reached by the seven industrial democracies at the Tokyo summit last May made a good start towards international accord in the war on terrorism. We recommend to the General Assembly consideration of the Tokyo resolutions.
Moving to the economic realm, how ironic it is that some continue to espouse such ideus as a "new international economic order" based on State control when the world is learning, as never before, that the freedom of the individual, not the power of the State, is the key to economic dynamism and growth. Nations have turned away from centralized management and government controls and towards the incentives and rewards of the free market. They have invited their citizens'to develop their talents and abilities to the fullest and, in the process, to provide jobs, to create wealth, to build social stability and foster faith in the future for all. The economic summits of the industrial democracies have paid a tribute to these principles - as has the historic United Nations special session on Africa in
Hay. We applaud the African nations' call for reform leading to greater reliance on their private sectors for economic growth. We believe that overcoming hunger and economic stagnation requires policies that encourage Africa's own productivity and initiative; such a policy framework will make it easier for the rest of the world, including the United States, to help. The laws of economic incentives do not discriminate between developed and developing countries. They apply to all equally.
Much of the recent recovery in the world economy can be directly attributed to this growth of economic freedom. And it is this trend that offers such hope for the future. And yet this new hope faces a grave threat: the menace of trade barriers. History shows that the imposition of such barriers invites retaliation, which in turn sparks the very sort of trade wars that plunged the world in the 1930s deeper into depression and economic misery. Truly, protectionism is destructionism.
That is why the United States seeks the assistance of all countries represented here in the General Assembly in protecting the practice of free and fair trade. We applaud the success of the meeting of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) trade ministers last week in Uruguay, where agreement was reached to launch a new round of multilateral trade negotiations covering a wide range of topics important to economic growth, with over 90 other countries members of GATT, the United States is working to maintain the free flow of international trade.
In addition to resistance to protectionism, the United States is also seeking to stimulate world economic growth in other ways. Our Treasury bill interest rate is now just over 5 per cent, the lowest it has been in nine years - which provides enormous relief to debtor countries. America's new tax structure will open the way for greater prosperity at home, which will contribute to greater prosperity abroad.
Finally, the united States is working with other countries to minimize currency swings, to promote stability in the monetary markets, to establish predictability as a basis for prosperity.
But, the United States believes the greatest contribution we can make to world prosperity is the continued advocacy of the magic of the market-place - the truth, the simple and proven truth, that economic development is an outgrowth of economic freedom just as economic freedom is the inseparable twin of political freedom and democratic government.
And it is here that we come to our final category - human rights - the indispensable element for peace, freedom, and prosperity. I note that Mr. Gorbachev has used in recent speeches the same categories I have used here todays the military, the political, and the economic; except that he titled his fourth category: humanitarian.
The difference is revealing. The United States believes that respect for the individual, for the dignity of the human person - those rights outlined in the United Nations Universal Declaration of Hunt i Rights - does not belong in the realm of charity or "humanitarian" causes. Respect for human rights is not social work; it is not merely an act of compassion, it is the first obligation of government and the source of its legitimacy.
It also is the foundation-stone in any structure of world peace. All through history, it has been the dictatorships and the tyrannies that have surrendered first to the cult of militarism and the pursuit of war. Countries based on the consent of the governed, countries that recognize the inalienable rights of the individual, do not make war on each other. Peace is more than just an absence of war. True peace is justice, true peace is freedom. And true peace dictates the recognition of human rights.
Commitments were made more than 10 years ago in Helsinki concerning those rights and their recognition. We need only look to the East today to see how sadly unfulfilled those commitments are. The persecution of scientists, religious leaders, peace activists, political dissenters, and other prisoners of conscience continues unabated behind the Iron Curtain. You know, one section of the Helsinki Accords even speaks to: "improvement of working conditions of journalists".
So, it is clear that progress in the human rights area must keep pace with progress in other areas. A failure on this score will hinder further movement in East-West relations.
These, then, are the areas of concern and of opportunity that the United States sees in the quest for peace and freedom - the twin objectives of the United Nations Charter.
Last year, I pointed out in my address to the General Assembly the differences between the United States and the Soviet Union are deep and abiding. But I also called for a fresh start in relations between our two nations, a fresh start that could benefit our own people and the people of every nation. Since that time, the United States has taken action and put forth new proposals that could lead our two countries and the entire world in a direction we all have long sought to go. Now more than ever, it is the responsibility of the Soviet Union to take action and demonstrate that they too are continuing the dialog for peace.
As I have said, I believe that we can be hopeful about the world and the prospects for freedom. We only need look around us to see the new technologies that may some day spare future generations the nightmare of nuclear terror, or the growing ranks of democratic activists and freedom fighters, or the increasing movement towards free market economies, or the extent of world-wide concern about the rights of the individual in the face of brute, State power.
In the past, when I have noted such trends - when I have called for a "forward strategy for freedom" and predicted the ultimate triumph of democratic rule over totalitarianism - some have accused me of telling people what they want to hear, of urging them not: to engage the day but to escape it.
Yet, to hope is to believe in humanity; and in its future. Hope remains the highest reality, the age-old power; hope is at the root of all the great ideas and causes that have bettered the lot of humankind across the centuries.
History teaches us to hope - for it teaches us about man, and about the irrepressible human spirit, A Nobel laureate in literature, a great figure of the American South, William Faulkner, once said that the last sound heard on earth would be that of the two remaining humans arguing over where to go in the spaceship they had built. In his speech to the Nobel Committee in 1950, Faulkner spoke of the nuclear age, of the general and universal physical fear it had engendered, a fear of destruction that had become almost unbearable. But, he said:
"I decline to accept the end of a man. I believe that man will not merely endure: he will prevail. He is immortal ... because he has a soul, a spirit capable of compassion and sacrifice and endurance."
Faulkner spoke of the old verities and truths of the heart, of the courage, honor, pride, compassion, pity, sacrifice and, yes, that hope which is the glory of our past. And all of these things we find today in our present; we must use them to build our future. It is why today we can lift up our spirits and our hearts; it is why we resolve that with God's help the cause of humanity will not merely endure but prevail; that some day all the world - every nation, every people, every person - will know the blessings of peace and see the light of freedom.

 May I begin. Sir, by warmly congratulating you on your election to the presidency of the forty-first session of the united Nations General Assembly. I am sure that with your ability and experience you will make outstanding contributions to the work of the current session. At the same time, I should like to extend my high respects to Mr. Jaime de PiniSs for his fruitful work as the President of the fortieth session.
A year ago we were meeting here to commemorate the grand occasion of the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations. We expressed our ardent desire for the maintenance of world peace and promotion of international co-operation, put forward quite a few proposals and voiced concerns and anxieties over the turbulent international situation. The year 1986 is the International Year of Peace. The people of the world have made various efforts for peace and the forces against war and for peace have grown further. In November last year the United States and the Soviet Union held a summit meeting, indicating in their joint statement that "nuclear war cannot be won and must never be fought"  and acknowledging that the two countries bear special responsibilities for halting the arms race and carrying out nuclear disarmament. During their talks and dialogs on the question of arms control and disarmament, each side indicated that it would reduce its strategic nuclear weapons by 50 per cent. Since then there has been a certain degree of relaxation of international tension. We welcome this development.
Nevertheless, people cannot fail to see that the United States and the Soviet Union are still far apart in their views and positions on the question of disarmament. At present the arms race is still going on, and various proposals and ideas for disarmament remain only on paper. No substantive progress has been achieved on disarmament and no solutions have been found to regional conflicts. The root cause of international tension still exists. Therefore, people have no reason to feel relieved about the present world situation. The creation of tension and confrontation goes against the wishes of the people of all countries, including the United States and the Soviet Union. The popular will for peace is an irresistible trend in the world today. The people of all countries must persist in their arduous efforts towards relaxation of international tension and the maintenance of world peace.
We hold that the key to disarmament lies in true sincerity in favor of disarmament, and the greatest test of the sincerity of the two major nuclear Powers is whether or not they will take practical steps to be the first drastically to reduce their armaments. We hope that they will reach an effective agreement through serious negotiations, take real actions for disarmament and not indulge in rhetoric, still less use disarmament talks as a cover for the arms race. Xn the present circumstances, it is necessary for them to be the first jointly to undertake not to launch a nuclear war or resort to the use or threat of force against other countries, so that favorable conditions may be created for disarmament and the relaxation of international tension.
China has all along opposed the arms race and its extension to outer space. We stand for the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and for the substantial reduction of conventional weapons. We are in favor of the peaceful use of outer space. Zn his statement on 21 March 1986, Chinese Premier Zhao Ziyang gave a comprehensive and systematic elaboration of the Chinese Government's position of principle on the question of disarmament, including such issues as nuclear disarmament, conventional disarmament, intermediate missiles, space weapons, chemical weapons and the relationship between disarmament and security. At the same time, China has taken actual steps towards disarmament in many areas. By the end of this year, it will
complete the seduction of the number of its troops by 1 million. China has been cutting its military expenditures year by year and a considerable portion of its military industry has been shifted to civilian production. Some military airports and naval ports have been turned to civilian purposes. The Chinese Government has officially declared that it will no longer conduct atmospheric nuclear tests.
The basic views of the Chinese Government on disarmament are as follows.
The two super-Powers, the United States and the Soviet Union, which possess by far the largest nuclear and conventional arsenals in the world, bear special and unshakable responsibility for disarmament and should take the lead in drastic arms reduction. Nuclear disarmament should be carried out simultaneously with conventional arms reduction, and the two should promote each other.
As the question of disarmament affects the security interests of all countries in the world, every country should have a say in this question. The United Nations should play a greater role in disarmament. The two major nuclear Powers should heed, respect and accept the reasonable demands and propositions of various countries, especially the small and medium-sized countries. No disarmament negotiations or agreements between the major nuclear Powers should jeopardize the interests of other countries.
Disarmament and international security are closely related. Efforts to achieve disarmament should be combined with those for the maintenance of world peace and security. In order to ease international tension and maintain world peace, it is necessary not only to achieve effective arms reduction but also to oppose hegemonism and power politics, check aggression and expansion and resolve regional conflicts.
In keeping with the consistent stand of our Government on disarmament, the Chinese delegation will submit to the current session of the General Assembly
The war of Vietnamese aggression against Kampuchea has been going on for eight years. Although Viet Nam has dispatched large numbers of troops and employed every means available, it has never succeeded in subduing Kampuchea. The so-called irreversible situation in Kampuchea as claimed by Viet Nam is nothing but a myth. Facts have demonstrated that Viet Nam cannot possibly succeed in its attempt to annex Kampuchea by force of arms. The only way to a settlement of the Kampuchean question is the withdrawal of Vietnamese troops from Kampuchea. The earlier Viet Nam extricates itself from the quagmire of the war in Kampuchea, the better it will serve the Vietnamese people and their national interests. The traditional friendship between China and Viet Nam will be restored provided Viet Nam effects a genuine withdrawal of troops from Kampuchea and gives up its anti-China policy.
Last March the Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea headed by President Saradech Norodom Sihanouk put forward an eight-point proposal for a political settlement of the Kampuchean question. This proposal is fair and reasonable and conforms with the principles in the relevant resolutions adopted at successive sessions of the United Nations General Assembly. It has offered a reasonable basis for a political settlement of the Kampuchean question and thus won support from many countries. It is the consistent position of the Chinese Government that the Kampuchean question should be settled on the basis of the relevant United Nations General Assembly resolutions and the Declaration of the International Conference on Kampuchea. China firmly supports the eight-point proposal of the Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea and all the proposals and suggestions conducive to a just and reasonable settlement of the Kampuchean question put forward by the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and other countries.
We stand for a political settlement of the Kampuchean question. After the withdrawal of the Vietnamese troops, just and reasonable solutions to Kampuchea's internal problems should be worked out by the Kampuchean people and by the various political forces in Kampuchea through consultations on an equal footing, free from external interference. China hopes that Kampuchea will be a peaceful, independent, neutral and non-aligned country and would not like to see any single group monopolize power. China seeks no selfish interests in Kampuchea. We are ready to join other countries concerned in an international guarantee that Kampuchea will enjoy the status of a peaceful, independent, neutral and non-aligned country. This is China's basic position on the question of Kampuchea.
The occupation of Afghanistan by foreign troops is an encroachment upon its independence and sovereignty and poses a grave threat to the security of the adjacent countries and peace in Asia. The international community has all along strongly demanded a just and reasonable settlement of the Afghan question at an early date in line with the relevant United Nations resolutions. The eight rounds of indirect talks in Geneva held under the auspices of the United Nations have failed to achieve substantive progress on the crucial question of the withdrawal of foreign troops. If the Soviet Union sincerely desires a political settlement of the Afghan question, it should implement the relevant United Nations resolutions and present a time-table acceptable to the international community for an early withdrawal of all its troops from Afghanistan.
It is the desire of the people to see relaxation of tension on the Korean Peninsula. We support the positive efforts made by the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea for the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea and its reasonable proposals and demands for dialog between the North and the South, tripartite talks and the withdrawal of United States troops from South Korea. We hope that the parties concerned will work together to ease the tension on the Korean Peninsula so as to promote the peaceful reunification of Korea.
It is disturbing that the situation in the Middle East remains tense and turbulent. We have consistently supported the just struggle of the Arab countries and the Palestinian people. For them to sink their differences, strengthen unity and act in concert is a basic guarantee for victory in the Arab and Palestinian national causes. We hope that the parties concerned in the Middle East will seek a just and comprehensive settlement of the Middle East question through political negotiations so as to bring peace to the region. To this end, the national rights of the Palestinian people must be restored, and Israel must abandon its policy of aggression and expansion and withdraw from all the Arab territories it has occupied since 1967. At the same time, the right to existence of all countries in the Middle East should be recognized and they should live in friendship on the basis of the principles of peaceful coexistence.
The widening and escalation of the Iran-Iraq war has posed a grave threat to peace and stability in the Gulf region and brought enormous suffering to the people of the two countries. Both Iran and Iraq are China's friends. We hope that the two neighboring countries will exercise restraint and refrain from intensifying the war so as to create an atmosphere necessary for conducting peace talks and bringing about a cease-fire. We sincerely hope that in accordance with the norms of international law, they will settle their disputes on mutually acceptable terms through peaceful negotiations and bring an early end to the war.
Owing to external intervention, the situation in Central America is becoming more complicated. In order to put an end to the prolonged turmoil and bring about a just peace in Central America, it is imperative to respect the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of all countries in the region and do away with all external interference and power politics so that the people of these countries will be able to solve their own problems. Foreign military threat against, and intervention in, Nicaragua in violation of the norms governing
international relations have aggravated the situation in this region and naturally met with the opposition of the international community. We support the just and reasonable principles put forward by the Contadora Group for solving the problems in Central America and hope that the Group will succeed in its efforts,
The situation in southern Africa is deteriorating and becoming even more volatile, as the South African authorities perpetrate racist atrocities, cling to their illegal occupation of Namibia and engage in grave provocations against the neighboring countries. The Pretoria regime's sanguinary suppression of the black people in South Africa is a challenge to human dignity and international justice, which has aroused the great indignation and strong protest of the international community. The World Conference on Sanctions against Racist South Africa held by the United Nations and the special session of the General Assembly on Namibia have played an important role in mobilizing the international community for intensified struggle against South African racism. We firmly endorse effective sanctions against the South African authorities and support the South African people in their heroic struggle against racism and for racial equality. We support the just struggle of the Namibian people for national independence and the efforts of the independent States in southern Africa to safeguard national security and bring peace and stability to the region.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the adoption by the United Nations of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. These two instruments are of positive significance to the realization of the purpose and principle of the United Nations Charter concerning respect for human rights. The Chinese Government has consistently supported this principle of the Charter. Just as in all other countries which were victims of imperialist and colonialist oppression, there were no human rights to speak of in the semi-colonial, semi-feudal old China. It is only following the founding of the People's Republic of China that Chinese citizens are able to enjoy extensive democratic rights. In accordance with the provisions of the Constitution of China, the Chinese Government has adopted various measures to ensure the enjoyment by its citizens of all kinds of fundamental rights. With the progress made in economic development and structural reform in the past few years, there has been a steady improvement in socialist democracy and the legal system in China. Never before have the Chinese people enjoyed such a high degree of democracy and freedom as they do now.
We have noted with concern that, although the United Nations has formulated and adopted a number of international instruments on human rights, gross and massive violations of human rights continue to occur in many parts of the world as a result of colonialism, racism, foreign aggression and occupation. Moreover, interference in other countries' internal affairs in the name of protecting human rights is also a common occurrence. We call on the international community to make joint efforts to check these violations of the principles of the Charter.
In discussing the current international situation we must pay close attention to the question of development in the world. Over the past year the developed countries have maintained a low economic growth rate and many developing countries are still in grave economic difficulties. International economic relations are becoming increasingly imbalanced and irrational. The prices of most raw materials and primary products for export by the developing countries have kept falling and the export of their manufactured products has run into numerous obstacles owing to trade protectionism in the developed countries. External debts are weighing more and more heavily on the debtor countries. The developing countries are in desperate need of development funds, but,, while capital inflow keeps dwindling, an abnormal phenomenon of reverse flow of funds has occurred.
Such developments serve to widen the gap between the developed and the developing countries, which will not only do great harm to the developing countries but also have grave consequences for the developed countries in the long run. The developed countries account for only one quarter of the world population of nearly 5 billion while the remaining three quarters are in the developing countries. The world economy cannot grow steadily without the economic growth of the developed countries, but at the same time its steady growth also depends to a great extent on whether the developing countries can overcome their difficulties and revitalize their economies. Therefore, helping to boost the economic growth of the developing countries will contribute both to the common prosperity of the world economy and to world peace and stability.
Following political independence, the developing countries are all committed to their domestic economic development. In the process they have made headway in a search for development strategies, economic structures and economic policies suited to their respective national conditions. Many of them have made readjustments and introduced reforms in their economies, with gratifying results. In addition to their own efforts and promotion of South-South co-operation, it is of great importance to the economic growth of the developing countries to improve North-South relations. As the developing countries are still fettered and harmed
by the inequitable international economic relations, it would be difficult for them to attain the goal of economic development smoothly by merely relying on their own efforts. He hope that the developed countries will, in the overall interest of the world economy, help create an international environment favorable to the developing countries. The international community should take practical measures in trade, finance, development and other international economic fields to facilitate the flow of capital and transfer of technology to the developing countries, further increase their access to markets and reduce their debt burden, thus contributing to the overall growth of the world economy.
The special session of the United Nations General Assembly on the critical economic situation in Africa, held last May, gave expression to the concern of the international community for Africa's economic recovery and development. We hope that the parties concerned, particularly the developed countries, will fully honor their commitments so as to ensure the full implementation of the United Nations Program of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 198C—1990, which was approved unanimously by the session.
International relations are now undergoing a great change. The newly independent countries which emerged in the post-war period, the numerous non-aligned and other small and medium-sized countries, regardless of their different situations, all treasure independence and oppose power politics. They desire peace and stability and oppose war and tension, and they all want to get actively involved in international affairs and play their part in maintaining peace and promoting international co-operation. It is no longer realistic simply to take ideology and social system as a criterion for differentiating countries and international political groupings. The time is gone for ever when a big Power or power center could manipulate international relations according to its wishes. The
recently concluded Eighth Conference of Beads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries proved once again that the Non-Aligned Movement is playing an important role in the international affairs of the day. The trend towards multipolarity in international relations and the growing aspiration of the peoples to take their destiny into their own hands are an inevitable historical development and constitute a positive factor making for peace.
We are of the view that all countries, regardless of their ideologies and social systems, should establish and develop relations on the basis of the five principles of mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence.
We are in favor of dialog, which is the correct way for the peaceful settlement of international disputes. Facts show that only through peaceful negotiations and consultations on an equal footing is it possible to remove contradictions and differences between States, forestall international conflicts and ensure international security.
Obviously, in order that dialog can be conducted and yield positive results, the use or threat of force must be abandoned, the sovereignty and security of all States respected and all acts of aggression and expansion stopped. In no circumstances should a country be allowed to impose its will on others.
The Chinese people are now going all out in the drive for China's material, cultural and ethical advancement, determined to turn China into a modernized socialist country with Chinese characteristics through the efforts of several generations. China firmly pursues an independent foreign policy of peace, whose fundamental aim is to preserve world peace and secure an enduring peaceful international environment for its socialist modernization. Peace and development are inseparable. To have peace and development, we need friendship, co-operation and strengthened relations with other countries on the basis of the five principles of peaceful coexistence.
This year we in China have started to implement the Seventh Five-Year Plan for National Economic and Social Development. In the coming five years we shall basically complete the overall restructuring of our economy. Meanwhile, we shall adhere to the policy of opening up to the outside world, improve the environment for investment and expand our external economic relations. We are promoting the sustained and steady growth of China's economy by carrying out reform and the policy of opening up to the outside world, and we want to ensure successful and uninterrupted economic development by pursuing an independent foreign policy of peace. China's current domestic and foreign policies have proved to be sound and effective and in the interests of the people. We shall adhere to these policies with unshakable determination.,
The United Nations has entered upon its fifth decade since its founding. It has tremendous successes to its credit, but it also faces problems and difficulties. Since the restoration of its rightful seat in the United Nations China has always abide by the purposes and principles of the Charter, actively participated in the work of the Organization and endeavored to perform its duty as one of the permanent members of the Security Council.
The financial crisis confronting the United Nations at the present time has caused widespread concern. We are of the view that the United Nations should undergo rational structural reforms, but such reforms must be aimed at strengthening, not weakening, the role of the Organization and must observe, not violate, the principle of the sovereign equality of all Member states, as provided for in the Charter. It is our sincere hope that the United Nations will, with the joint support of all Member States and through consultation^ on an equal footing, take the necessary measures to overcome the difficulties it faces and improve its efficiency, so as to achieve even greater success in its endeavor to safeguard world peace and promote international co-operation.
In this autumn of 1986, the community of nations is again facing serious problem* and momentous decisions that affect the destiny of our peoples.
We are threatened by embroilment in hostilities as well as by famine and misery. Dangers threaten international economic and financial co-operation. The dignity of man is being violated in a thousand ways. Wars are taking place in many parts of the world. In the Republic of South Africa there is a threat of civil war. Natural disasters are compounded by man-made disasters with far-reaching
effects that transcend national boundaries.
But we see hopeful signs also. In Europe co-operation across the ideological boundaries is developing into a strong force for the preservation of peace. Negotiations between West and East on confidence-building and disarmament are being conducted in unprecedented depth. Encouraging progress has been registered. New negotiations are being prepared. Throughout the world the hand of those who seek co-operation instead of confrontation is becoming stronger. More and more people realize that we have become a community in pursuit of survival. There is a prevailing awareness that the survival of mankind requires co-operative solutions -for the prevention of war, for the protection of our ecological basis, for the new technological developments, for the peaceful use of the sea-bed and the peaceful use of outer space, for the fight against famine and disease, for solutions to international economic problems, including that of indebtedness. The peoples of the world want their Governments to recognize these signs.
The quest for superiority and hegemony, the quest for unilateral advantages,
the exploitation of political, military and economic power, the attempt to bring
others to their knees, the attempt to force one's own social order on others: all
these are outdated aspirations. Again and again they have dragged mankind into
catastrophe. The peoples of the world are no longer prepared to tolerate such policies.
My country, the Federal Republic of Germany, is on the side of progress,
co-operation, human rights, self-determination and peace. We regard man, in his
unalterable dignity, in his uniqueness and in his freedom, as the focus of all
action. Those values are the cornerstone of the alliance between democratic
Europe, the United States and Canada.
The President of this session of the General Assembly himself comes from a
country that has sought international co-operation time and again to overcome
difficult economic problems. I wish him and the United Nations good fortune and
success.
I should like thank Mr. Perez de Cuellar for his excellent work, his wise decisions and his sensible initiatives as Secretary-General of the united Nations.
The 12 States members of the European Community, on their way towards European union and a common foreign policy, are speaking here from a common position. As representative of the Chairman of the Community, Sir Geoffrey Howe has spoken for all of us. Going on from there, I shall outline the views of the Federal Republic of Germany, which has irrevocably committed its destiny to that of Europe and which
is a firmly established member of the Western Alliance.
Europe, so often torn by wars in the course of its history, a continent from which conquest, force and repression have spread to all parts of the world, today's Europe wishes to be a continent of peace and an example of good-neighborly relations. The peoples of the European Community - first and foremost the Germans and the French - have shown that it is possible to replace centuries-old rivalry and deadly conflict with friendship and to grow together into a union of equals.
However, Europe is more than the Community of the Twelve. After all, Europe does not end at the Elbe and Werra Rivers. Hence, in taking our decisions we never forget that there are also Germans and Europeans to the east of us. As a nation in the center of Europe, we consider it our historical duty as Germans to defuse and eventually surmount the antithesis between East and West. We should be bad Germans and bad Europeans were we to do otherwise. That is why, during the 1970s, we put relations between the Federal Republic of Germany and its eastern neighbors on a new contractual basis, a basis that remains an unshakable cornerstone of our policy. Conscious of the course of history, we seek steady development of German-Soviet co-operation, which is an essential prerequisite for a realistic policy of European detente.
We shall consistently pursue the process of German-Polish reconciliation, we seek a peaceful modus vivendi in the whole of Europe based on co-operation and mutual trust. An ever-more important role in this effort falls to the two German States by virtue of the 1972 Treaty cm the Basis of Relations. We Europeans must develop and design our European home, which comprises Europe in its entirety, as a place fit to live in. We must not continue to accept the enormous commitment of resources and energies to the conflict between West and East.
If today Europeans are becoming more fully aware of their common identity and seeking to live peacefully in their common home, the doors in that home must be opened much wider. This means that it must not be a capital offense to pass through those doors from one part of the home to the other, we must rid borders of their awesome and divisive character, thereby enabling States with varying social systems to pursue their common and complementary interests and their responsibility for their common future in peaceful competition, so that their peoples no longer live in fear of each other but can get to know one another. The Europeans must, through a gradual process of reducing conflict potential and of fostering co-operation, elevate their relations to new forms, what we seek is a peaceful order in Europe based on the equality of all and on equal entitlement to security.
We seek a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will regain its unity through free self-determination.
The defusing of the East-West antithesis depends greatly on the development of relations between the two super-Powers. For that reason, it is important that the second summit meeting between President Reagan and General Secretary Gorbachev should take place before the end of this year.
United States-Soviet nuclear and space negotiations must lead to positive results. The negotiating objective agreed upon by both parties in Geneva on 8 January 1985 to prevent an arms race in space and terminate it on earth has become an obligation towards all the peoples of the world. That obligation must be honored without reservation.
We attach particular importance to the negotiations on the American and Soviet intermediate-range missile systems. In recent months progress and rapprochement have been achieved in that field. We desire the global elimination of all American and Soviet land-based intermediate-range nuclear force of longer range. If that aim cannot be fulfilled in one step, we should like to see an interim result which leaves the lowest possible number of missiles cm both sides and sets equal ceilings on a global scale and for Europe.
We want the arms spiral finally to be reversed. We Germans will bring all our influence to bear to help negotiations to that end to an early result. We also desire drastic reductions in strategic nuclear potentials. The relationship between offensive and defensive weapons must be discussed in its proper context, as was agreed on 8 January 1985.
We consider it necessary that the provisions of the SALT II agreement continue to be observed and that the 1972 Treaty on the Limitation of An ti-Ball is tic Missile Systems be adhered to until the establishment of a new contractual basis.
Last weekend the 35 States participating in the Stockholm Conference on Confidence and Security Building Measures and Disarmament in Europe adopted a final document. That document is a signal of hope. The Conference derived from a Franco-German initiative. At the beginning of this year the joint appearance of the French and German Foreign Ministers injected a fresh impetus. Its success is a triumph for common sense, responsibility and sound judgment. The measures agreed upon will apply to the whole of Europe from the Atlantic to the Urals. They will make the military behavior of the participating States more calculable, thereby helping to reduce distrust. They can facilitate progress at the Vienna mutual and balanced force reduction negotiations and, above all, initiate negotiations on conventional stability in the area between the Atlantic and the Urals. There are also too many conventional arms in Europe, and there is an imbalance to our detriment.
The offer of negotiations made by the Halifax meeting of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Foreign Ministers still stands. The Warsaw Pact has responded favorably. Action must be taken before this year is over. The aim of future negotiations must be to create a situation in which the size of the forces of both sides is determined solely by defensive requirements. On our side this is already the case. We must never forget that even a war waged with conventional arms alone would in today's Europe be a thousand times more horrific than the Second World War and would amount to multiple genocide in Europe.
Negotiations on the world-wide prohibition of chemical weapons have reached the stage at which it is possible for the community of nations as a whole to be freed from the scourge of chemical weapons. There is no longer any reason to delay an agreement.
In the important issue of a nuclear test ban, too, progress is possible. Stable and lasting peace requires co-operative structures in all areas. Apart from confidence-building and disarmament, this implies the establishment of an ordered system of political interaction as well as the broadest possible economic, technological, environmental and cultural co-operation. Peoples must have a part in exchanges and co-operation and be permitted to exercise the rights set forth in
the Helsinki Final Act.
We in Europe are endeavoring to bring about such a development within the framework of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, whose key elements are security and co-operation. The participation of the United States and Canada in that process corresponds to the reality of the security situation in Europe. The multilateral nature of the process gives all Europeans in Western, Eastern, neutral and non-aligned countries the opportunity to help build the Europe of the future, in which all States, irrespective of their social systems, will determine their own fate and their engagement in co-operation with their neighbors.
The follow-up meeting in Vienna to the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, due to be opened at ministerial level in November, must point the way towards a peaceful order in Europe.
We seek a mandate for the continuation and expansion of the negotiations on confidence-building measures and disarmament in the whole of Europe on the basis of the encouraging results in Stockholm. We must take co-operative steps towards the establishment of more stable security structures in the conventional sphere.
In the field of economic co-operation, we seek greater transparency of markets, more exchanges and division of labor, and new forms of co-operation.
Everyone will benefit if the latest reactor-safety and environmental technology becomes accessible to all countries.Chernobyl was a warning signal.
Isolationism and trade wars are of no use to mankind; exchanges and co-operation are the way to accomplish common tasks, to increase the prosperity of all and to ward off dangers. Co-operative solutions to security issues will further extend the basis of trust, to the benefit of economic and technological co-operation.
We want human rights to be respected*, we seek more contacts and improved opportunities for human encounter, we seek even more youth exchanges, educational co-operation and progress in the field of information.
At this very moment there are real prospects of substantial progress, both in the relations and negotiations between the two super-Powers and in the multilateral process of detente, progress that will lead to a new end more lasting phase of fruitful relations between West and East. Tangible progress in Europe serves to promote development, security and stability throughout the world.
The European Community is already shouldering its responsibility for co-operation in the development of the third world. We do this without ambitions for political power and without wishing to impose our social model on others or to establish spheres of influence. We seek a world in which self-determination, social justice, human rights and fundamental freedoms are the paramount principles of interaction among all peoples.
International terrorism, the scourge of mankind, is directed against peaceful interaction among nations, the right to live and human dignity. It is the common task of the community of nations to fight this evil. The decisions of the General Assembly and the Security Council are an encouraging sign that awareness of this task is growing.
The continually worsening international refugee problem is a symptom of grave injustice in some parts of the world. The recommendations deriving from the discussion of the refugee initiative that I introduced in the General Assembly six years ago must lead to an improvement in international co-operation in this area. We hope that this session of the General Assembly will adopt by consensus the recommendations made by the Group of Experts.
Respect for the right of self-determination and respect for human rights are absolutely essential if peace is to be safeguarded. There is a direct path leading from the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights through the two covenants on human rights to the prohibition of torture. By adopting the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the community of nations has reaffirmed its desire to combat systematically this particularly abhorrent form of violation of human rights,. The next step should be the prevention of arbitrary executions. He shall continue to support the abolition of the death penalty.
Two years from now, in 1988, 40 years will have passed since the united Nations in its Universal Declaration of Human Rights took the vital pioneering step to embed human rights in international law. The United Nations needs institutions that will guarantee better protection of human rights. To this end, the appointment of a high commissioner for human rights is just as indispensable as the creation of a United Nations court of human rights. By such actions we could lend real significance to the year 1988. The persecuted and the suffering await a decisive and effective step on the part of the international community^
We roust not remain silent with regard to serious violations of human rights. If we find something intolerable, we have a duty to say so. Today this applies particularly to the inhumane and immoral system of apartheid, the systematic form of racial discrimination and segregation. The state of emergency in the Republic of South Africa has bred arbitrary and lawless action. An increasing death toll is the horrific outcome of a policy directed against people who wish only to live in their own country and to enjoy equal rights and freedom from discrimination. If the inhumane system of apartheid is not eliminated, the inevitable consequence will be even more violence, even more bloodshed and ultimately chaos and civil war.
Just as inhumanity cannot be reformed but only eliminated, apartheid is not
reformable and must therefore be abolished.
We demand the immediate initiation of dialog among the authentic representatives of all sections of the population and are preparing an initiative with that aim. We demand the immediate release of Nelson Mandela and all other political prisoners. We demand that the ban on the African National Congress and other political groups be lifted. We demand the termination of the state of emergency. The measures adopted by the European Community on 16 September 1986 lend emphasis to this political demand.
The internal tension generated by apartheid in South Africa reverberates through the entire region and is exacerbated by the South African policy of destabilizing its neighbors. This situation is further aggravated by the continuing illegal occupation of Namibia, whose people are denied their independence and their right of self-determination. The Federal Republic of Germany will not waver in its support for the earliest possible establishment of Namibian independence on the basis of Security Council resolution 435 (1978), as called for by the General Assembly at its fourteenth special session. There is no alternative to the United Nations proposed settlement as outlined in resolution 435 (1978).
The eighth summit conference of the non-aligned countries at Harare provided further evidence that genuine non-alignment is an important factor for peace and stability in inter national relations. We support the call addressed to the warring States of Iran and Iraq to put an end to the bloodshed in the Gulf region. We support the call made by the summit conference for the withdrawal of all foreign troops from Afghanistan and Cambodia. In Afghanistan, as in Cambodia, the right of peoples to self-determination must be realized.
In the same way, we advocate the right of the Palestinian people to exercise self-determination and to decide on their own future. This must come about within the framework of a peace settlement for the Middle East that guarantees all countries of the region, including Israel, safe and recognized boundaries and hence a secure existence as States.
We appeal to the regional groupings in all parts of the world to render their contribution to international stability.
We also need co-operative approaches to solve international economic problems and to align the international economic system with the needs of tomorrow. My country regards development co-operation between North and South as a central pillar of its policy in pursuit of peace. This is demonstrated by the rate at which our official aid has increased-, in 1985 its growth of 9 per cent far exceeded the growth of our gross national product. At the same time, our help is directed to areas where the need is greatest-, for that reason, the share of our aid devoted to Africa has been raised from 37 to 47 per cent. The Federal Government will also give its most vigorous support to the ProgramF of Action adopted at the special session of the United Nations General Assembly on the critical economic situation in Africa. We know that our world is facing a common fate, and we act accordingly. Our aim is a system of world-wide co-operation based on partnership and awareness of the interdependence of nations, in which private initiative and autonomous efforts have their place.
The first and elementary goal of development co-operation must be to free the world from hunger. To this and, we must enable farmers in all parts of the third world to produce enough food for themselves and for their domestic markets. In most of the developing countries rapid agricultural growth can prove to be a locomotive for national economies. All the aid devoted to rural development can bear fruit, however, only if the industrialized countries do not engage in ruinous competition with third-world food producers by subsidizing their own products. A stop must be put to the world-wide dumping of agricultural products.
We have managed so far to keep the problems of indebtedness under control by means of a co-operative strategy, but the crisis of indebtedness itself remains unresolved. It continues to pose a political challenge, but if it is to be overcome the international financial institutions, the governments of creditor countries and the private banks must play their part. Capital must at last begin to fl<w again from North to South instead of financing budgetary deficits in industrialized countries. It is of central importance that the private transfer of capital should be set in motion again. For this reason, the Federal Government has signed the Convention on the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency, which can become an effective means of attaining that goal. However, the indebted countries must also act. They must create conditions which will restore the confidence of domestic as well as foreign investors in the future of their countries. Only thus can the flight of capital be halted.
Another crucial task is that of revitalizing the international free trade system. The Punta del Este agreement on the opening of a new round of trade liberalization is an encouraging sign. We must strengthen and develop the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). We must prime radically the proliferation of agreements on voluntary restrictions; we must thin out the jungle of agricultural subsidies*, we must modernize GATT, and that means gradually incorporating services and foreign investments into the GATT system.
In an increasingly close-woven international economy, economic policies can no longer exist in isolation. Each country must see and consider the effects of its own economic policy on other countries. Here, too, co-operation and solidarity are called for. The greater a country, the greater is its economic responsibility to the rest of the world.
To establish the world-wide co-operative structures that will enable us to master our common future, we need a comprehensive dialog between industrialized and developing countries. I therefore consider it urgently necessary that we should at last inject new life into the North-South dialog and that we should orient that dialog towards the major issues affecting the future, thereby making it a potent factor in international politics and economics. In 1975, which is already 11 years ago now, as we took the first steps towards a large-scale North-South dialog, our thinking was determined by the study drawn up by the Club of Rome on the limits to growth. Shortages of energy, raw materials and foodstuffs, limits on the tolerance of the environment, seemed to be the law that would determine the future of the world. But we are beginning to sense that sane thing completely different is taking places a new technological revolution, which is establishing new and wider horizons for growth. New forms of technology -space technology, information technology and gene technology - permit a new type of growth that conserves energy and raw materials and which protects, indeed heals, the environment. This departure from the industrial age into a new era is not by any means peculiar to the Western countries but is a world-wide phenomenon. The new forms of technology can also bring decisive benefits to the developing countries in particular.
The potential of gene technology is immense. Let us remember that in the sixties high-yield varieties of rice and wheat led to the green revolution. India, which had hitherto been an importer of grain, became self-sufficient and even began to export grain. The new varieties were produced in the traditional manner by cross-breeding. Gene technology now offers far quicker and more effective ways of cultivating "made-to-order" plants, which are resistant to disease, can withstand drought and cold, can grow in over-saline soil and are rich in protein, and plants which breathe in nitrogen from the air, thereby relieving farmers of the need to buy expensive fertilizers.
A second green revolution seems set to take place in the nineties, its effects far exceeding those of the first. Above all, it will include regions hitherto at a disadvantage and be of great importance to arid zones such as the Sahel. Major improvements can also be expected in livestock breeding. Then there are the opportunities that gene technology opens up for medicine. For example, it gives us reason to hope that we can develop vaccines against tropical diseases that are at present incurable.
Great and new though the opportunities deriving from these new forms of technology may be, the risks associated with them are equally great and new. Gene-technology in particular raises issues of immense importance, since it gives man unprecedented power to interfere with the hereditary genes of living creatures.
The accident in the Chernobyl reactor brought home to us overnight how the task of mastering safely the risks of high technology has become a common responsibility, one that welds the nations of the world into a community in pursuit of survival. In Vienna the special International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) meeting on reactor safety has just begun. We hope that it will set negotiations in motion which will lead to universally binding safety standards and an international liability law. It is significant that that conference should take place under United Nations auspices, for the United Nations has become the indispensable forum for dealing with the issues that will determine our global future.
We must not, however, accept nuclear energy as the final answer to man's energy requirements? here, too, we must jointly seek new answers. The protection of the environment cannot today be guaranteed by an individual State when it relies on its own resources. Radioactivity, as we have seen, does not stop at national boundaries, nor do air and water pollution. It follows that environmental protection is no longer an affair to be dealt with by each individual State as it sees fit.
For thousands of years the inroads made by human technology into nature seemed so minimal that their overall impact could be disregarded. Nature appeared indestructible and inexhaustible. It is now realized, however, that technology has assumed dimensions that threaten to destroy the ecological balance of nature. We are living today with the shock of that discovery. Nothing is the same any more. International environmental policy has become a vital task. It is a safeguard for the future, a course of action dictated by our responsibility to future generations. In this field, we are confronted by fundamental tasks under the
heading of international domestic policy, a term which implies the need to act
together.
Those few references alone demonstrate the challenge facing all of us in this new technological revolution. What must be done - and here let me cite the Secretary-General's report to our Assembly - is;
"to manage safely, and to common advantage, the inventions of the human mind".
We need a North-South dialog that devotes itself to those new questions. It must be a dialog that takes as its starting point the immense structural upheaval currently taking place in the world and faces up to it in a courageous and forward-looking manner. What is needed is a global policy in which the problems of mankind are understood as tasks for mankind. Mankind, which has become a community in quest of survival, must recognize its responsibility to its contemporaries as well as to all future generations.
The United Nations is the forum where this policy must be discussed. This development must take place with due regard for the identity of all peoples, which have all made unique contributions to human history and to the civilizations of the world. Respect for others also entails respect for their cultural identity. Our international Organization must therefore promote a world-wide cultural dialog that sill prevent the submersion of native cultures by foreign influences and highlight the variety of cultural achievements for the benefit of all.
I have again stated the case for world-wide co-operation in a spirit of mutual confidence to resolve the major international issues facing us. To this end we need the United Nations as a sound international Organization, as the forum where openness prevails and as an indispensable negotiating framework. It draws its strength not least from its universality. That is why all peoples, including the Korean people, should be represented here. We must do everything possible to maintain the effectiveness of the United Nations. To this end, it is necessary for us, the Member States, to observe fully the obligations deriving from the Charter. It is also necessary for this session of the General Assembly to achieve positive results in its discussion of measures to increase the efficiency of the United Nations, based on the report of the 18 experts.
My Government supports the views outlined by the Secretary-General in his report on the role of the United Nations in international relations and the structural reforms needed to strengthen the Organization. My delegation welcomes the fact that the President has so clearly defined the operative objectives of the reforr process. The United Nations needs reforms to remain strong and effective. For our part, we need a strong and effective United Nations so that through our co-operation here in the Organization the survival of mankind may be assured.
It is a great honor for me to address the Assembly on behalf oFrance.
The French Government is pleased, Sir, that the General Assembly is meeting this year under your distinguished guidance. Your election is a tribute to Bangladesh, whose commitment to peace and international co-operation is known to all of us here. It also bears witness to the confidence our delegations have in you, sure in the knowledge that you will carry out your mandate with the authority necessary to direct our work successfully. You can count on the whole-hearted co-operation of the French delegation, which offers you its warmest congratulations and its best wishes for success.
It is also a pleasure for me to salute our Secretary-General, whom I was delighted to receive in Paris a short time ago. I am happy to see him restored to health, and to be able to express again, here, the French Government's gratitude for the services he has rendered our Organization, and in particular for the decisive contribution he made to settling the dispute that had arisen between New Zealand and France. I hope he will obtain from all Member States the assurances he has every right to seek in order to continue the mission entrusted to him nearly five years ago, which he has carried out with such competence and skill. The fortieth anniversary of our Organization, while an occasion for celebrating our achievements, also reminded us of the limitations reality imposes on the implementation of the Charter.	^
To review the disillusionments and disappointments is in itself a salutary exercise. Today, as the Secretary-General emphasized in his remarkable report, our Organization faces not only the problem of its financial situation, but also the inability of its Members to agree on priorities and tasks. It is my feeling, however, that the general realization of past disarray and inadequacies has, foe the first time, led to a commitment to real reform, as evidenced by the conclusions of the Group of 18.
No one disputes the existing shortcomings in co-operation between Members of the United Nations, but this necessary clear-sightedness should not lead us to take a pessimistic view. On the contrary, France considers that only a display of demonstrating realism can give us assurance that we shall be able to resolve the problems of today and those of the future.
The San Francisco Charter made the preservation of international peace and security the primary goal of the United Nations. Looked at uncompromisingly and without ideological bias, the world in which we live is seen to fall far short of the expectations of the founders of the United Nations.
One of the outstanding features of our age, accentuated by changes in attitudes and by technological progress, is the shrinking of our planet, which is leading to increasing overlapping of problems at the world level. No serious event, however localized, can leave us indifferent any more. Today neither conflicts nor alliances take account of frontiers or distances. They transcend differences of culture and race, without, however, eliminating them. Cn the contrary, in many cases, the internationalization of problems has triggered a backlash, sometimes very extreme, in the form of clannish behavior of every kind.
Paradoxically, therefore, while the world is tending to become a single entity, it has not been able to overcome th.; threats and collective challenges confronting it. Conflicts and violations of human rights are increasing, while the cancer of terrorism is spreading. The arms race is continuing, spurred on by technological progress, the benefits of which ought rather to be shared throughout the world. The economic and financial situation of many third world countries remains very critical.
In the Middle East, France has long maintained that peace must be based on principles which, for us, are self-evident. Israel's security and right to existence must be acknowledged and guaranteed; the Palestinian people must be permitted to exercise its right to self-determination. Peace presupposes first of all mutual recognition by the parties concerned and the primary responsibility of the parties in the quest for a settlement, which cannot be achieved by outside Powers, although their contribution may be very useful.
That being so, there is now talk again of convening a properly prepared conference with the presence of all the parties concerned. He approve of this in principle and are ready to play a full part in helping to find a solution to a conflict that is too serious for the international community to have the right to regard itself as powerless.
Among the favorable signs that may be noted is that the idea of the need for dialog is gaining ground, albeit slowly. France has always welcomed indications to that effect.
Unfortunately, these rays of hope do not allow us to forget the unending crisis that is tearing Lebanon apart. It has tragic consequences for a people linked to France by age-old ties of every kind, a people France loves and respects.
Whatever else may have been said, Lebanon was once a very model of coexistence, tolerance, freedom and culture to the entire world. It would be an irreparable loss if this center of intellectual vitality, whose light shone throughout the Mediterranean world, were to be engulfed in the rising tide of fanaticism and hatred. It is my fervent hope that this battered and ravaged country will one day find the path to reconciliation through the restoration of its independence and territorial integrity.
For the past several years, by virtue of its historical ties with Lebanon -but also because the issue far transcends Lebanon itself - France has made
ceaseless efforts, at the price of considerable sacrifice, to promote the return to peace longed for by the vast majority of Lebanese. To that end, France decided to participate in international action wh<ch made it possible to limit the chaos in the aftermath of the Israeli invasion. Our Ambassador in Beirut, Louis Delamare, was among the first to pay with his life for his untiring efforts to renew dialog between fraternal enemies. Dozens of French soldiers have been killed in the attempt to permit a return to the rule of law and to restore a minimum of normal life to the civilian population of Beirut.
In the south of that suffering country the international community is endeavoring to prevent a new escalation in the fighting and senseless violence. Side by side with other national contingents in the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), French soldiers have all too often paid with their lives in a peace mission.
But of late the situation has become intolerable. The united Nations Force is no longer merely being caught in sporadic clashes between the enemies it is meant to be keeping apart; it has become the target of methodically prepared attacks which will soon leave it no alternative other than to retrench in order to ensure its own safety.
We must note that since its formation in 1978 UNIFIL has been unable to carry out the mandate entrusted to it by the Security Council. That is why last April France drew the attention of the Council to this state of affairs and to the concern it was causing us. The events of the past few weeks have, unfortunately, confirmed our assessment. The sacrifices we have accepted to date give us the right to demand that each of us should shoulder his responsibilities and that the means available to the Force should be commensurate with the mission entrusted to it. We are facing a serious challenge to our Organization, its authority and its ability to carry out peace-keeping operations. That challenge must be met.
For sore than six years Iraq and Iran have been tearing each other apart in a war which, because of its intensity and the resources and tremendous losses it has entailed, can no longer be considered simply as a regional conflict. Freedom of navigation has been imperiled on shipping routes of vital importance for the world economy. The dogged prosecution of this absurd war threatens to shatter the equilibrium of a region of strategic importance. Like all other members of the international community, France is aware of and deeply concerned by this situation. We can but express our hope for a reasonable negotiated outcome to this protracted conflict, and we urge that the relevant Security Council resolutions finally be implemented. France supports all efforts to bring an end to this war, in particular the Secretary-General's offers of mediation.
Although We have dwelt at length on crises in the Middle East that our Organization has thus far, unfortunately, been powerless to resolve, I have no intention of forgetting all the others which have thwarted the peace efforts of our Organization for many years. These include: Cyprus, where a de facto situation which France does not recognize has been established; Afghanistan and Cambodia, subjects to which I shall return in this statement; the Korean peninsula, where division and tension have persisted for 40 years and where it is our earnest hope to see dialog established between North and South, which is the only way to ease tension and then to resolve the Korean question. We wish the United Nations to be a truly universal body and, hence, for all the Korean people to be represented here. Other crises include the situation in Central America, where I hope that with the active assistance of all the countries in the region a solution nay be found to the current crisis; and Western Sahara, where I hope that the joint efforts of the Secretary-General and of the past and current Chairmen of the Organization of African Unity will make it possible to resolve a conflict involving States friendly to France, a conflict which has already lasted too long.

The international community cannot fail to express its indignation at the continuing daily violations of the most basic human rights throughout the world, whether such violations result from the wars raging in several areas or from deliberate policies. No pressure, regardless of its source, and no sophism can ever make us accept such violations. Transcending all ideologies and arguments prompted by expediency, there can be only one concept of human dignity.
I am pleased to see that in many States, especially the Philippines and Latin America, the return to democracy has shown that people have never forgotten it.
For several years now, with the courage born of determination to defend their independence and dignity, the Afghan and Cambodian peoples have been resisting foreign occupation and the authorities it has imposed on them.
In Afghanistan one third of the inhabitants of the country have had to seek refuge outside its borders. The elite of the population has had to leave the country in large numbers, and every day women, children and old people have been paying the price of the acts of war perpetrated against their villages in violation of all humanitarian principles.
In Cambodia the Khmer people, a friend of France, is the victim of increasingly oppressive foreign occupation. We are even witnessing a new form of colonization in that country.
Were the Afghan and Cambodian peoples to be given back their pride and freedom they would not constitute a threat to anyone in the region any mere than they, have in the past, and certainly not to their powerful neighbors. The invasions of which they are victims must be seen as wars of conquest belonging to another age, and France will continue to say, along with the vast majority of States, that the Soviet Union and Viet Nam must, in their own interest and for the sake of world peace, end their respective ventures in Afghanistan and Cambodia.
Speaking on behalf of the Twelve, Britain's Foreign Secretary has just stated once again that the institutionalized racial discrimination that the South African authorities persist in maintaining is unacceptable. The measures announced by Pretoria have so far not touched on essentials, and no one should be surprised that they have failed to check the spiral of violence.
While recognizing the complexity of the problems involved, France, together with its partners in the European Community, has decided to put into effect an additional program of sanctions but believes that these arrangements should be supplemented by positive measures. Everything possible must be done to promote genuine dialog, which of course presupposes the freeing of political prisoners.
Together with all those who are working to encourage moderation and conciliation in that country, we should like to believe that it is not too late to lay the foundations of a society in which, without exception, the right to dignity of all the communities that have built South Africa is at last recognized.
The tragic events in Istanbul, Karachi and Paris have proved once again that terrorism has become the systematic weapon of a war that knows no frontiers and is mostly faceless.
Admittedly the phenomenon is not a new one and instances of it are only too numerous. However, I am struck by the recent upsurge of terrorism and the growing number of victims. Here I must mention in particular the French, American and British hostages being held in Lebanon.
Unless it wants to delude itself, the international community should recognize that it has not always faced up to the scourge as unflinchingly as it should have. Some would have us believe that it is the only means of expression of oppressed peoples. The odious methods it uses, the slaughter of innocent people in free societies and the continuing blackmail over the lives of hostages make it impossible for us to confuse, even for a moment, those actions with genuine resistance.
Certainly no one would deny that the persistence of unresolved conflicts and the injustices they bring in their train is one of the sources of terrorism. But we must also denounce many other causes such as the rising tide of intolerance and fanaticism and the complicity of States that are willing to close their eyes to the activities of terrorist organizations or do not hesitate to use them to their own advantage and even go so far as to encourage them.
In a world in which indiscriminate terrorist violence can affect the citizens of all States, there was bound to be a reaction.
We are gratified to note that the General Assembly, reflecting that world-wide realization, last year condemned these cowardly and criminal practices and that the Security Council and the Commission on Human Rights have taken a firm stand against the taking of hostages. However, France, which took the initiative in submitting this question to the Commission on Human Rights, wishes to emphasize the need to supplement these texts, whose political significance is evident, with the concrete measures the situation calls for.
The determined action required would be made easier if all States were effectively to meet the obligations incumbent upon them under international law and conventions to which they have subscribed.
I venture to hope that the appropriate reaction of the international community expressed here will encourage all States to co-operate, particularly in the strengthening of air and maritime security, and convince them of the need to work through all appropriate channels, national and other, to eradicate terrorism.
Since the United Nations was founded the Organization and the entire international community have had to face up to the strategic realities of the -nuclear age.
France is convinced that nuclear deterrence, which has prevented a direct confrontation between the two super-Powers for the past 40 years, remains an
irreplaceable factor for peace and that there is no alternative within human grasp in spite of the rapid progress taking place in advanced technology, progress in which France has equipped itself to play a full part. t
In view of the considerable disproportion in existing arsenals, any progress towards nuclear disarmament must begin with verifiable, progressive and balanced reductions in the entire range of American and Soviet strategic weapons systems. These reductions must be carried out under such conditions that the balance of nuclear deterrence is not called into question.
All the speakers here have stressed the importance that progress in the current negotiations in Geneva between the Soviets and theAmericans could have for East-West relations. France has already said many times that it would welcome a priori such prospects as might be opened by a Soviet-American summit meeting this year. It recognizes in particular the political importance that an agreement on a global limitation on intermediate-range weapons systems could have in the world. It must, however, observe that the reduction of those systems would affect only a very small part of the nuclear arsenals of the United states and the Soviet Union.
The President of the French Republic recalled in 1983 from this very rostrum the conditions which France has set for its participation in a nuclear disarmament process when the time comes. I should like to repeat here that these conditions will not change and that France will not agree to its forces being take) into account, directly or indirectly, in negotiations to which it is not a party.
As long as French security rests on nuclear deterrence, the first requirement f or ray corn try is to maintain the credibility of its strategic forces at the necessary level. For that reason, France has naturally declined to go along with any form of planned obsolescence of its forces while other Powers retain a huge excess nuclear capacity. It will accept neither a quantitative nor a qualitative freeze on its arsenal nor will it halt its nuclear tests. That arsenal does not exceed the level considered indispensable for our security and our independence. The nuclear tests are being carried out in unquestionably safe conditions that have been recognized as such by independent and undisputed experts from the countries of the Pacific to whom France has allowed access to its test site, other States regularly carry out many tests and none of them provides or has provided such guarantees on the international level.
With regard to Europe, the problem of security cannot be reduced solely to its
nuclear aspects. What distinguishes our continent from all the others is that the
permanent wound of its division is compounded by an unequal arms build-up of 
conventional and chemical weapons unmatched elsewhere in the world.
Several years ago France proposed that in the framework of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe an approach should be sought that would make it possible, in stages, to bring greater transparency to military activities and hence greater trust throughout our continent before initiating a gradual return to a lower level of the balance of armaments. In that spirit and, I would recall, on the basis of the French proposal, the Conference on disarmament in Europe was convened. It completed its work at Stockholm last week. We are pleased that the first East-West agreement on security to be reached in nearly 10 years came about in that context. This result should enable the follow-up conference of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, which will meet shortly in Vienna, to make headway in all fields covered by the Helsinki Final Act - among them, human rights, the free movement of individuals, contacts among people -which, just as much as security and disarmament, affect the progress of East-West relations.
In regard to nuclear energy, France, like the rest of the world, was disturbed by the Chernobyl accident. The accident must be judged with due gravity and seriousness. On the other hand, it should not serve as a pretext for those who seek to speculate on fear and irrational sentiment. The analysis recently completed in Vienna by international experts confirms the specific nature of the Soviet reactor; the lessons of the Chernobyl tragedy cannot be transferred as such and applied to Western-type installations.
France decided several years ago to base its energy independence on nuclear energy. That goal is well cm the way to being reached today and cannot be brought into question. Conscious of what is at stake, France will naturally work for greater co-operation on safety already under way in the framework of the International Atomic Energy Agency. But I should liKss to make the point here that the power to regulate in such an area must belong quite clearly to those who alone have the responsibility, capability and means to put into operation both the installations themselves and the regulations - in other words, national Governments, in the same spirit, France will continue to help interested countries acquire the benefits of the civilian applications of the atom once there is appropriate international monitoring to guarantee that the fruits of such co-operation are not diverted.
France and its partners in the European Space Agency have decided to confront the great challenge of the peaceful exploration of space. We for our part are resolved to prevent a gap from developing in this field between nations that would move ahead for their own advantage and the others, which would be denied the benefits of applications vital for their development: earth observation, meteorological applications, navigation, communications transmission and direct television. France will continue to work to further existing international co-operation and develop the co-operation planned for the years ahead.
We are bound to note today that the economic and financial situation of numerous third-world countries, especially the least developed among them, appears to have grown much worse. The situation is especially critical in Africa, and the special session which once again this year the General Assembly fortunately devoted to the problem highlighted the dimensions of the problem.The African corn tries know from experience that the efforts they have courageously decided to undertake will have the resolute and fraternal backing of France. Our commitment stems from the close relations we have with our partners to the north and the south of the Sahara. It also results from our awareness of the exceptional seriousness of the crisis, whose internal and external causes have been analysed with exemplary lucidity by the States concerned. The crisis affects almost the entire continent, which still encompasses two thirds of the world's least-advanced countries. France provides more aid to sub-Saharan Africa than any other country. Its contribution to the development of the continent as a whole has not flagged over these past years. No one should doubt that this will continue in the future.
Certain regions in the third world whose economic development has been disastrous are also victims of threats to their security, and I should like to say a few words here about the sadly telling case of Chad. The difficulties and handicaps of every kind that that country's leaders have had to face are widely known. They have once again been compounded by attempts on the part of its neighbor, Libya, at destabilization, by occupation of part of the territory and, lastly, by overt military aggression. The Government of Chad received, when it has so requested, the support of France. The aid we provided, and in particular the
military assistance, was intended, while deterring Libya from pursuing its offensive activities, to prepare what will doubtless be a long and difficult road towards national reconciliation and reconstruction in Chad.
In the case of Chad, as in many other cases, the relationship between underdevelopment and insecurity and, consequently, the level of armaments, has been constantly demonstrated. Some years ago France proposed that this crucial problem as a whole should be the subject of political examination at the United Nations. Following the debates of the experts, it now remains to give concrete substance to this plan, either at the next special session of the General Assembly on disarmament or, if a consensus emerges, at a special conference to be held at an earlier date.
I should like, finally, to say a few words about the question of debt. For all too many developing countries debt has now become a dominant concern. The day-to-day effort to meet payments on due dates mobilizes all their energies. It does not permit Governments the freedom necessary to resolve their long-term development problems.
Over the past few years, there has been a great deal of consideration of this question. The very volume of such discussion shows that the international community has awakened to the seriousness and, at the same time, the complexity of the situation. Debt, in itself, is the consequence of the distorted development of the international economy which has brought us to the situation in which we find ourselves today.
It is for that reason that no one can any longer claim that the issue can be resolved in a purely mechanical manner by granting short-term facilities or through the simplistic application of miracle remedies. If we are to solve the problem in a lasting manner, we must tackle the root causes of the situation and not simply its effects.
The world facing a crisis of exceptional gravity, a phase of structural
adaptation in the international economy requiring greater international
cooperation so that it will be more imaginative, more active and more pragmatic. I am fully aware that not everyone is convinced that this is necessary, but I think that the movement is in the right direction. France, for its part, believes that we must increase international co-operation in three areas. First, there must be increased financing for developing countries to loosen the grip of debt. I should add that there is no instance of a country that has not had to have recourse to substantial external financing during its industrialization phase. This is obvious, and in this area I note some progress, both in thinking and in conduct.
Broad agreement is now emerging on the need to expand the role and enhance the intervention capabilities of multilateral development institutions Each of us recognizes that every other kind of financial assistance is also needed, in particular from international commercial banks and from States, in the form of aid for development and commercial credit.
With regard to bilateral aid for development, France will again increase its effort in 1987 over 1986, with a view to reaching its goal of 1 per cent of gross national product.
Secondly, the remarkable efforts to ensure economic recovery embarked on by developing countries, especially by the most heavily indebted among them, must be continued. Outstanding results" have already been achieved in the battle against internal and external deficits, in curbing inflation and in implementing bold economic policies that emphasize the long-term interests of nations rather than favor illusory, fragile short-term solutions. It takes courage to set up and implement such policies, and I should like to pay tribute to those who have taken such initiatives.
A single statistic will suffice to illustrate the importance of such efforts: the balance-of-payments deficit of non-oil-exporting countries has fallen from $73 billion in 1982 to $29 billion in 1986.
Lastly, it is absolutely essential to correct the current disorders in the international economic and financial system. The solution to the debt problem must be based on the resumption of sustained economic growth in the world economy. This should be a key objective of the industrialized countries> which have a primary responsibility in this regard.
The progress made in the war against inflation should enable us to continue to lower real interest rates, without which any lasting solution of the debt problem would be illusory, and to continue to move towards greater stability of the international monetary system.
The correction of financial imbalances should also be actively sought. It is not a healthy situation when the world's greatest industrial country continues to drain off such a sizable 
In this context, France welcomes the success of the Punta del Este conference and hopes that the new round of negotiations to be launched will make it possible to liberalize world trade and to strengthen solidarity among nations.
Freedom in all its dimensions - political, economic, cultural and religious - is being flouted in too many countries. War and terrorism are spreading insecurity and fear. The dignity of the human person is in jeopardy in every part of the world where hunger, poverty and violence reign.
Whatever ideologists may say, the values of dignity and freedom are inscribed in the conscience of all mankind. France, for its part, intends to defend those values wherever it is present in the world, as well as within this Organization, which would be failing in its mission if it resigned itself to compromise or impotence.
Off all the challenges I have mentioned, two seem to me of more urgent response than the others.
One is terrorism, which would take us back to a time we thought long past if we allowed it a free hand to undermine democratic societies and destroy the basic rules of international life.
The other is the critical situation of many third-world countries, particularly the least advanced among then. It is inconceivable that we should allow them to be crushed under the weight of their economic and financial difficulties - inconceivable, inhuman and irresponsible.
Over and above the problems encountered by our Organization, even in its day-to-day functioning - problems which I am convinced will be resolved - the wisdom and intelligence so often demonstrated by this Assembly encourages me, in turn, to make a confident appeal to all the Member States.
As I said at the beginning of my remarks, the internationalization of problems does not of itself entail international solidarity. In this regard, the development of co-operation at the regional level is an encouraging first step. Everybody knows that France in particular sets great store by intensifying its co-operation with its partners in the European Community.
The urgency of the challenges that I have just mentioned compels us to set awareness of the need for this solidarity above our economic differences and political divergences. Let us all, therefore, understand that the dangers confronting mankind are common to us all and that the only response is to be found in solidarity.
The PRESIDENT; On behalf of the General Assembly, I wish to thank the Prime Minister of the French Republic for the important statement he has just made.
Mr. President, I welcome you to your prestigious office with the same warmth which exists between our two countries - both members of the CeraHonweaifcu. I share with you some knowledge of the English Bar and know that you will show the dedication, wisdom and objectivity which, if I may say so, is the hallmark of our legal profession.
I cannot fail at the same time to pay a tribute to your predecessor, who represents a fellow member of the European Community. Ambassador de Pinies has had a distinguished career at the United Nations, crowned by his handling of the fortieth anniversary session, which captured world attention. He did not disappoint the high expectations we all had of him.
Nor can I omit to pay a tribute to our Secretary-General and to say how happy I am, how happy we all are, to see him restored to health. His modesty and patience - qualities which once again showed through in his annual report - are an example to us all.
I have the honor to address the General Assembly today on behalf of the European Community and its 12 Member States.
Forty years ago, on 19 September 1946, Winston Churchill had this to say of Europe:
"Over wide areas a vast quivering mass of tormented, hungry, care-worn and bewildered human beings gape at the ruins of their cities and homes and scan the dark horizons for the approach of some new peril, tyranny or terror." A generation later it is sobering for us in Western Europe to remember those words. They remind us of the full destructive force of what Churchill, in a later speech described as:
"Ancient nationalistic feuds and modern ideological factions [which] distract and infuriate the unhappy, hungry populations."
The destructive power of Churchill's "feuds and factions" is undiminished, and it is for that reason I wish to dwell for a moment on the more hopeful experience of the European Community. I say this with great humility; for in this century, as often before, we Europeans have feared and distrusted, fought and plundered one another. Yet today 12 free countries of Western Europe can speak to the world with a single voice; and we can do so in the conviction that we shall never attack one another again.
The Community is an ambitious undertaking. The decisions we take in our Community can change the laws of all our countries. They touch the life of all our citizens. Of course it sometimes takes us time to agree; but we believe other nations could profit from the same stability and trust which we have built in Europe since 1945. This mutual trust has allowed us to build up our joint political and economic strength. We are determined to go on advancing our interests together. Let there be no doubt: a challenge to one of us is a challenge to all: whether it be to our liberties, interests, rights or well-being; whether it comes from terrorists or drug-dealers, from bullies or from tyrants.
Last year my predecessor, Jacques Poos, the Foreign Minister of Luxembourg, spoke here as representative of 10 members of the European Community. It is my privilege to address you on behalf of 12 member States, for the Community has welcomed two new members - Spain and Portugal. Their accession weaves two more strands of European culture and history into one ever-thickening cable. Meanwhile the construction of Europe goes on. We are ratifying new treaty provisions on foreign policy co-operation. And by the end of 1992 we mean to have broken down the barriers that still divide the Community; so that, from Aberdeen to Athens, from Copenhagen to Cadiz, goods, services and capital and, by no means least, people, can move freely between us.
Our Community has learns to work together in domestic affairs. It is now the world's single greatest trading bloc.Individually we have made powerful contributions to world affairs: our contribution must and will grow, now that we act together. The principles of the Charter of the United Nations have always been basic to our Community. He believe that our history imposes on us a particular responsibility to work for those principles and to promote in the world the ideal of dialog and peaceful co-operation which has served the member States so well.
But Europe, the wider Europe, remains divided. Twenty-five years ago the Berlin wall cast its shadow between East and West. Barbed wire and concrete set neighbors and families apart from each other. These man-made divisions oblige us, as Europeans, to search for reconciliation and the rebuilding of trust between nations. Our common history and culture encourage us to believe we can succeed.
The accident at Chernobyl, to which the Soviet Foreign Minister has just referred in his own speech, has added a new dimension to exchanges between East and West. Let us hope that the lessons of that accident will be well learned. As Martin Luther King Jr. said, in a different context:
"We must learn to live together as brothers or perish together as fools."
For us in Europe, as for the rest of the world, better relations between the two super-Powers are of the greatest importance. We warmly welcomed the Geneva summit meeting last November between President Reagan and General Secretary Gorbachev. We share the widespread hope that there will be another summit this year. That prospect has already produced major proposals by both sides. We therefore much regret that the arrest of a respected American journalist in Moscow has cast a cloud over those hopes. We look for its early removal.
The Geneva negotiations have as one priority the prevention of an arms race in outer space. The other urgent priority is deep cuts in the strategic and intermediate forces of the United States and the Soviet Union. We believe that the United States, the Soviet Union and Europe can make significant progress towards disarmament without compromising their security. An early agreement on the world-wide elimination of chemical weapons should and must be obtained.
Even if the objective of general and complete disarmament can only be gradually achieved, it nonetheless remains our ultimate goal. But agreements will have lasting value only if they are fair, balanced and verifiable. And if confidence is to grow, existing arms control agreements must be respected by all parties. We are approaching a critical period: there is an opportunity for major decisions. Future generations will not forgive failure.
Arms control and disarmament negotiations are only part of East-West
relations. Practical steps are needed to overcome the tension and divisions that lie behind the high level of armaments.
That is why the Helsinki Pinal Act is so important. It is fundamental for the health of East-West relations that all the Helsinki commitments should be honored. We look to all the participants in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) process to do so. At the CSCE follow-up meeting in Vienna, we will press for the sort of steps which ordinary people in our countries can see and understand.
The Twelve warmly welcome the successful conclusion of the Stockholm conference last weekend. The agreement that has been reached there is a significant contribution towards reducing the risk of war in Europe and towards establishing greater confidence between East and West. The Twelve, who made a substantial contribution to that result, will seek to build on it both in the field of arms control and, more widely, in the CSCE process.
Although Afghanistan and Cambodia are two countries far distant from our own, the outside interventions there symbolize many of the problems we face in East-West relations and in working for greater stability in the world at large. In Afghanistan in particular, some small detachments of Soviet troops may be withdrawn, but over 110,000 Soviet troops will still remain.
Tens of thousands of Afghan citizens have been killed as a result of the Soviet occupation. They will not return to life. Four million people remain outside their country, living as refugees. Many of them have been taken in by Pakistan, which has been rewarded by numerous attacks launched across its border from Afghanistan.
Speaking for a moment as the Foreign Minister of the United Kingdom, I cannot refrain from observing that it was in this context that the Foreign Minister of the
Soviet Union said that "the time has come to learn to call things by their proper names." I cannot refrain from expressing my astonishment and dismay that the facts which I have just described - the events which have taken place in the past six years in Afghanistan - were described by the Soviet Foreign Minister as "a national, democratic revolution". If that be their view, then it is not a view that can be shared by the rest of the world.
Speaking again for the Twelve, the principles we seek are those that must underlie a solution. They have been massively endorsed by the Assembly on many occasions. The Soviet Union should implement those principles, withdraw all its troops from Afghanistan and agree an acceptable timetable without delay. We support the efforts of the Secretary-General of the United Nations to resolve the conflict. Only the success of those efforts - and soon - can prevent further suffering.
Few parts of the world have suffered more than the Middle Bast from the ancient feuds and modern factions of Churchill's phrase. Our approach is the same: to counsel dialog and co-operation. There are no military answers to the conflict in the Middle East or in North Africa.
A just, lasting and comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israel dispute can be achieved only through negotiation. We take encouragement from the agreement between Egypt and Israel over Taba. We have made our own views known on many occasion, and we stand by them. An international conference could make a major contribution if the gap between the parties could be narrowed and if they could agree on the principle and nature of such a conference.
All parties should clearly and unambiguously accept two principles: the right to existence and security of all States in the area, including Israel, and the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination and all that that implies.
We appeal to the parties concerned - the Arab States, Israel and the Palestinian people - to open the door to peace by recognizing each other's rights.
The Twelve are working individually and collectively to help development in the occupied territories. We call on Israel, pending its withdrawal in accordance with Security Council resolution 242 (1967), scrupulously to fulfill its obligations as the occupying Power and to ease restrictions on political activity and economic development. But such measures must be a prelude to, not a substitute for, true peace negotiations.
Six years ago this month, the conflict between Iran and Iraq broke out. It has claimed well over half a million casualties and gravely damaged both countries. It is a source of great concern to their neighbors in the Gulf, with whom we sympathize. We have unreservedly condemned the use of chemical weapons and the escalating attacks by both sides on shipping in the Gulf. The two countries should ask themselves what possible good is served by continuing this conflict. We would deeply deplore any further escalation.
It should be accepted equally by both parties that this conflict can only be brought to an end by negotiation. Security Council resolution 582 (1986) forms the best basis for such a negotiated settlement. We urge Iran and Iraq to agree an immediate ceasefire and to seek a peaceful, honorable solution to their differences, co-operating fully with the Secretary-General in the exercise of his good offices.
In the Western Sahara, as well, we appeal to the parties to respond positively to the Secretary-General's efforts to find a peaceful solution.
The United Nations is doing vital worth the effort to preserve Lebanon's sovereignty, unity independence and territorial integrity. We deplore recent
incidents which have put new obstacles in the way of the mission of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). We extend our sympathies to the victims. We wish to underline the urgency and importance of taking measures to enable the Force to carry out its mission safely and effectively. The latest events have demonstrated how intolerable the present situation has become.
I now turn to the problem of Cyprus, which after too many years remains an important matter of international concern. The island remains tragically divided. The Twelve reaffirm their strong backing for the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of Cyprus, in accordance with relevant United Nations resolutions. We stand fully by our previous statements.
In particular, we reject any action that purports to establish an independent State within Cyprus. As we have made clear on many occasions, we support the Secretary-General in his mission of good offices for a just and viable solution to the problem. We ask all concerned to co-operate with him and not to take any action that would make his task more difficult.
In South Africa, the Twelve have worked to promote the genuine national dialog that is so obviously and urgently needed if there is to be a peaceful solution to the country's problems. South Africa's policies also affect its neighbors. We have forcefully condemned its armed incursions against neighboring countries. There must be no recurrence of those armed raids.
The Twelve have repeatedly made clear their revulsion at apartheid, we have demanded that it should be abolished. We utterly reject a philosophy which denies opportunity or liberty to one child yet gives ordinary rights and privileges to another solely on the basis of his or her colour. Such a system breeds hatred and violence. There have been reforms in South Africa, but too few and too slow to stem the surging bitterness and bloodshed in the country. The present state of emergency has brought desolation to the homes of many thousands of people imprisoned without trial and has worsened, not improved, the prospects for peaceful change.
Violence will not end apartheid. Instead, conditions must be created in which dialog can begin., But dialog is impossible while black leaders remain imprisoned or detained and black organizations proscribed. That is why the Twelve have repeatedly called on the South African Government to release unconditionally Nelson Mandela and other political prisoners and to lift the ban on the African National Congress, the Pan African Congress of Azania and other political parties.
In September 1985 the European Community countries agreed on a series of measures - some restrictive, some positive - designed to impress on the South African Government the inescapable need for fundamental reform. In June this year, at The Hague, the European Council decided to take additional action. As part of that action, Heads of State and Government of the Twelve asked me to undertake a mission to southern Africa. In the course of two visits to the area ^r July I sought to explain the policies of the Twelve to South Africa's neighbors and to impress upon the South African Government our deep concern and the need for steps to encourage a peaceful negotiated solution.
In the absence of any progress in that direction, and having consulted the major Western industrialized countries, the Twelve agreed at Brussels last week to
impose a ban on new investments in South Africa and on the import of iron, steel and gold coins from South Africa. Those measures represent a further step reinforcing the measures we took last year, which included bans on all exports to and imports from South Africa of arms and paramilitary equipment, a ban on oil exports and a ban on all new co-operation in the nuclear field.
In addition we are implementing a concerted European program to help the victims of apartheid, both individually and collectively. We are helping those arrested under the state of emergency and we are putting heavy emphasis on programs of training and education for black South Africans. We are also helping South Africa's neighbors, for example over the improvement of transport facilities in the region.
We shall keep up our effort in all these areas and do everything we can to promote urgent and peaceful change.
Time is short. We appeal to the South African Government to look to the future, to accept that fundamental change is inevitable. That Government clearly understands the demographic and economic challenge. South Africa's white leaders are sowing the wind; unless sincere negotiation begins now, their own children will reap the whirlwind.
The South African Government also bears a heavy responsibility in Namibia. Last year it set up a so-called transitional government of national unity. That body has no status whatsoever under the United Nations plan. We cannot accept unilateral moves by South Africa to transfer power in Namibia. We call upon the South African Government to implement the United Nations plan without further delay.
Central America is another area where armed force will solve nothing. dialog and peaceful negotiation are the only way forward. A political solution is
of the highest importance and it must emerge from the region itself. We support the Contadora peace process, which is a major step in the right direction, but further effort is needed by all concerned to reduce regional tensions. .*t Luxembourg last November we established a political dialog with Central America to underline our active support for that process in the interests of stability and pluralistic democracy. We also signed a co-operation agreement. We reiterate our intention to increase our aid to the region substantially in order to encourage regional co-operation and economic development.
On behalf of the United Kingdom I shall be circulating a document, a separate national communication, on the FaIklands.
More widely in Latin America, we have been encouraged by the continuing consolidation of democracy in most countries of South America. We hope that this process will continue throughout the region. But problems certainly remain in some countries. We have made plain our particular concern about human rights abuses and the continuation of violence in Chile. The Chilean Government has re imposed a state of siege following the attempted assassination of General Pinochet, we view this development with deep concern and reiterate our hope that the Government will immediately release political prisoners and initiate without delay a dialog with the democratic opposition about a peaceful restoration of democracy.
The human rights abuses in Chile and South Africa are by means unique. This Assembly cannot remain indifferent in the face of the systematic violations of individual liberties, of the tyranny, oppression and indiscriminating violence which persist in many countries and of the fact that hunger, disease and lack of opportunity deny the most basic economic and social rights to countless people.
On 21 July this year we issued a statement setting out our principles in this field. That was a signal of the high priority we attach to human rights in our
international relationships. This Assembly has established clear standards - in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other international instruments. We seek the universal observance of those instruments. That is, what our people expect, not just fine words, so we attach particular importance to maintaining and strengthening the mechanisms established by the United Nations for the protection of human rights.
The scourge of international terrorism has brought a new precariousness to modern life. It has killed innocent people in airports, shopping arcades and crowded streets. We utterly condemn cowardly attacks like the Karachi hijack and the recent atrocities in Istanbul and Paris, which can do nothing to help the political causes that their perpetrators profess to believe in. Our horror is greater when sovereign States lend their support - moral or material - to the terrorists. This year we have taken certain steps to deter State-supported terrorism, particularly in the case of Libya. No country which supports terrorism can expect to enjoy normal relations with the Twelve. We are determined to do more, and a ministerial meeting of the Twelve will be taking place on 25 September to consider future action. We shall not tolerate such behavior by supposedly responsible Governments.
So, too, the problem of drugs demands an urgent collective effort. International drug trafficking is now on a scale that threatens to undermine whole societies. Close international co-operation is required to defeat this evil trade. We shall play our part at the World Conference in Vienna next June - a valuable initiative by the Secretary-General.
Economic issues have been central to the development of the European Community. It is now the world's largest trade grouping, accounting for 20 per cent of world trade. We are the world's largest importer, in particular of products from developing countries, amounting to $US 105 billion in 1985. Our
320 million citizens are linked to some 400 million people in Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific through our trade and aid agreements with their countries. We are collectively the largest donors of aid in the world. This economic weight gives us certain responsibilities towards the world's trading systems and we take these responsibilities seriously.
Since the Second World War, growth in world trade has been stimulated by the progressive dismantling of the tariff barriers that existed between the two world wars. Nevertheless there are strains in the world trading system. Old traditional industries in the Western world have faced massive contraction as comparative advantage has passed to the newly industrialized countries, with traumatic social changes for those involved. Pressures for import controls have grown. They look like easy solutions, but they are not.
Protectionism above all penalizes developing countries by reducing access to prime markets in developed countries. In the developed countries themselves, protectionism penalizes consumers by increasing prices and restricting choice and exporters by increasing their production costs. ProtsGfeicnisa is self-defeating. A spiral of retaliatory protectionist measures would have disastrous effects on world trade, particularly for the third world. Let us always remember that trade fosters growth.
The contracting parties of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) have just concluded their ministerial meeting at Punt a del Este at which an important agreement has been reached to launch a new round of multilateral trade negotiations. The Community has worked hard for a successful outcome. Multilateral trade negotiations serve two purposes: to renew the GATT system, bringing it up-to-date with the realities of world trade, and to pursue trade liberalization by allowing countries to make concessions multi later ally that they may find difficult to make bilaterally. If we all share the burden of adjustment, we spread the pain. We are fully committed to this process.
You may ask what the Community is doing to give effect to these admirable principles. Let me give two brief examples:
First, in the textiles sector, the Community has achieved a. remarkable degree of restructuring. The Community is glad that the new Multi-Fiber Arrangement agreed in July foresees the application of GATT rules to trade in textiles as a final objective and calls for all participants to co-operate in the progressive liberalization of the textile trade. The Community also argued strongly for the particularly favorable treatment that the new Multi-Fiber Agreement gives to the
least developed countries.
Second, agriculture is a major political issue, and one that mnst be tackled urgently. There has been a revolution in food production in the last 10 years. New technology has meant new fertilizers, fatter cattle, new types of grain and rice, more efficient storage. India is now exporting food. China is virtually self-sufficient. These are great success stories which serve as an inspiration to those struggling to overcome food shortages.
Ironically, more plus more can equal less. Too much food in some countries can aggravate food shortages in others.Expensive producers growing more can cause poorer producers to grow less. The result is a tragic paradox: that even in an age of plenty, famine persists. Meanwhile trade disputes become political conflicts, as countries compete to subsidize their food exports, and dispose of their growing surpluses.
We have to address these problems now. While recognizing the importance of agriculture for the well-being of rural communities, the Tokyo Summit agreed on the need "to redirect policies and adjust the structure of agricultural production in the light of world demand". The Community is committed to this. Heads of Government agreed at the European Council in The Hague in June that "a better control of total production must be ensured so that it is better adjusted to the market situation". This is not the responsibility of one country or group of countries. The problem is world-wide, and we can only deal with it - in the words of the Tokyo declaration - in co-operation with each other. Last week, GATT Ministers agreed to launch a new GATT round, including negotiations on agriculture. We have no more important task than to make this a success. The Tokyo Summit was also an important opportunity to review progress on the debt problem. The annual meetings of the International Monetary Fund (IMP) and World Bank are less than a week away, so I shall be brief.
The last year has seen important changes. International recovery may be in its fourth year, but the international economic environment remains unfavorable. Growth is still unevenly distributed throughout the world and growth rates are still lower than we want. Lower interest rates help us all, even if in real terms they are still high by historical standards. Oil price falls help many but severely affect others, and commodity prices generally remain weak. Many debtors have undertakes courageous adjustment programs of the industrialized
countries have reduced the imbalances of the early eighties which aggravated the difficulties facing debtors.
The debt burden remains heavy for a number of countries. The Community fully supports the United States initiative for sustained growth, which aims to meet the legitimate aspirations of debtor countries for growth through structural adjustment and economic liberalization with the necessary external financing. Or, in plain language, it recognizes that we sink or swim together. Those who expected instant results misunderstand the initiative and the problem's complexity. But much has been achieved. The World Bank has stepped up its policy-based loans. The IMF and World Bank are working more closely together. And, in recent weeks, they have shown a flexible and imaginative approach to the very difficult problems faced by the oil-producing countries.
There has been much criticism that resource flows have declined. This may be so for the banks in the short term: it partly reflects falling short-term demand for loans. But the banks have a crucial role to play in support of the United States initiative. We are confident they will rise to that challenge. For their part the creditor countries are responding to the need to ensure adequate finance for adjustment through rescheduling at the Paris Club-, new export credits; aid program; and support for the international monetary bodies. The Twelve will support a general capital increase for the IBRD at the appropriate time, and they welcome progress towards a 3US 12 billion replenishment, IDA-VIII, to help the poorer countries.
One way or another, be it bilaterally, multilaterally or through the institutions of the European Community, we provide one third of the world's official development assistance. We shall maintain and, where appropriate, expand
these flows to meet the commitments we have made individually to targets established by the United Nations.
The problems of Africa are particularly acute. As the special session recognized in May, many countries face grave economic problems. But natural disasters such as droughts and man-made disasters such as civil war have made them far worse. We extend particular sympathy to the people of Cameroon who have suffered the appalling natural calamity of Lake Nyos.
At the special session on Africa, African countries acknowledged the role they themselves must play. The industrialized countries, including the Twelve, agreed on the importance of increasing official development assistance to Africa, and on improving its quality and effectiveness. We maintain substantial bilateral aid programs and contribute to international and regional development agencies; in addition, we are making a substantial collective contribution through the Lome III Convention and other association and co-operation agreements.
Finally, this Organization itself faces a very serious problems how to confront its own financial crisis. A number of countries, over the years, have either delayed payments or withheld contributions. The Twelve collectively provide just under 30 per cent of the United Nations budget. We believe that every State should sect its legal obligations. The Secretary-General has shown courage in proposing certain measures, endorsed by the General Assembly at its resumed session in the Spring, to deal with the short-term problem. But further measures are required. There is a clear need for changes in the system which will produce broader consensus on financial issues and help overcome the reluctance of some Members to meet their financial obligations.
We are grateful for the work done by the Group of 18 high-level experts. We shall make a positive and constructive contribution to the discussion of their report. We support the creation of a new mechanism to consider the program and budget, structured so 53 to ensure effective decision-making and to contribute to greater rationalization and efficiency within the system. He are firm in our support for the Charter and for a strong and effective United Nations. Greater budgetary discipline, improved co-ordination, and rigorous adherence to priorities can only strengthen the Organization and ensure its future stability and vigor.
As this Session will once again demonstrate, the world faces many grave problems - too many to cover in one speech; and I have not attempted to do so. So I am also circulating today as document A/41/634 a memorandum as a companion piece to this speech, describing our position on a number of other issues to.which we also attach the highest importance.
Voltaire once observed that, in India and China, they believe that a prophet will come out of the West, whereas people in Europe expect their sages to come from the East. The lesson of this, perhaps, is that we all have something to learn from each other. The United Nations is a place to listen as much as to speak. And if we do so, perhaps we shall find to our surprise that we can learn from each others' experiences and profit from each others' good will.
I have tried to show how our experience of co-operating together in the European Community has shaped our positions on a number of key issues facing this Assembly. I believe those positions, though ambitious in aim, are fair and realistic in practice. It is an approach which we believe fulfills the ideals to which this Organization is committed. In our search and support for freedom, peace, justice, democracy and prosperity for mankind, in offering our friendship to all who wish us well, we shall continue to pursue our duty to other nations, notably to those less fortunate than ourselves. At the same time we shall uphold and defend what we have built together.

At the outset. Sir, I extend to you once again the felicitations of my delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the forty-first session of the General Assembly, it is a matter of immense pleasure for me and the rest of my delegation that a distinguished diplomat from a close and friendly neighbor country has been elected to that high office. You bring to your position rich and varied experience. We are confident that you will guide the deliberations of this Assembly with distinction.
I also take this opportunity to express our appreciation to your predecessor, Mr. Jaime de Pinie's, for his skillful leadership during the deliberations of the fortieth session of the General Assembly.
I should like to convey our greetings to the Secretary-General, whom we are happy to see once again actively discharging his many onerous responsibilities. I hope that our Organization will continue to have the benefit of his experience and guidance for many years to come.
In the past year the United Nations - indeed the entire multilateral system -
has been subjected to severe strain and challenge. I am glad that, as he states in his report on the work of the Organization, the Secretary-General has found notable unanimity in the recognition of the continuing validity of the principles of the United Nations Charter and the need to strengthen title United Nations so that it may better meet the needs of the future. India is a founder BSeaber and its allegiance to the Organization and commitment to the principles of the Charter remain firm and unswerving.
As all of us are aware, the United Nations came into being in the wake of unparalleled death and destruction. The founding of the United Nations reflected the hopes and aspirations of humankind, which saw the need for a more rational world order. That vision is even more relevant today.
The international situation remains tense. The nuclear arms race and its extension into outer space, conflicts around the world and the world economic crisis endanger peace and international security. Nuclear weapons no longer threaten only States and nations, they threaten the very survival of man. In her address at the seventh summit of non-aligned Heads of State or Government, in New Delhi in March 1983, Prime Minister Indira Gandhi warned that
"Never before has our earth faced so much death and danger. The destructive power contained in nuclear stockpiles can kill human life, indeed all life, many times over and might well prevent its reappearance for ages to come."  What is at stake is civilization itself.
Last year, at the Geneva summit, the leaders of the Soviet Union and the United States declared that a nuclear war cannot be won and must not be fought. We call upon those two nations, which bear the major responsibility with regard to disarmament, to reinvigorate their dialog and take the logical follow-up steps to that assertion. We are glad that after a period of anxiety the two countries
appear to have resumed their efforts to make progress in this vital field. Their decisions will have consequences not only for their own peoples but for humanity as a whole. We trust that at their next meeting President Reagan aid General Secretary Gorbachev will reach important and meaningful agreements.
Other nuclear-weapon States must not shirk their responsibility either. A decision on their part in favor of nuclear disarmament could only have a positive effect. They should no longer take shelter behind the position that they will disarm only if the two super-Powers do.
Tl-e desire for peace is universal. There is increasing articulation of that feeling around the world, including in nuclear-weapon States, in legislatures and deliberative bodies, in universities and peace movements, aroong scientists and professionals - indeed, among all citizens.
Early this month, Heads of State or Government assembled at Harare for the eighth summit of non-aligned nations appealed to the two most powerful nuclear-weapon States to arrest the trend towards confrontation and conflict. Earlier, the leaders participating in the six-nation, five-continent peace initiative urged an immediate moratorium on nuclear tests and offered a concrete Program of verification. A large number of Governments have welcomed this; many Parliaments have expressed enthusiasm and support. We welcome the positive response of the Soviet Union to the appeal by the Six in the Mexico Declaration by extending its unilateral moratorium on nuclear testing for a third time, now until January 1987. We hope the United States will respond positively.
The United Nations has a unique role to play in all issues of disarmament. Regrettably, the negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament have failed to bring about any positive steps on the vital issues of a nuclear test ban, the cessation of the nuclear arras race, nuclear disarmament and the prevention of nuclear war. It is thus more urgently necessary for the General Assembly to put forward new ideas and mobilize support for disarmament measures. Many issues that were before the United Nations at the time of its inception continue to linger on its agenda. Our pride in the freedom achieved by formerly dependent peoples is abridged by the failure to remove the last vestiges of colonialism in Africa and the still unfulfilled promise of a homeland for the Palestinian people.
Last week we focused on Namibia at a special session of the General Assembly. Namibia, which is solely the responsibility of the United Nations, mirrors a situation where every value enshrined in the Charter stands challenged. ECforts towards freedom there have been continually frustrated by those who had concurred in the plan for independence of Namibia charted in Security Council resolution 435 (1978). This is the bitter twist of irony. Necessary consequent action by the Security Council has received support from all Members except those that have direct commercial stakes in the area and that also have the power to annul the collective will with their veto. It is not Namibia that is isolated; it is those who have sought to isolate Namibia that are.
In South Africa apartheid survives and is the root cause of violence and instability in the region. Every initiative for a peaceful resolution has been rejected by the Pretoria regime. Since the last session of the General Assembly a major effort was made by the Commonwealth to bring about a dialog between the minority who rule and the majority who are ruled in South Africa. An Eminent Persons Group comprising distinguished personalities from seven Commonwealth countries visited South Africa for this purpose. However, the authorities in Pretoria live in a world all their own. Every meaningful proposal was spurned. The international community has no option but to impose comprehensive and mandatory sanctions against South Africa in accordance with Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter as the only peaceful means to compel the South African regime to dismantle apartheid. The alternative would be too ghastly to contemplate.
South Africa cannot withstand the tide of history. The abhorrent system of apartheid will collapse. In the words of Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi:
"Racism cannot last. People's aspirations cannot be uncaged in a prison. Nelson Mandela and his people will be free"-
The presence of' great Powers continues to increase in the Indian Ocean. Formation of command structures and other forms of outside military presence and pressures negate the decision of the General Assembly to declare the Indian Ocean as a zone of peace. The convening of the Conference on the Indian Ocean at Colombo has been inordinately delayed because of the unhelpful attitude adopted by some. The Non-Aligned Movement has suggested 1988 as a finite target at which we must aim, and we hope the early convening of the Conference no longer remains an illusion.
We remain deeply concerned over the situation in west Asia. The people of Palestine continue to languish without a homeland of their own. Israel's arrogant defiance of the will of the international community, the consolidation of its stranglehold over the occupied territories: all constitute sad chapters in a seemingly endless tragedy.
We call for the complete and unconditional withdrawal of Israel from the Palestinian and other Arab territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem. We support the exercise of the right by the people of Palestine, under the leadership of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), to self-determination and the establishment of an independent sovereign State in Palestine. The right of all States in the region to live in peace within secure and recognized borders, including the independent State of Palestine, must be assured.
We would like to underscore once again the importance of the early convening of the International Conference on the Middle East in accordance with General Assembly resolution 38/58 Cj that would constitute a major contribution by the United Nations towards the achievement of a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict.
The continuing conflict between Iran and Iraq causes us deep concern and anguish. Both these nations are heirs to great and proud civilizations. Both are
endowed with the riches of nature and talented peoples. Yet for six long years death and destruction have prevented the channeling of their resources to productive activities. As a country which has friendly ties with both, we have had and shall continue to have close consultations with them to bring this tragic conflict to an end.
Of late, we have seen a disturbing trend of violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States by powerful nations. Nicaragua has the right to follow its national policies without outside intimidation or interference. All differences must be settled through negotiations. We have extended our full support to the Contadora process. Whether in Central America and the Caribbean or in the Mediterranean, the security and independence of non-aligned countries must be respected. No nation has the right to take the law into its own hands. Policies of domination must give way to greater understanding and respect for the aspirations of the States.
Cyprus remains divided, with part of its territory under foreign occupation. We reiterate our solidarity with its people and reaffirm our support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a non-aligned and unified Republic. We have noted the efforts made by the Secretary-General to bring about a satisfactory resolution of this issue.
In relation to Afghanistan and South-West Asia, I reiterate that the situation can be resolved only through an overall political settlement based on the principles set out in the New Delhi Declaration. We support the efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
The differences in South-East Asia call for a political solution. There can be no military solution, what is needed is a balanced approach that takes into account security and other considerations of all the countries in the region and
eliminates outside interference. We urge all States in the region to undertake a dialog to resolve the differences and establish durable peace.
The menace of terrorism is spreading. Assassinations, hijackings, bombings have meant the death of hundreds of men, women and children and have resulted in the loss of innocent lives, the mindless destruction of property and the jeopardizing of fundamental freedoms. I wish to reiterate the total opposition of my delegation to all acts of terrorism, whether committed by individuals, groups or States. All countries must co-operate in fighting this common scourge within the framework of internationally accepted norms.
At the same time, we support the struggle of people under colonial and racist regimes and all forms of foreign domination and occupation and of the national liberation movements against their oppressors. Their struggle is legitimate and must not be confused with terrorism.
The process of regional co-operation in South Asia, with which you, Mr. President, have such a close personal involvement, culminated in the formation of the South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation (SAARC). The seven nations of the region, which face similar problems, are determined to nurture and foster this process of regional co-operation. SAARC will provide a vehicle for this purpose. India will have the privilege to serve as host to the second summit of SAARC leaders this November.
Tensions and instability can arise also from the unsatisfactory state of the world economy. The economic situation continues to cause concern and is fraught with uncertainties which carry grave implications for the future,, Expansion of world output and trade has slowed considerably, and developing countries in particular continue to be confronted with exceptionally difficult circumstances. Mechanisms of international co-operation which might have helped to mitigate their problems have been rendered largely ineffective. The international economic system remains inherently iniquitous.
The developing countries have been urged to undertake drastic adjustments in the face of an unhelpful' international economic environment. Their efforts are hampered by intensified protectionist barriers, sharply declining prices of commodity exports and an increasingly intolerable debt burden. The severity of adjustment measures demanded of them has not only affected development prospects but has in many cases led to social and political tensions and unrest. Such adjustment to an adverse environment, which the developing countries have had no hand in shaping, really means accommodation by them to the policies and national interests of developed countries. There is thus a real danger that outside pressures may lead to an infringement of the economic sovereignty and be inimical to the political stability of developing countries. While it is obviously necessary for the developing countries to implement economic policies which will restore momentum to their economic growth, they must resolutely reject so-called solutions which would have the effect of undermining stable, democratic political structures.
Along with the economic slow-down that has characterized the first half of this decade, there has been a marked change in the attitude of the developed countries, to the detriment of the interests of the developing countries. This attitude can be described as apathy with regard to the fundamental problems of poverty and development. It is, therefore, necessary to restate the basic consensus that has guided the international community in the post-war period; namely, that the development problem is a common concern of mankind and requires the co-operation of rich and poor nations alike. A retreat from that consensus and from the responsibilities associated with it will lead to an even deeper economic crisis. Enlightened co-operation in our interdependent world is no longer a luxury of choice but a necessity.
The uncertainties of today can be turned into the opportunities of tomorrow. This would, however, require breathing new life into mechanisms and modalities of economic co-operation. On their part, the developing countries are ready in the most pragmatic and constructive spirit to resume such a dialog. In this context, we have noted with interest the proposal of the Secretary-General to convene a ministerial-level meeting of the Economic and Social Council to reach an agreement on the issues which need to be addressed most urgently. We are willing to explore all avenues which could lead to a resumption of meaningful dialog and co-operation in the areas of vital economic concern.
The major economic imbalances which exist in the world economy also reflect the choices before us. If traditional approaches are continued, the vast surpluses and the corresponding deficits which are accumulating in some parts of the world could have a dangerous destabilizing effect. Alternatively, with bold and imaginative measures, they could be used to expand the productive capacity and the potentially vast markets of the developing countries, which could lead to a quantum increase in trade and growth rates around the globe. Low inflation rates and the benefits which industrial countries derive from the low commodity and energy prices should make it easier for them to undertake such measures. It is our firm belief that sustained growth in the world economy for the benefit of all would not be possible without a reactivation of the development momentum of developing countries. It is not sufficient merely to promote growth in the developed countries. Any significant improvement in the material conditions of life - which is the fundamental purpose of development - cannot come about entirely through the trickle-down effect of growth in industrial countries. We have to face the development issue squarely and evolve co-operative action to deal with it.
The major imbalances in the world economy, the mounting burdens of external debt, the intensifying protectionism and the falling commodity prices reflect deeper structural deficiencies in the international economic order which need to be urgently addressed. In this regard, we support the proposal made by the Group of 24 in Washington to constitute a representative committee of ministers to examine further the different proposals for monetary improvement and reform. Such an examination could be an important preparatory process leading towards the convening of an international conference on money and finance for development. The forthcoming meeting of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) would also provide an important opportunity to consider in an integrated and comprehensive manner the interrelated areas of money, finance, trade and development; and we would urge all countries to co-operate fully in reaching an early agreement on the agenda and other issues related to it. It is particularly important that the role and mandate of UNCTAD in dealing with trade and development policies should be pursued and further strengthened.
In Punta del Este last week agreement was reached on the launching of a new round of multilateral trade negotiations to be called the Uruguay Round. We hope that these negotiations will result in the removal of protectionist barriers against the export products of developing countries.
One of the most critical issues as regards the development problem in the years ahead was highlighted by the 1986 report of the United Nations Committee on Development Planning, namely, that developing countries face a serious financing
gap over the next decade and that, without the restoration of development finance, prospects for growth would remain negligible and unable to satisfy even minimum aspirations for employment creation and higher living standards. We fully support the proposal of the eminent persons comprising the Committee on Development Planning for the doubling of development finance to provide an additional $25 billion per year, which they have contended is the minimum necessary condition for restoring moderate sustained growth in the developing world.
The General Assembly has decided to put on its agenda a separate item entitled -External debt crisis and development". This is an appropriate recognition of the severity of the debt and development crisis. Ke believe that in our search for a solution to this important issue measures to prevent the recurrence and spread of this problem should form an important element.
The developing countries and the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries remain deeply concerned about the critical economic situation in Africa. Within their capacities, the developing countries, including India, are doing their utmost to help the African countries overcome the critical situation. On earlier occasions ny delegation has outlined the concrete steps that we have taken. These are being continued and further expanded, in the context of the United Nations Program of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990, adopted by the General Assembly at its thirteenth special session, we shall continue to do our utmost to support the efforts of the African countries in areas where the skills and capabilities that we have acquired in our development experience have particular relevance.
We are concerned that the current financial crisis facing the United Nations remains acute, despite the efforts made by many Member States to expedite their payments. Thus, the United Nations faces a situation in which it will not be able to carry out the work Program mandated by its legislative bodies. The crisis is above all a political crisis, arising from disregard for obligations flowing from the Charter and from lack of agreement among Member States on how to finance the Organization and its activities. We hope that wisdom will prevail and that a consensus will be achieved.
At the same time, it is also necessary to pay due heed to economies which can be achieved without undermining the Organization itself. In that context, we express our appreciation of the work done by the Group of High-level Intergovernmental Experts to Review the Efficiency of the Administrative and Financial Functioning of the United Nations. The United Nations must continue to play its vital role in the maintenance of international peace and security and in the promotion of development and international cooperation. We pledge our full oo-operation to that end.
In his very first cress to the General Assembly Jawaharlal Nehru warned that it was becoming increasingly apparent that if we did not move with speed towards a world order, we should be left with order in the world. Secretary-General Perez de Cuellar in his first report to the General Assembly similarly warned of the approach of a "new international anarchy". Nearly 40 years separate us from Jawaharlal Nehru's warning; only four years from the caution addressed to us by the Secretary General.But their strength and relevance endure. A stable world order my be one which is founded on ethics and international morality. Political stratagems divorced from morality may hold out the promise of short-term advantage, but they cannot provide the basis of any ensuring settlement. The durable world order to which we aspire must be based on justice, equity and mutual advantage. That is the goal to which the United Nations and all countries individually must dedicate themselves.




This session of the Assembly opens the fifth decade of the United Nations. I hope that it will begin an era in which this body will come closer to realizing the dreams of its founding fathers.
Their ideals were inspired and inspiring: safeguarding the principles of universality and equality, a genuine desire to maintain international peace and security, encouraging international cooperation in solving global problems and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Unfortunately, those lofty principles have been vitiated and perverted beyond recognition. Extremists have seized this body. They have compelled it to shun the only peace treaty in the Middle East - the Camp David Accords. They have forced upon it an annual ritual of adopting dozens of distorted and irrelevant resolutions relating to my country. In clinging to these barren exercises, the United Nations spends precious time and funds, resources that could profitably be used to combat
hunger and poverty.
These and other issues remain unresolved, however, and they demand serious and responsible attention. First among them is the repugnant reign of apartheid in South Africa.
Israel, founded upon basic moral and democratic values, cannot remain silent in the face of racial discrimination, wherever it nay occur.. We reject and condemn apartheid as a political, social and economic system. Israel also believes that violence is not the path to reform in South Africa. We must urgently foster a climate that will facilitate a political settlement if we are to avoid a further drift towards economic chaos, suffering and bloodshed. We hope responsible leaders on all sides will act to create such a climate and that the Government of South Africa will initiate negotiations that will satisfy the legitimate political aspirations of all South Africans, regardless of race or color.

In the heart of the African continent many continue to suffer from hunger, disease and poverty. There is a growing awareness around the world of the need to provide help. People must be fed right now. We have contributed to that effort, but we also believe that we must help countries afflicted by hunger to develop the long-term means to prevent its recurrence and to set their economies on the road to development and growth.
This past year the General Assembly convened a special session on the critical economic situation in Africa. The Organization of African unity (OAU) has outlined a development strategy that is reminiscent of Israel's own development experience. Israel announced at that special session its readiness to make immediate contributions to the attainment of those goals. We offered to share our experience in agriculture and desertification, in medicine and education and in the general field of economic development. Many in Africa remember our earlier contributions in this field. Our experience has been gained in 28 years of assistance by Israel to more than 100 countries in Asia, Africa and Latin America. We have trained over 55,000 professionals from developing countries. We have shared our experience with the specialized agencies of the United Nations. And we are ready and willing to do more.
Many of those African States that severed relations with Israel in 1973 and 1974 are now in the process of resuming those relations. I wish to commend the leadership and courage of the Heads of State who have gone on to re-establish formal diplomatic ties with us despite the pressures exerted upon them. We extend the hand of friendship and co-operation to all African nations and we expect many more countries to resume full diplomatic relations with Israel in the near future.
The Middle East, with its vast resources of land and minerals, has within it the potential to leap into a new age in the twenty-first century - an age of great economic prosperity and a better life for millions. But that hope hangs on the outcome of a precarious contest between those who seek progress and those who continually plunge the region into turmoil and hatred.
Perhaps the most tragic instance of the fanaticism that plagues our region is the cruel war waged by Iran and Iraq for the past six years. That war has claimed well over a million casualties; it has reintroduced outlawed means of warfare such as gas and chemical weapons and the wholesale torture of prisoners; it has hurt the entire world by threatening freedom of navigation and the free flow of oil. It is a sad commentary that, despite their various proclamations, those two warring Governments show no intention whatsoever of genuinely seeking ways to stop the horrible carnage.
Another instance of the reign of fanaticism and its terrible human cost is Lebanon. The tragedy is rooted in the chronic absence of an effective Government able to control and reconcile the warring factions. Without such a strong central authority, Lebanon has been unable to discharge the most elementary obligations of government - the control of one's territory against lawlessness and terror, terror directed against one's own citizens and against the citizens of neighboring States.
The first to pay for that anarchy have been the Lebanese themselves. Over 100,000 were slaughtered in the civil war of 1975-1976 and thousands of others have been killed since in sectarian clashes. Lebanon's Government has set no effective jurisdiction over any part of the country: not over the Bekaa Valley or Tripoli, where 20,000 Syrian troops physically occupy Lebanese territory; not over the Shouf Mountains; not even over Beirut itself. Such conditions encourage the reign of the gun, the rocket and the bomb throughout Lebanon. Naturally, the southern part of the country has not been exempt from that dismal pattern. Beginning with the PLO, various terrorist groups have used the south as a staging area for terrorist attacks against Israel. Those who expected that a "Pax Syriana" would pacify Lebanon were hopelessly deluded,.for Syrian domination of Lebanon has meant that Syria has been playing off one factor against another, as well as using Lebanon as a base for proxy terror attacks against Israel
and against targets world-wide.
That Syrian strategy, now shared by Iran, should concern the entire international community. As for Israel, we have one, and only one, objective regarding Lebanon: to protect northern Israel against attacks launched from Lebanon. This is self-defense in its simplest form. We shall not let Israeli citizens pay with their lives for Lebanon's failure to control its territory. We shall continue to take the necessary measures to defend our people. We hope that Lebanon will produce an effective Government with which we can agree on permanent security arrangements. In the meantime we shall continue to work with any Lebanese party genuinely interested in preventing terror in the South of Lebanon and in the North of Israel.
The United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) has tried to assist in bringing stability to the area. It has performed a useful role. It has suffered painful casualties in the process, including losses sustained in a recent rash of murderous attacks. We extend ou£r deepest condolences to the bereaved families end their Governments. We must be clear, however, on what role UNIFIL can and cannot play. International forces are most effective when they serve as buffers between two States that share a commitment to pacifying their common border. Unlike Israel's neighbors on two other borders, that is not the case with Lebanon. That is why UNIFIL, unlike the multinational Force in the Sinai and the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) in the Golan Heights, has been unable to act as an effective buffer, since the day it was established by the United Nations. Peace-keepers cannot be asked to combat terrorists. That role must be left to the Governments and the peoples in the area of turmoil. We shall continue to co-operate with UNIFIL, as we maintain the necessary security arrangements to defend our norther border.
Israel watches with concern the larger conflicts waged in our region: those between radicals and non-radicals, between conservative regimes and revolutionaries, among militant religious movements, and among the various dictatorships themselves. But there is little we can do to affect this tragic and chronic violence. Where we can act - where we have acted and shall continue to act - is in the limited confines of the dispute between the Arab States and Israel.
Ever since Israel's independence we have made every effort to achieve peace with our neighbors. Peace for us is a natural and integral part of our heritage. The Jewish people is a democratic and free people striving to rebuild its national life in the ancient - the only - homeland of the Jews. Israel is a haven for the persecuted, a land where ever Jew from whatever background feels at home. We can best achieve our ideals and goals in an atmosphere of peace and security. Hence, we cherish peace? we pray for it and we teach its blessings to our children. Our entire people rejoiced when, after decades of war which were forced upon us, we were able to build a bridge of peace with one of our Arab neighbors.
During the past year we have made special efforts to broaden that peace. In July, Prime Minister Peres visited Morocco for talks with King Hassan. We have made efforts to reinforce the peace treaty with Egypt and to solve the problems that are still outstanding. We hope we are on the threshold of a substantial improvement in the relations between our two countries. Such an improvement is vital in and of itself, and of even greater importance for the prospects for peace
with other Arab States.
A few days ago we marked the eighth anniversary of the signing of the Camp David accords. With the passage of time we can see that those accords were a turning-point in the history of the Middle East. They have proved decisively that there is a way out of the cycle of belligerency, and they have demonstrated unequivocally that there is no alternative to direct negotiations. To this very day they remain the one and only blueprint for accommodation and peace between Israel and its Arab neighbors. All attempts to bypass, nullify or denigrate the Camp David accords have failed. Those attempts have been unsuccessful because they have disregarded the minimal needs of all parties, because they were not rooted in achievable proposals acceptable to all the sides.
Camp David accords are still the leading parties to which everyone concerned with peace in the Middle East turns. Together they hold the key to progress towards peace. With its commitment to the accords, Egypt has gained in prestige and stature. Many of those in the Arab world who once attacked and boycotted it are now looking to Egypt to play a leading role in peace negotiations. The United States, of course, is equally sought after. Many have come to appreciate the positive influence it brings to bear on the political process in our region.
For its part, Israel remains anxious and willing to move the peace process forward without delay. The peace treaty with Egypt was intended to be the first in a series of treaties that together would constitute a comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israel conflict.
Those who are afraid of peace or who are seeking to evade peace with Israel are trying to promote an alternative to direct negotiations, and ultimately to peace itself, through an international conference. Let me repeat again: Experience proves that the only path to peace is through direct negotiations. Substitutes for such negotiations can only lead us away from peace. The history of our region provides anple evidence of this simple truth.
The Government of Israel has repeatedly called upon King Hussein of Jordan to enter into direct peace negotiations with Israel. We recognize that once he decides to respond to our call Jordan may face considerable opposition from some Arab quarters. That opposition, however, will not be deflected or appeased by such devices as an international conference. Ultimately, Jordan will have to decide whether the advantages of peace with Israel outweigh the risks and difficulties involved in making such a move. But Jordan must understand that its peace will have to be with Israel, not with an international body. The first sign of a
genuine willingness to move towards peace is a declared readiness to deal directly with one's former adversary. There is no other way to a genuine reconciliation.
We firmly believe that the absence of democracy and freedom in our region is a major obstacle to peace. Only democracy offers the guarantee of freedom, the hope of progress and the prospect of peace. We do not believe any people want war. We do not believe the Arab peoples want war. Wars of aggression are initiated by Governments that do not represent the will of their peoples and fail to reflect their aspirations. That is why we must hope that democratic Governments will prevail throughout the Middle East on a not too distant day, for on that day true and permanent peace will come to our region. To hasten the coming of that day we call on all countries interested in peace in the Middle East strongly to support direct talks between Jordan and Israel. We call on them strongly to signify their willingness to buttress and strengthen a peace settlement by declaring their readiness to endorse it immediately. In addition, the supporters of peace should undertake to extend whatever assistance and support may be needed by the Government and the people of Jordan to embark on an ambitious development Program that will accompany the implementation of the peace treaty. The rewards of peace must be swift and exemplary, and serve to belie the words of its opponents.
Our region - the entire world in fact - is plagued by the spread of Arab terrorism. There is no limit to its atrocities. Even places of worship are not immune to this wanton murder. The recent attack on a synagogue in Istanbul was merely the latest and deadliest in a series of such attacks on Jewish places of worship. But Jews are not the only victims. Arab terror has made a blood pact with terrorists from all over the world to fight the common enemy, of which Israel and Jews are merely a part. That enemy is the community of democratic nations. The fight against this menace is therefore the fight of all civilized and free nations.
The so-called PLO was the linchpin of this alliance in terror; it pioneered the art of hijacking, bombing, kidnapping and massacre on an international scale. In the decade preceding 1982 the PLO used its mini-State in Lebanon to train and arm terrorist groups from five continents, from left-wing extremists to neo-Nazi gangs. Libya, Syria and Iran joined in financing, training and arming the terrorists and providing them with safe havens.
Since our action in Lebanon in 1982, the PLO has disintegrated into a number of rival terrorist gangs, most of them mercenaries in the service of various Governments. Their one common objective is to sabotage any attempt at peace and stability. The legacy of terror that they have created has encouraged other terrorist groups, many of them possessed by a mad desire to spread anarchy and terror for no reason whatsoever.
Much has been said about ways to combat international terrorism, but little has been done. Terrorism will continue to take its toll as long as the terrorists believe they can kill with impunity and achieve legitimacy and their political goals in the process. They must be denied these victories. They must never be appeased. They must never be "understood". They must always be condemned and fought vigorously. If we are serious in our desire to rid ourselves of international terrorism, we must adopt a broad and comprehensive campaign against the terrorists.
We must expel the representatives of terrorist organizations, starting with the PLO, from all countries committed to the fight against terror. We should hunt down the terrorist killers. They must always be on the run. But no matter what measures we take against the killers themselves, they will not be enough. If we do not go to the source, to the regimes whose support and protection make terrorism possible, we will not succeed in rolling back the tide of terror. We must isolate
and punish those terrorist States. We should shut down their embassies, expel their diplomats, curtail trade with them, and co-ordinate a military response if they persist in attacking us. Those who refuse to address the problem of State-supported terrorism are not merely failing to solve the problem? they are
facilitating its expansion.
Last year, from this rostrum, I spoke of three major threats facing the countries of the Middle East: the escalating race in conventional arms, the dangers of nuclear weapons, and the grave problem of chemical warfare. Unfortunately, little if anything has been done to reduce those threats. In fact, in some ways the situation has worsened in the past year.
The most dramatic development has been the increased use of chemical weapons by Iraq in its war with Iran. This has been investigated by the united Nations and condemned by the President of the Security Council on behalf of its members. There is also considerable evidence that other States in the Middle East, most notably Syria, are developing a chemical warfare capability. The free world should pool information on this subject and adopt concerted measures to prevent the development or acquisition of chemical and biological weapons. We cannot afford to cower before dictatorships that stockpile these inhuman inventories, especially since these regimes have shown no hesitation in using them.
To our disappointment, negotiations on a nuclear-weapon-free zone among the States in the region have yet to begin. It is our firm belief that, in an area as sensitive as the Middle East, the most effective and credible barrier to proliferation would be a freely and directly negotiated convention establishing a zone free of nuclear weapons. The Soviet Union and other socialist countries were among those which supported the establishment of our State in 1948. But things have changed. With the exception of Romania, all the Eastern-bloc countries have severed their diplomatic ties with us and adopted a one-sided policy towards the Middle East. We welcome, of course, any sincere attempt at improving relations and re-establishing diplomatic ties between us and any Eastern European country.
This year, for the first time in nearly 20 years, an official meeting took place in Helsinki between representatives of Israel and the Soviet Union. We hope that it is a sign of a positive change in the policy of the Soviet Union towards Israel. Without such a renewal of diplomatic relations and without a major change in the Soviet Union's policy towards Soviet Jews - especially the policy that prevents them from exercising their basic right of repatriation to Israel - it is difficult to see how the Soviet Union could contribute in any way to the attainment of peace in our region.
The plight of our Jewish brethren in the Soviet Union has been raised countless times by Israel's representatives and by world leaders; yet the tragic suffering continues. The hope that a new leadership in the Soviet Union would bring with it an improvement in the situation of Soviet Jewry has, so far, not been borne out. The condition of Soviet Jews, especially those among them wishing to leave for Israel, has deteriorated still further.
In a country of over 100 nationalities, speaking over 100 languages, Jews remain the only officially recognized nationality in the Soviet Union denied the right to maintain its cultural heritage and pass it on to the next generation. They are forbidden to study their ancient language, Hebrew. Throughout the entire length and breadth of the Soviet Union there is not a single Jewish school where Jews may study their history, literature and traditions.
In recent years, hundreds of thousands of Jews from the Soviet Union have expressed their desire to join their people in Israel. But the Soviet authorities have effectively stopped Jewish emigration; less than 500 Jews were allowed to leave during the first eight months of this year. Thousands have had their requests for exit permits repeatedly refused on the flimsiest of pretexts; as punishment for daring to apply to leave, they have been subjected to all manner of harassment and reprisals. Among those "refuseniks" are the prisoners-of-Zion, who have been subjected to arrests and lengthy terms of imprisonment on trumped-up charges. The real reason for their imprisonment is painfully clear: it is their insistence on their right to emigrate to Israel and their right to study Hebrew and persevere in their Jewish heritage.
The Soviet policy towards Soviet Jews is a flagrant violation of the International Convention on Human Rights, to which the Soviet Union is a signatory. It is totally contrary to the letter and spirit of the Helsinki Accords. The refusal of the Soviet Government to fulfill its most elementary humanitarian obligations must weigh heavily in the considerations of all who would contemplate entering into agreements with the Soviet Union on any subject.
Prom this rostrum, I call upon Governments and people of good will everywhere to urge the Soviet Government to bring its behavior towards Soviet Jews into line with universally accepted international standards. We in Israel will not rest until every Jew in the Soviet Union is permitted to exercise his right to emigrate and until Jews are free to follow their ancestral traditions and faith.
Another beleaguered Jewish community are the Jews of Syria. They are subjected by the Syrian regime to discrimination and restrictive policies. They are not free to live wherever they wish. Several hundred young Jewish women cannot
find husbands in the Jewish community. The Syrian Government has callously refused to allow then to leave the country so that they may marry within their faith and establish families. Jews who wish to travel abroad must leave their families behind as living hostages to ensure the travelers return. All that, too, is another instance of flagrant violation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, to which Syria is a signatory.
None of the problems I have described, including those relating to our region, is insoluble. They can be resolved if the Governments involved muster genuine good will, we turn again to the leaders of our Arab neighbors with an outstretched hand of peace. Let us bring an end to belligerency and hatred. Let us make real the hopes for a new era of understanding and coexistence. We shall not spare any effort in this quest, nor will we give up hope that it will bear fruit.
The eyes and hearts of millions of human beings who are wasting away from hunger and poverty, who live under oppressive regimes that deny them basic human rights, who are victims of barbaric terror, are turned towards us in the hope that we can alleviate their suffering. They look to us, to this body, for the hope of a better future. We cannot let them down and still claim fidelity to the ideals of this Organization. We bear the responsibility to begin action now for their sakes and for the sake of our place in history. Let us not forsake them, or our aspirations for a better and safer world.
Mr. President, I congratulate you on your election. We have a great deal of work to get through at this session. I know from my meeting with you yesterday that you will guide us skilfully through the rough water we will inevitably meet. Let me say, too, how good it is to see the Secretary-General restored to full health. We need his wisdom and courage at this time.
I appear here today as the representative of a small country from the southern reaches of the vast Pacific Ocean. Forty years ago my country was amongst those which pledged their commitment to the objectives of this world Organization. How much nearer are we, today, to achieving those ideals? Enormous problems confront us. Technology has expanded humanity's horizons into outer space. But here on earth we have not yet succeeded in providing basic human needs - food, shelter, and at least a minimum degree of security - for all. Under the Charter we have all abjured the use or threat of force. Yet the most powerful nations among us seem unwilling to take the decisive step of rejecting the weapons of mass destruction that threaten us all. Today, more than ever before, small States need the protection that the Charter and this Organization were intended to give. The United Nations was intended to represent our interests, for the powerful are better able to look after themselves. If we who are small are not to be ignored by those who are mighty, then we must work together here to ensure the survival of this planet.
New Zealanders know from recent experience that this Organization can respond quickly and fairly to the needs of small States which call for its help.
In 1985 my country was suddenly embroiled in a dispute with France. It concerned the detonation of bombs fixed to a ship at a wharf in one of our harbors. A crewman of Dutch extraction lost his life. The circumstances were widely blazoned across the world press and need not be further recapitulated.
Despite lengthy bilateral negotiations we were not able to solve the problem. With France, we then turned to the United Nations for help in finding an acceptable solution. Both countries undertook to abide unconditionally by the United Nations arbitration. The Secretary-General took on the task himself. He made a ruling which both Governments accepted without reservation. It has been carried out by both of us. I want to record my Government's profound gratitude to the Secretary-General for the commendable way he carried out that task. Through his mediator efforts we have been able to bring to an end that unhappy episode.
Our experience in the field of decolonization has also shown us, once again, how this Organization can help us in fulfilling our obligations to bring dignity and self-respect to all people. My country is responsible for helping bring to nationhood a tiny territory in the South Pacific: Tokelau; remote, beautiful, but with few resources other than the fish in the sea around the three small atolls and the determination of its peoples. Our Government invited a United Nations visiting mission there in July to see the unique development issues confronting that atoll community. I am pleased to see members of the mission here today. We have found, as in the case of other island nations whose histories have been entwined with ours, that the United Nations could indeed make a useful and innovative contribution to the process leading to self-determination. That is an example that could well be followed again in another case in the South Pacific; and I shall return to that later.
It is clear that the United Nations can help if small nations shew that they want it to do so. Nobody believes that problems that have bedeviled us for years will be solved overnight. But one thing is clear: whatever the issue -international security, the right to live in freedom and peace, or freeing the shackles on international trade - the small and the vulnerable have much more in common with one another than with the big Powers. Separately, we may achieve a little*, together we may yet move mountains, perhaps even the Rockies and the Urals.
Today there is no greater incentive for us all to work together than the need to bring under control the fast-quickening nuclear-arms race. Arms control and disarmament are not pious goals; they are immediate and desperate imperatives. Nuclear weapons have become the subject of a monstrous exercise in self-perpetuation. We know now that none of us, even those in as remote a place as New Zealand, or more remote still, could escape the consequences of their use. All too graphically the scientists have shown us that.
The central point, surely, must be that, when you have arsenals that can destroy humanity, you can have no security. By their very nature, nuclear weapons subvert and distort the intention of Governments to provide security for their people. So-called nuclear logic always seems to require the next terrible step: the production of a new weapon to prevent the last from being used. The ceaseless search for balance is really endless escalation; security, like a desert mirage, is never reached. We sink further into insecurity and fear. The balance of terror has been raised one more notch. It is well named. And despite the truly awesome consumption of resources, it seems we are edging towards yet another new and uncontrolled level of arms technology and spending. An arms race in outer space must not be permitted. Where one nuclear giant leads, the other will surely follow.
Of course, the arms race does not exist in a vacuum. It is a reflection of deep-seated distrust and scarcely concealed hostility. Only earnest diplomatic action aimed at sincere detente will remove the distrust. Only decisive political action can end the arms race itself. No one underestimates the difficulty of managing the transition to a world without nuclear weapons, which must be the ultimate goal - but the nuclear "logic" that equates more nuclear weapons with greater security cannot be allowed to go on sabotaging the process of arms control and disarmament negotiations. What security is there, I ask, in a system under which mischance, malevolence or madness may entomb not only the nuclear Powers, but all of us?
With the fate of the world in their hands, how can the two major nuclear Powers continue to refuse to respond promptly and positively to the overtures each has made to the other? The leaders of the United States of America and the Soviet Union, separately and together, have given indications that progress can be made. The tentative steps they have taken seem to shew that there is common ground. They agree on the need for deep cuts in nuclear weapons. Their proposals now lie on the negotiating table. They must not just lie there. The political will of the major Powers to end the arms race will be judged by what they do now to narrow the negotiating gap between them. An old adage says: "Procrastination is the thief of time." Time is fast running out. The nations of the world, all but a handful of them non-nuclear, cannot wait much longer; they have waited too long already.
Nor can we, the small countries, simply conclude that it is a problem only for the nuclear Powers to solve. He must take a hand, together. New Zealand welcomes the successful conclusion earlier this week of the Stockholm Conference on Confidence-Building Measures and Disarmament in Europe. As earlier speakers from both East and West have noted, the agreement should make a significant contribution towards reducing tensions in Europe. That benefits not only Europe, but the wider international community. The agreement is most welcome after a long period of stalemate on arms control and disarmament negotiations. But it is only a beginning. We urge the larger Powers to get on with resolving their wider differences. Meanwhile there are things which the small can do, steps which we can take in co-operation with one another to encourage disarmament.
Among practicable arms control measures, the most urgent is a comprehensive test-ban treaty; one that would ban all testing by all nations, in all environments and for all time. No other single step would do so much to slow the remorseless advance of nuclear-weapon production and experimentation, or to establish confidence in the will of the nuclear Powers to eliminate nuclear weapons from the world's arsenals. It would be a truly universal arms control measure.
There may be more than one route to a comprehensive test-ban treaty. The ending of testing by any State, even temporarily, is a step forward and should be welcomed. A mutual moratorium by two or sore would be better still, even if a temporary one. All such steps give time for talk and delay disastrous escalation.
There may be other provisional measures involving all the nuclear-weapon States which would help establish confidence and encourage a commitment to negotiate a permanent ban on testing. But none of these can be a substitute for a comprehensive test ban. The New Zealand Government will again join with others in calling on the Conference on Disarmament to start immediately with the work of drawing up a comprehensive test-ban treaty. New Zealand, too, is ready to take part in an international system for monitoring a test ban. We have some facilities in place for monitoring testing in our own region and are preparing to improve them.
There is room for smaller powers to act in the regional sphere, too, in practical ways that the United Nations has recognized as valuable. For its part, New Zealand will not permit nuclear weapons in our country, even temporarily, as on visiting ships or aircraft. We intend to keep our land, our waters and our ports, and our air space nuclear-free.
With the members of the South Pacific Forum, an annual gathering of 13 independent states, we have moved to establish a nuclear-free zone in the South Pacific. The Rarotonga Treaty was adopted over a year ago now. It prohibits the acquisition, stationing or testing of nuclear weapons by any of its parties. This year's forum at Suva adopted three Protocols to the Treaty. These call on the major nuclear Powers to respect the zone. I am glad to be able to tell you that some have already indicated their willingness to sign these Protocols. The New Zealand Government, along with others in the region, hopes they will soon be endorsed by all those countries eligible to sign. But, the South Pacific will not be free of the scourge of nuclear testing until France accepts that the security concerns of a distant European Government should not thwart the legitimate desire of the nations of the South Pacific to live in peace and safety in a nuclear-free environment. For too long, far too long, the Pacific has been used as a testing-ground by the nuclear Powers. Two of them stopped testing there long ago. It is time for France to follow their example. I would note also, in passing, that contrary to what has been said earlier in this debate, the report of the Scientific Mission that visited the French testing site at Mururoa Atoll in 1983 does not provide a basis for asserting that those tests "are being carried out in unquestionably safe conditions," (A/41/PV.8, p. 71). That report specifically refused to rule out the possibility of serious damage to the Atoll and its surrounding environment in the longer-term future.
The South Pacific countries are increasingly confident of their place in the international community, certain of what binds them together, determined to preserve their cultures, committed to the principles of democracy and consensus and willing to work closely with those nations that genuinely pursue co-operation.
The micro-States in the vast ocean region that I come from present unique development challenges. New Zealand makes a major contribution, and we welcome the assistance of other countries in the region's development. Such assistance, however, is only one contribution towards economic growth. Equally important are fair and equitable returns for the region's limited resources, the produce of its |	land, its slowly expanding manufacturing exports and, most important, its fish.
All that calls for international co-operation.
The United Nations was involved earlier this year in another major step forward in the development of the Pacific. On 28 May the Trusteeship Council recommended that the Trusteeship Agreement over the Federated States of Micronesia, the Marshall Islands, Palau and the Northern Marianas should be terminated. At its
meeting at Suva, the South Pacific Forum welcomed that development. New Zealand was a party to the Forum's consensus. The peoples of those Territories have said what they want. That is decisive. The United Nations has discharged its responsibilities, and the process of decolonization is coming nearer to completion in the South Pacific.
There is a lesson here for New Caledonia. Our experience of decolonization has shown us that the United Nations can help bring about peaceful evolution. The South Pacific Forum has always regarded New Caledonia as a neighbor that should take its place as an independent member of the South Pacific community. It is, by history as well as by unchangeable geography, an integral part of the region. Unless its stability is preserved, the stability of the whole region and all its member States will be seriously affected. Forum members are concerned that the Territory's move to independence should take place peacefully. That means by negotiation. France clearly has the power to bring about change peacefully. It is deeply disappointing to us and to our South Pacific neighbors, therefore, that in the approach recently outlined by the present French Government it seems that independence is no longer its goal for New Caledonia. I noted this morning the statement of the French Minister for Overseas Departments and Territories, reported in today's Herald Tribune. He said:
"When Australia and New Zealand are advocating independence for New Caledonia, they are advocating independence for a territory that would be under Libyan control."
Such a claim is farcical. We are not supporting any faction of the independence movement in New Caledonia. We support true self-determination for all real New Caledonians. The South Pacific Forum leaders have made it clear that they want to maintain a dialog with all the parties to see if a more promising situation can be brought about. The Heads of Government of the countries members of the South  Pacific Forum decided last month to seek the re-inscription of New Caledonia on the United Nations list of Non-Self-Governing Territories. That move was strongly endorsed by the Heads of State or Government of the countries of the Non-Aligned Movement at their meeting at Harare. My delegation, with other South Pacific com tries, welcomes that support. We look forward to a positive decision by the Assembly and to a constructive solution to New Caledonia's travail.
We all know that economic stability and prosperity are a necessary condition for real security. The need for international action by the vulnerable is as pressing here as it is in any other field. New Zealand, like many developing countries that are reliant on commodity exports, depends for long-term economic growth on its ability to trade fairly in those areas in which it has a comparative advantage. Yet we are being prevented from doing so by the absurdities of a distorted world trading system. Agricultural trade has generally been excluded from the international trade rules and disciplines. It is the first area to be hit by new protectionist measures, especially non-tariff barriers; it is the main victim of domestic production subsidies which, in the large developed countries have reached a level that even they now recognize as unsustainable. But it is the rest of us, the efficient producers, who have to deal with the massive over-production dumped cm world markets and that brings down returns for everyone.
The problems of agriculture are a time-bomb ticking away under the world trading system. An explosion would threaten not just the prosperity of individual countries but global economic and political stability. That is why New Zealand attaches great importance to progress in a particular United Nations forum, that of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). The new round of negotiations recently launched at Punta del Este offers a vital opportunity for the international community to establish just and equitable rules for the conduct of agricultural trade. That will be the measure of the new round's success. It has to succeed. It will not succeed without pain, as New Zealand well knows. But if it fails, the credibility of the whole multilateral system will be thrown into question.
There is a need for international action on Africa, too. New Zealanders have been deeply moved by the plight of the sub-Saharan people, who continue to be afflicted by drought and famine. New Zealanders continue to work alongside the Government in supporting churches and other organizations undertaking rehabilitation projects. In the week before the special session on the critical economic situation in Africa they contributed substantially yet again to an international appeal, in this case Sport Aid.
The outcome of the special session was welcomed as a starting point for planning strategies for the future. The endeavors to work out practical measures to bring about an end to Africa's economic and developmental problems are encouraging. The co-operation and commitment with which the special session's deliberations were conducted must be sustained if its sound recommendations are to be put into effect.
New Zealanders have also been shocked by events in southern Africa - the violence in South Africa's black townships, the South African Government's further repression of rights and freedoms, the attacks on defenseless targets in neighboring countries, carried out simply to give a political message, and South Africa's obstruction of Namibian independence. For a while, it looked as though the entirely reasonable approach adopted by the Commonwealth Eminent Persons Group might be successful in bringing all parties in South Africa together to negotiate a new political dispensation. The South African Government's rejection of those efforts, signaled as it was by the contemporaneous and wanton bombing of neighboring capitals, is to be deplored. Negotiation is always the preferable way to bring about necessary and lasting changes acceptable to the majority. The chances of a negotiated end to South Africa's troubles now look slim indeed. Such as they are, they must be grasped, or a holocaust will surely follow.
The common theme in each issue I have raised is the need for united action. And in each case it is clear that the United Nations can play a crucial part, provided it has the support of those - the overwhelming majority of its Members -who are small, whose individual power is slight. It is disturbing, therefore, to see a weakening - even a conscious undermining - of the commitment to multilateral action. It is long-standing political indifference or, in some cases, hostility, which is the cause of the United Nations financial crisis. The selective withholding of contributions - a practice in which one major contributor has recently joined another - cannot be condoned. Nor can the action of those who allow dues to fall into arrears. But we have all contributed to the current crisis. We have pretended to believe that political problems could be solved simply by calling for more financial resources, more studies, more staff. Well, we were wrong. Entirely new measures are necessary, at once more drastic and more constructive.
The Secretary-General took prompt and decisive action earlier this year to avert the immediate cash crisis. His package of measures was designed to contain the crisis this year. This Assembly must look at the longer term. It must be resolute.
For we are in no better shape financially now than we were in April. We must recognize this in looking at the proposals before us both for economies and for reform. By a positive approach we emphasize to those owing funds that, while we cannot accept their disregard of binding Charter obligations, we are prepared to help ourselves. We small States have the most to lose - so we must find a way forward.
We in New Zealand welcome the report of the High Level Group. We strongly endorse its consensus findings. We commend them to the membership. We must go on to develop quickly an agreed approach to the reform of the program and budget process,, We must begin to run this important Organization like any self-respecting business - in the interests, that is, of its shareholders, the Member States. In the process, all of us are going to have to accept some curtailment of our favorite programs. We accept that. Compromise from all will be required.
Reform of our finances, management and administration is the first requirement, for it is the prerequisite to efficiency.
More important in the end, though, is the way this Organization goes about fulfilling the objectives of its Charter. I found myself in complete agreement with some observations two days ago of the Foreign Minister of the Netherlands and I- cannot do better, in conclusion, than to refer to them. He said:
"Differences in ideologies and cultures are a fact of life. But polarization and mutual recrimination are not their inevitable corollary." (A/41/PV.9, p. 46)
I would add that although they are a possible and, as things stand, all too likely corollary, they are the very things this Organization was founded to dispel and to avoid for the future. They can only lead to ever deepening mistrust and hostility. It is no use pretending we are not going to disagree and from time to time disagree bitterly. What we must do is face that reality and instead of papering over differences by what the Netherlands Minister rightly called "the practice of false consensus", we must seek in a real spirit of reconciliation, and friendship, to find constructive and hopefully permanent solutions to the great and serious questions that today threaten to divide much of the world into two hostile camps. We must not risk being seen by future generations as having spent our brief and precious time here preparing for war, rather than working for peace.


We all come in turn to this important rostrum to speak of our perception of the world, our combined efforts produce a picture of present day international realities.
What is the picture that we see today?
 At first glance, the interval since the last session of the General Assembly has done nothing to brighten the panorama of our time. The intervening period has been marked by a number of factors which have aggravated existing concerns. The arms race has not been halted; it is advancing in a steep spiral. The danger of its spreading to outer space has become more real. Dangerous hotbeds of armed conflict persist. In many parts of the world, misery and poverty are becoming more acute.
Despite all this, we still believe that the International Year of Peace will go down in history as something more than just a symbol of peace.
I should like to draw the Assembly's attention to some trends which enable us to speak of glimmers of light on the world's horizon. They should be noted by everyone of us, for they should strengthen our resolve to act even more vigorously. They should be noted by all the peoples, who are tired of bearing the burden of fear and anxiety. They should be noted by the world as a whole, which is becoming an increasingly interdependent and indivisible whole, and which may no longer be able to withstand strain and destruction.
Hope breeds optimism. In the words of Mikhail Gorbachev: "Everywhere in the world there is a growing conviction in the minds of the peoples and in political public circles and widely differing in their orientation and outlook that what is at stake is the survival of mankind and that the time has come for decisive and responsible action." Wfe see a glimmer of light in the fact that at a time so crucial for mankind the peoples of the world, and an increasing number of Governments, are becoming aware of the need to adopt a new way of thinking in line with the realities of the nuclear and space age.
The time is at hand when considerations of groups, blocs or ideologies are beginning to give way to the understanding that peace is the supreme value. Only if peace is translated from declarations >a x> practical action is there a chance for survival. This new way of thinking is bringing that truth into the foreground. Whole groups of countries, the Non-Aligned Movement, political parties, public organizations and anti-nuclear forces are putting forward promising ideas for ending the nuclear deadlock. A favorable background is emerging for
developing a dialog.
An exception to this trend is the policy pursued by the imperialist forces. This contrast, however, only emphasizes the general will for action, for concrete practical deeds.
It is becoming a fact of life that vast territories are being declared nuclear-weapon-free zones. Democratic majorities are taking such decisions through
democratic procedures.
Political leaders who claim that they are committed to democracy, should
become aware of the contradictions between their behavior and their declared principles. Instead of building up and counting warheads, they should be counting the votes of these who call for the complete elimination of weapons of mass destruction.
Unfortunately, in some countries the institutions of democracy are being outweighed by the immoral arithmetic of military superiority. But it is an indisputable fact that the call for action is no longer a voice crying in the wilderness. On the contrary, even in the wilderness of the Nevada desert calls are being heard for an end to nuclear testing. The Nevada explosions are new registered not only by us but also by United States scientists with their instruments installed near the Soviet city of Semipalatinsk.
At the same time, not a single seismograph in the world is registering nuclear explosions on our territory - not because of any lack of sensitivity on the part of the instruments, but because the Soviet Union is responsive to the will of the world community.
In pursuing the foreign policy proclaimed at the Twenty-seventh Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, our co lei try is taking specific, practical steps. One of the most important is the unilateral moratorium on nuclear explosions. This is precisely the kind of action that proves the sincerity of our intentions and the seriousness of our concern for the future of the world.
For more than a year now the Soviet testing sites have remained silent. Listen to this silence? it is very eloquent. If it were accompanied by a similar silence at United States test sites, that more than any words would tell mankind that what we are witnessing was the beginning of a movement towards realizing the
idea of a nuclear-free world.
Stopping the tests means not allowing the emergence of new types of nuclear
weapons and barring the way to the creation of nuclear space weapons. We call upon
the United States to join us in this forward march and not call us back to carrying
out explosions, as it proposed here yesterday. A bilateral moratorium, followed by
a multilateral one, is one of the most important links in the chain of actions
which could lead to the creation of a comprehensive system of international peace and security.
In its determination to make this a reality, the Soviet Union, together with other socialist countries, has submitted proposals on this subject for the Assembly's consideration. We are convinced that the creation of this system that would embrace the political, military, economic and humanitarian fields would be in
keeping with the interests of all States and peoples.
The sponsors of this proposal make no claim to have discovered a hitherto unknown political "continent". If there are any blank spots today they exist mainly in the field of concrete, practical measures. To clear the way for such action would indeed be a discovery of the highest order. The proposed bases for security are consonant with the principles of the United Nations Charter and designed to promote their implementation within the specific conditions of our day. Here, we are looking forward to a most democratic and constructive discussion and the collective creative efforts of all countries.
The idea of comprehensive security presupposes first and foremost material guarantees of peace, political and international legal safeguards and the establishment of principles of civilized and respectful relations among States. A safe world is a world of law and order, in which there is strict compliance with the united Nations Charter and respect for all rules of international law, for human rights and freedoms.
Our initiative contains an answer to the question of what should be done to save life on Earth. As we speak of this the abandoned villages in the area of the Chernobyl nuclear power plant stand before our eyes. That accident has meant for us more than grief over our losses and compassion for its victims. It has reinforced our anxiety for the future of the Earth. Chernobyl was a tragic mistake on the part of human beings working with the peaceful atom. But still less are there any guarantees against mistakes with the military uses of the atom. Given the existence in the world of 50,000 nuclear warheads, we are living on borrowed time and no one knows when that time will run out.
What should be done? Continue to play the game of nuclear roulette? It is
clear even now that, sooner or later, this could lead us to collective suicide and
self-destruction. There is only one way out: before it is too late, while there
is still time, the game played for insane stakes and in which there can be no
winner must be stopped. Stop once and for all this deadly gambling with nuclear death.
It is within the powers of the international community, the sole sovereign master of its own fate to do this. No single nuclear Power has the right to take decisions on behalf of all, and the USSR refuses to do so. In his historic statement of 15 January, the Soviet leader proposed something quite different - to scrap all nuclear weapons. Once again the criterion is experience.
Political responsibility is the opposite of political arrogance. The problem of nuclear testing clearly highlights these mutually incompatible approaches.
There are other facts. Look at the fate of the SALT I and SALT II treaties. They are being torn up now because they allow no room for equipping a 131st bomber with cruise missiles. One thousand, five hundred such missiles seemed too few, so
it was necessary to add 20 more.
The tribunal of history is merciless in its verdicts. If political leaders fail to take timely and responsible decisions, history will not forgive them. We have a chance to lay the foundations for lasting peace. Of course it is not just a matter of adopting yet another resolution. The United Nations must establish a system of values which gives the highest priority to practical actions.
Let ma emphasize that this is being stated by the representative of a nuclear Power. We never wanted to acquire nuclear weapons, but from the time we were forced to acquire them we have constantly sought to limit, reduce and eliminate them. We are not the last member of the "nuclear club", but we are proposing its dissolution. Let there be no mistake - we have our pride like anyone else. However, the prestige and dignity of a great Power are things we associate with the
equal security of all.
We are motivated by our sense of responsibility both to our own people and to other peoples. It is for this reason precisely that we are willing to agree to sensible compromises and make realistic concessions when we put forward proposals for the reduction of strategic offensive weapons and medium-range missiles. This reflects the new approach to the realities of the nuclear space age outlined most fully and comprehensively in Mikhail Gorbachev's report to the Twenty-Seventh Congress of our Party.
The sincerity of our intentions and the integrity of our position are matched by our determination to put an end to the dangerous course of world events. We are putting so much emphasis on the renunciation of nuclear-weapon tests because it is precisely this that is the real test of the sincerity of declarations.
Yesterday we heard the statement of the President of the United States. It is regrettable that the rostrum of the General Assembly was used in such a way. To respond point by point to that statement presents no problem. However, to enter into polemics would be to show a lack of respect for our audience. The subject under discussion is far too serious to turn it into a grindstone for sharpening political wit. Time is too precious to be wasted on refuting misconceptions and prejudices that distort reality and facts.
Nevertheless, there is one key point to which we must refer, because it is of fundamental importance. I am referring to the attempt to provide a philosophical rationale for the assertion that new sophisticated military technology is capable of reliably ensuring security. It is precisely that kind of philosophy that caused the tidal wave of armaments which has been growing year after year and now threatens to obliterate the Earth.
There is only one path to security - destroying existing weapons instead of replacing them with new ones. The technology of destruction must not be allowed to determine policy.
One can imagine the sigh of relief among people if they heard that in this International Year of Peace the United States, too, had decided to stop nuclear testing. That is what they had been expecting from the United States President,
I have been authorized to state that the Soviet Union is ready, at any time and anywhere, to sign a treaty on the total prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests. We are ready to do so here at the United Nations, so that the entire world community could become part of this great act and historical turning-point which would be a sign of respect for its will.
Words not matched by deeds are worthless, but words supported by deeds are a country's gold reserve.
We urge those who make verbal pronouncements in favor of eliminating nuclear weapons to follow up with practical deeds. Otherwise whatever they say about the inhumanity of nuclear weapons is no more than a rhetorical mirage behind which there looms an altogether different policy.
Its proponents iWe a favorite argument, verification. But that argument
increasingly resembles a tattered curtain. Broadly speaking, there is no longer
any problem of verification. In the conviction that there can be no trust without
verification, the Soviet Union is open to any form or method of verification.
In our view the summit conference of the non-aligned countries at Harare made some very valuable recommendations in this respect. The United Nations could support the proposals of the Delhi Six - Argentina, Greece, India, Mexico, Tanzania and Sweden - on monitoring compliance with the obligation not to carry out nuclear tests. The Soviet Union will accept recommendations formulated under the auspices of the United Nations.
We agree with those States which believe that the question whether mankind will live in a nuclear or a nuclear-free world must be decided by the whole world community and not by a small group of nuclear Powers.
This also applies fully to the future of outer space, for near-Earth space is the common heritage of mankind and should be used for the benefit of all. However, if weapons gat into space, this heritage would become a threat to all? just two or three States enjoying the status of military-space Powers would then dominate the rest of the world.
Is that what we want? Do we want a military-space fiefdom to be established? The question is posed by the course of events, which may become tragic for
international relations as a whole. Therefore we shall continue to work to protect outer space from attempts to turn it into a military domain of one or two Powers.
Today those designs are being camouflaged with high-sounding pronouncements about a defense program, which supposedly would do away with the threat of attack once and for all. One hears moving and soul-stirring stories about a dream which when realized would free mankind from the fear of nuclear death. Evil designs are being purveyed as good intentions, and swords as shields.
Let no one be misled by such talk. It serves to conceal an attack against the main pillar of stability, the anti-ball is tic-missile Treaty. The intention is to get the Treaty out of the way within a time frame of seven years. Here everything is being very carefully calculated, for it is precisely in seven years that they plan to prepare space weapons for deployment.
The question is. What for? Would it not be more sensible to work for an agreement on the complete elimination of nuclear missiles, whether strategic, medium-range or any other, as we are proposing?
The answer is simple; whatever is done to disguise it, the so-called defensive space shield is being designed to carry out a first strike with impunity. The first strike could become the last one, and not just for the country being attacked. Space weapons, like nuclear arms, do not recognize national boundaries, and they do not choose whom to spare and whom to destroy. And in any circumstances they could threaten, not one country or several countries, but the entire world.
Therefore we consider it necessary to warn everybody that if space is to remain peaceful everyone must protect it.In this, the United Nations, the only legitimate trustee of peace in outer space, should make its voice heard.
We also call for the help of the United Nations in regard to a matter of extreme importance - the elimination of chemical weapons. Encouraging progress has been achieved at the Geneva Conference.
The historic goal of ridding the earth of chemical weapons is new closer to attainment. The only thing that could hinder the attainment of that goal is the position of the United states, which is seeking to develop binary weapons. However, obstacles can be removed if political will is evinced - and this Organization is quite capable of stimulating it.
A comprehensive system of international security has more than nuclear, space or chemical parameters. Security implies the non-use of any force, including conventional armaments and armed forces.
The Soviet Union calls for a significant reduction in the level of military confrontation, above all between politico-military alliances. Radical proposals to that effect, based on the concept of reasonable sufficiency, have been made by the States members of the Warsaw Treaty.
I shall say even more. We would certainly not want our troops to be present anywhere beyond our national borders. This question is also open for discussion and can be resolved in an atmosphere of increased trust and with the implementation of measures of military detente.
A beginning has already been made in the Stockholm forum, and all of us - not just the Europeans - can congratulate ourselves and each other on this triumph of reason and good will. It has given us something more than just a major agreement. It has demonstrated that when we really want something, we can achieve it. It has confirmed that the Helsinki process is being successfully developed and has taken deep roots in European soil. It is now extremely important that the forthcoming meeting in Vienna should become yet another milestone in Europe's advance towards reliable security and improved co-operation.
The Asian and Pacific region should also be allowed to breathe freely. Our ideas in this regard are incorporated in a concrete program of action that was outlined in Mikhail Gorbachev's address in Vladivosfaock. We are encouraged that this program has proved to be in harmony with the feelings of many States of the region.
We are aware of all the sore spots existing in the region. First of all, there is the Korean peninsula. The people of Korea yearn for an aid to the division of their country. There is only one impediment to that, namely the presence of United States troops, which in effect occupy the southern part of the country.
The situation around Kampuchea is another source of tension. Here again the fate of the entire people is being sacrificed to the geopolitical interests of certain States. To serve those interests, some are trying; to consign to oblivion the millions of human lives destroyed by the reactionary anti-national clique. This must not be allowed to happen.
The constructive proposals of Kampuchea, Laos and Viet Nam open the way for resolving the region's problems on a broad political basis and stabilizing the situation in South-Bast Asia.
Untying those and many other knots would undoubtedly contribute to the strengthening of peace and security in the Asian and Pacific region, and we are doing our best to promote this.
The positive changes new under way in our country's relations with the People's Republic of China are important not only in terms of bilateral co-operation; they are also conducive to the improvement of the overall situation.
New and increasingly rich substance is being added to our traditional friendly relations with the people of India and its Government. The Soviet Union values good relations with many Asian States and wishes to discuss with them, in particular with the members of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), ways of upgrading relations where they are as yet below the desired level.
Measures to eliminate regional conflicts would form an organic part of the concept of comprehensive security. Of course, there is not, nor can there be, a uniform model for a political settlement here. Nevertheless, concrete expression must be given to some general principles. Those are, first, unconditional respect for sovereignty, independence and the right of nations themselves to choose their way of development; secondly, a respectful attitude towards legitimate Governments; thirdly, respect for the obligations and agreements concluded between States in full conformity with international law.
Every regional conflict is a difficult test for the United Nations This is particularly true with regard to those territories where the emblem of the United Nations symbolizes special responsibility. Unfortunately, it is all too often darkened by the shadow of unfulfilled hopes.
The time has long since come to put to effective use all the powers of this Organization, to exercise all its rights. This applies above all to the fate of the Namibian people and to the Trust Territory of Micronesia. Their problems are as old as the United Nations.
The Middle East problem is somewhat "younger". There must not be many people present in this Hall who participated in the adoption of the resolution on the division of Palestine. Today, we are once again voicing our view that along with the State of Israel, which owes its existence to, among others, the Soviet Union, an Arab Palestinian State should become part of the world's political map.
We believe that the United Nations should again take the matter of a Middle East settlement into its hands. As a practical step in that direction, the Soviet Union proposes that a preparatory committee be set up within the framework of the Security Council to do the necessary work for convening an international conference on the Middle East.
The tragedy of the people of Cyprus has been going on for so many years now. Here as well there has been no lack of mediation efforts and plans for a settlement. Various options have been tried, but the proposal that the problem of Cyprus be settled at a representative international conference under the auspices of the United Nations has been studiously evaded. Who stands to gain from that? Only those forces which intend to use the island for their military and political plans. Raising the stick of "neo-globalism" over the Mediterranean, they would like to turn the entire region into a hotbed of tension. They sometimes use that stick without giving any thought to the consequences, as was done with barbaric cruelty in Libya.
Since the very beginning of the war between Iraq and Iran, the Soviet Union has been calling for a stop to that senseless mutual extermination. Being sincere friends of both nations, we are making use of the possibilities available to us to convince the parties to the conflict that they should make peace. We shall continue to do so.
It is our conviction that were it not for the racist regime of Pretoria the black, white and colored people in South Africa would have long ago found a common language - a language of equality, concord and racial peace. The dividing line is drawn not by ethnic differences but by the cruel policy of apartheid, which is hostile to everyone, irrespective of the color of the skin. To fail to see that is to encourage, wittingly or unwittingly, genocide against the majority of the South African people.
The world community has just spoken out unequivocally about the situation in southern Africa, and it is up to the Security Council now to adopt binding decisions, embodying in them the will of the absolute majority of the world's nations.
Recently, a new and ugly phenomenon of "prepaid" regional conflicts has appeared in international practice. A graphic example is Nicaragua, into which millions of dollars are being channeled to finance the massacre of peasants and the destruction of villages and plantations - only because that small country has dared to choose its own way of development which, in the eyes of the administration of the world's largest and most powerful capitalist nation, appears to pose a threat to its security.
The undeclared wars against the legitimate Governments of Afghanistan, Kampuchea, Angola, Mozambique and Ethiopia are paid for in exactly the same way. And quite often the country financing a conflict maintains diplomatic relations or conducts negotiations with the Government concerned, while at the same time seeking to overthrow it by any means. Indeed, it does not mind the cost when blacklisting Governments and countries which, for some reason or other, it finds inconvenient. Thus, the entire range of reprisals, from direct military to economic and ideological, has been used against the Republic of Cuba for more than a quarter of a century. But surely it is high time to understand that such a policy is bankrupt and that it can only be described as insane.
Political wisdom dictates acknowledging the established realities and not seeking to undo them arbitrarily. Describing gangs of mercenaries as "freedom fighters" - which is attempted in the war against Afghanistan - does not help. The time has come to learn to call things by their own names. With regard to Afghanistan, a national democratic revolution has taken place there. Its social base is constantly becoming broader and stronger; it relies on the support and participation of all social strata and ethnic groups in that country without any exception. They have a clear-cut program for a peaceful settlement of crisis phenomena, and all that is needed is not to hamper that positive process. Here again, the Soviet Union is in favor of seeking new solutions and a fresh approach, unobscured by prejudice, that would help to identify ways of solving the problem with due regard for the legitimate interests of the Afghan people and of its friends and neighbors.
A comprehensive system of international security can give us the keys to many of the most intricate locks.
We have outlawed, as most other States have, any form of terrorism. At the same time, we are prepared to contribute, and are already contributing, to fighting that plague. No sane person can live with it. Terrorism must be mercilessly eradicated, for innocent people suffer and die because of it. But to combat it effectively we also should see its causes. One should not ignore the nature of that abhorrent phenomenon: outbursts of individual and group terror are sometimes engendered by imperialist violence against entire peoples. An improvement in the overall international situation would do much to help stamp out terrorism.
An obstacle to an improved international climate is posed by neo-globalism. It entails diktat and aggression; it tramples upon the independence of nations. The alternative to it is a comprehensive system of security.
The arms race and regional conflicts inevitably have an adverse effect on the world economic system. And while politicians, futurologists and experts are trying somehow to model a structure of security in a world with or without weapons, no one can come even close to predicting the economic consequences of the situation as it evolves. Yet the explosion with which it is fraught would be no less catastrophic than a possible malfunction in the technologies of war.
Today, militarism is not only jeopardizing man's physical survival but his socio-economic progress as well. The cost of the arms race is reaching a level comparable to the material damage caused by past world wars. All of this makes disarmament imperative.
Against the background of the uncontrollable crisis affecting the world economic structure we see with particular clarity the increasingly prevalent process of purging out resources from the national economies of the developing countries of Latin America, Africa and other regions. In the early 1980s the developing world, exploited by imperialism, was pushed into a vicious circle of development via debt, and it now finds itself hung up in the noose of a trillion dollar indebtedness. This, in effect, means that regions with the world's greatest concentration of population, resources and future markets are sliding towards economic catastrophe.
That is why we regard economic security as an integral part of a comprehensive system of international security. When it begins to function, it will be possible to set up a fund for assistance to the developing countries and to draw up, under United Nations auspices, a global program of scientific and technological co-operation.
In our opinion, a comprehensive system of international security is inconceivable without wide-ranging and open co-operation in the humanitarian field. We are strongly in favor of expanded international co-operation in implementing political, social and individual human rights, and we urge everyone to take a fresh, unbiased look at that problem. Specifically, at the Bern meeting the Soviet Union proposed that steps be taken by all States bring their domestic legislation on the whole range of humanitarian problems into conformity with international norms. Unfortunately, another approach emerged at the Bern meeting, one that ignores the consensus among most of the participants in that dialog. Here, the United States of America undermined the adoption of any agreement.
The path of detente is a path towards greater openness in societies, towards a better level of objective information, towards nations' mutual familiarization with each other's life and towards the strengthening of the spirit of mutual understanding and accord in their relations.
Whatever the field of international relations we turn to, the role of the United Nations can be seen as indispensable and its responsibility as great, "today, with the emergence of a new consolidation of the forces of progress and peace, the members of the Organization should have as their common concern the enhancement of United Nations authority and prestige and the increased effectiveness of its decisions. The dedicated work of Mr. Perez de Cuellar as Secretary-General of the United Nations at a difficult time for the Organization evokes deep respect, and we would like to thank him cordially.
The United Nations is on the verge of serious changes. It is impossible to restructure relations among States without taking into account altered realities. The Organization could only gain were the country presiding as Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement to participate, in one form or another, in the work of the Security Council.
Recent events have once again focused attention on an odd phenomenon, the country that once offered the site for United Nations Headquarters today all-too-often shows intense hostility towards the Organization. It slams the door and refuses to fulfill its obligations, as has been the case with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), or tries to assert the principle that whoever has the most money is right. It puts spokes in the wheels of the collective machinery with the notion that by so doing that machinery can be made to function according to its will. The United States has adopted the practice
of lecturing, punishing and arbitrarily threatening the Organization as a whole and those of its members it dislikes for some reason. Lately, the States Members of the United Nations have begun to ask with increasing frequency whether the United Nations can function normally in a country whose Government shows such undisguised disrespect for them and for the Organization itself. Perhaps that question should be heeded. It might be useful to hold a special debate in the United Nations on the numerous accumulated problems of the operation of the Organization.
The Organization's universality implies a forward thrust towards rapprochement and towards the elimination of centrifugal forces. In light of the proposed concept of comprehensive security, the East-West, North-South polarities can and must be expunged from the political vocabulary. That is what socialism is calling for. Whatever its antagonists assert, socialism is opposed to confrontation and intransigence in the most important pursuit of mankind: the construction of a durable and guaranteed peace. We have adopted that system of priorities in our relationship with the United States as well. This question has already been addressed here yesterday. Let me say that we are far from regarding our relations with the United States as holding no promise particularly since we have a high regard for the American people. Lately, encouraging outlines of meaningful agreements have been emerging. A summit meeting is also a realistic possibility. We could move forward fairly smoothly, if that is what the United States side wants. We are realists, and we do not draw inspiration from Utopian ideas. At the end of the last century, people envisioned the coming twentieth century as a golden age. But reality has dashed those expectations. Today, on the threshold of the twenty-first century, the objective reality is such that it could become either the golden age of science or the age of nuclear permafrost. The material means for bringing about either outcome already exist. The question is, which of them will be put to use?
The danger for civilization is ail-too evident. Hence the need for responsible, concerted action to prevent any possible catastrophe. We have made our choice. The Soviet Union - and I quote the words of Mikhail Gorbachev - will "continue to use every opportunity for productive dialog, for progress towards arms limitation and reduction, as well as towards the settlement of regional conflicts and the development of international co-operation in all areas of importance."
We think that in our deliberations it is very important that we never lose sight of the real scale of time and of the world. The language of which some politicians are so fond obscures that scale in a fog of nebulous abstract concepts, as if what is involved were not the Earth, but some other, remote, planet. Yet it is the Earth that we see before us in the images of our children and grandchildren, our fathers and mothers, our sisters and brothers, all those who are close and dear to us and with whom each of us identifies the concepts of "nation," "country" and "mankind."
This is the only acceptable yardstick. And one should not adjust his political telescope as though his sole interest were whether there is, indeed, life on Mars. All of us must answer one question, a question that is equally important to all: whether there will be life on Earth. We would very much like to answer, with confidence: Yes, there will be!
A short walk from this Hall is the delegates' Meditation Room, a refuge from a world deafened by the noise of strife and violence. "We want to bring back the idea of worship", Dag Haramarskjold once said about this room, "devotion to something which is greater and higher than we are ourselves".
It is just such devotion that gave birth to the United Nations: devotion to the dream of world peace and freedom, of human rights and democratic self-determination, of a time when, in those ancient words, "... they shall beat their swords into plowshares ... nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more".
The United States remains committed to the United Nations. For over 40 years, this Organization has provided an international forum for harmonizing conflicting national interests and has made a significant contribution in such fields as peace-keeping, humanitarian assistance, and eradicating disease. Yet, no one knows better than those in this Hall how the noble ideals embodied in the Charter have often remained unfulfilled. This Organization itself faces a critical hour - that
is usually stated as a fiscal crisis. But we can turn this "crisis" into an opportunity. The important reforms proposed by the Group of Experts can be a first step towards restoring this Organization's status and effectiveness. The issue, ultimately, is not one of cash but of credibility. If all the Members of this universal Organization decide to seize the moment and turn the rhetoric of reform into reality, the future of the United Nations will be secure. And members have my word for it: My country, which has always given the United Nations generous support, will continue to play a leading role in the effort to achieve its noble purposes.
When I came before the Assembly last year, an important moment in the pursuit of those purposes had not yet occurred. The leaders of the Soviet Union and the United States were to meet in Geneva. These discussions have now been held. For over 15 hours, the Soviet and American delegations met. For about five hours, General Secretary Gorbachev and I talked alone.
Our talks were frank. The talks were also productive - in a larger sense than even the documents that were agreed. Mr. Gorbachev was blunt; so was I. We came to realize again the truth of the statement: Nations do not mistrust each other because they are armed; they are armed because they mistrust each other. And I did not hesitate to tell Mr. Gorbachev our view of the source of that mistrust: the Soviet Union's record of seeking to impose its ideology and rule on others. So we acknowledged the deep and abiding differences between our systems of government, our views of history, and the future of mankind. But, despite these differences, we resolved to work together for real reductions in nuclear arms, as well as progress in other areas.
Delegates to the forty-first session of the General Assembly of the United Nations, today I want to report to you on what has transpired since the summit, notably the important letter X sent on 25 July to Mr. Gorbachev. In that letter, I dealt with the important issues of reducing nuclear arms, agreeing on strategic defenses, and limiting nuclear testing. In addition to those issues, which concern the military aspects of Soviet-American relations, I would also like to address other essential steps towards peace: the resolution of political conflicts, the strengthening of the international economy, and the protection of human rights.
Before I do this, however, let me, in the tradition of candor established at Geneva, tell you that a pall has been cast over our relations with the Soviet Union. I refer here to a particularly disturbing example of Soviet transgressions against human rights.
Recently - after the arrest of a Soviet national and united Nations employee accused of espionage in the United States - an American correspondent in Moscow was made the subject of fabricated accusations and trumped-up charges. He was arrested and jailed in a callous disregard of due process and numerous human rights conventions. In effect, he was taken as a hostage - even threatened with the death penalty.
Both individuals have now been remanded to their respective ambassadors. But this is only an interim step, agreed to by the United States for humanitarian reasons, it does not change the facts of the case: Gennadi Zakharov is an accused spy who should stand trial; Nicholas Daniloff is an innocent hostage who should be released. The Soviet Union bears the responsibility for the consequences of its action. Misusing the United Nations for the purposes of espionage does a grave disservice to this Organization.
The world expects better. It expects contributions to the cause of peace that only the leaders of the United States and the Soviet Union can make.
It is for this reason that I wrote last summer to Mr. Gorbachev with new arms control proposals. Before discussing the proposals, let us be clear about which weapons are the most dangerous and threatening to peace. The threat does not come from defensive systems, which are a shield against attack, but from offensive weapons - ballistic missiles that hurtle through space and can wreak mass destruction on the surface of the Earth - especially the Soviet Union's heavy, accurate ICBMs, with multiple warheads, which have no counterparts in size or number in any other country.
That is why the United States has long urged radical, equitable, verifiable reductions in these offensive systems. Note that I said reduction; for this is the real purpose of arms control: not just to codify the levels of today's arsenals, not just to channel their further expansion, but to reduce them in ways that will reduce the danger of war. Indeed, the United States believes the prospect of a future without such weapons cf mass destruction must be the ultimate goal of arms control.
I am pleased to say that the Soviet Union has now embraced our idea of radical reductions in offensive systems. At the Geneva summit last November, we agreed to intensify work in this area. Since then, the Soviets have made detailed proposals which, while not acceptable to us, appear to represent a serious effort. So we continue to seek a 50 per cent reduction of American and Soviet arsenals - with the central focus on the reduction of ballistic missile warheads. If the Soviet Union wants only a lesser reduction, however, we are prepared to consider it but as an interim measure. In other provisions as well, we have sought to take account of Soviet concerns. So there has been movement.
Similarly, in the area of intermediate-range nuclear forces, the United States seeks the total elimination of such missiles on a global basis. Again, if the Soviet Union insists on pursuing such a goal in stages, we are prepared to conclude an interim agreement without delay.
All this gives me hope. I can tell representatives that the exchanges between our two sides this summer could well have marked the beginning of serious, productive negotiation on arms reductions. The ice of the negotiating stalemate could break, if both sides intensify their effort in the new round of Geneva talks and if we keep the promises we made to each other last November.
For too long a time, however, the Soviet response has been to downplay the need for offensive reductions. When the United States began work technology to make offensive nuclear weapons obsolete some day, the Soviets tried to make that the main issue - as if the main danger to strategic stability was a defense against missiles that is still on the drawing boards, rather than the menacing ballistic missiles themselves that already exist in excessive numbers.
Still, the United States recognizes that both the offensive and defensive sides of the strategic equation must be addressed. And we have gone far to meet Soviet concerns expressed about the potential offensive use of strategic defensive systems. I have offered firm and concrete assurances that our strategic defense initiative could never be used to deploy weapons in space that can cause mass destruction on earth. I have pointed out that the radical reduction we seek now in offensive arsenals would be additional insurance that strategic defense initiative cannot be used to support a first-strike strategy. Our preference from the beginning has been to move forward co-operatively with the Soviets on strategic defenses, so that neither side will feel threatened and both can benefit from the strategic revolution that strategic defense initiative represents.
The United States continues to respect the anti-ballistic missile Treaty - in spite of clear evidence that the Soviets are violating it. We have told the Soviets that, if we can both agree on radical reductions in strategic offensive weapons, we are prepared right now to sign ah agreement with them on research, development, testing and deployment of strategic defenses based on the following.
First, both sides would agree to confine themselves, through 1991, to research, development and testing, which are permitted by the anti-ballistic missile Treaty, to determine whether advanced systems of strategic defense are technically feasible.
Secondly, a new treaty, signed now, would provide that, if after 1991 either side should decide to deploy such a system, that side would be obliged to offer a plan for sharing the benefits of strategic defense and eliminating offensive ballistic missiles. This plan would be negotiated over a two-year period.
Thirdly, if the two sides cannot agree after two years of negotiation, either side would be free to deploy an advanced strategic defensive system, after giving six months* notice to the other.
As the United States has repeatedly made clear, we are moving towards a future of greater reliance upon strategic defense. The United States remains prepared to talk about how - under what ground rules and process - we and the Soviet Union can do this co-operatively. Such strategic defenses, coupled with radical reductions in offensive forces, would represent a safer balance and give future statesmen the opportunity to move beyond it - to the ultimate elimination of nuclear weapons from the face of the Earth.
In addition to our proposals on offensive reductions and strategic defense, we have suggested new steps in another area - nuclear testing. Just as eliminating all nuclear weapons is our long-term goal, so too is a total ban on nuclear
testing; but both must be approached with practical steps. For the reality is that for now we still must rely on these weapons for the deterrence of war; thus the safety and reliability of our deterrent are themselves critical to peace.
The United States is proud of its record of nuclear safety and intends to maintain it. Nevertheless, we are as I said, ready now to take two important steps towards limiting nuclear testing: first, we ace ready to move forward on ratification of the Threshold Test Ban Treaty and the Treaty on Peaceful Nuclear Explosions, once agreement is reached on improved verification procedures. We have proposed new ideas to make this possible; secondly, upon ratification of those treaties - and in association with a program to reduce and ultimately eliminate all nuclear weapons - we are prepared to discuss ways to implement a step-by-step parallel program of limiting and ultimately ending nuclear testing.
Those are steps that we could take in the near future to show the world that we are moving forward. I therefore call upon the Soviet Union to join us in practical, attainable progress in limiting nuclear testing.
Just a few days ago I received a reply from General Secretary Gorbachev to my letter of 25 July - and, for the moment, let me say simply that we are giving it
As we move towards our goal of eliminating nuclear weapons, it is vital that we also address important imbalances in other kinds of weapons. This is why the United States has proposed a comprehensive global ban on all chemical weapons and why we and our allies have tried hard to break the stalemate in the conventional force negotiations in Vienna. In the Stockholm Conference a major advance has been achieved: a concrete new set of military confidence-building measures which
But we must remember from the experience of the 1970s that progress in arms control cannot be divorced from regional political developments. As I said at the beginning, political tensions cause military competition, not the other way around.
However, while the United States and the Soviet Union disagree over the root causes of political tension, we agree that regional conflicts could escalate into global confrontation. Last year, from this rostrum, I presented a formula for peace which would apply to five critical regional conflicts that are potential flash points for wider conflicts. I pointed out how difficult it is for the United States to accept Soviet assurances of peaceful intent when 126,000 Soviet troops prosecute a vicious war against the Afghan people; when 140,000 Soviet-backed Vietnamese soldiers wage war on the people of Cambodia; when 1,700 Soviet advisers and 2,500 Cuban combat troops are involved in military planning and operations in Ethiopia; when 1,300 Soviet military advisers and 36,000 Cuban troops direct and participate in combat operations to prop up an unpopular, repressive regime in Angola; when hundreds of millions of dollars in Soviet arms and Soviet-bloc advisers help a dictatorial regime in Nicaragua try to subvert and betray a popular revolution.
The danger inherent in these conflicts must be recognized. Marxist-Leninist regimes tend to wage war as readily against their neighbors as they routinely do against their own people. In fact, the internal and external wars often become indistinguishable. In Afghanistan, for example, the puppet regime has announced its intention to relocate tens of thousands of people from border areas, Can anyone doubt this will be done in classic communist style - by force? Many will die, to make it easier for the Soviets and their satellite troops to intimidate Pakistan.
It is just such transgressions that make the risk o£ confrontation with democratic nations so acute. So, once again, I propose a three-point peace process for the resolution of regional conflicts: first, talks between the warring parties themselves, without which an end to violence and national reconciliation are impossible; secondly, discussions between the united States and the Soviet Union - not to impose solutions but to support peace talks and eventually eliminate the supply of arms ^and the proxy troops from abroad; thirdly, if the talks are successful, joint efforts to welcome each country back into the world economy and the community of nations that respect human rights.
In addition to regional disputes, the grave threat of terrorism also jeopardizes the hopes for peace. No cause, no grievance can justify it. Terrorism is heinous and intolerable. It is the crime of cowards - cowards who prey on the innocent, the defenseless, and the helpless.
With its allies and other nations, the United States has taken steps to counter terrorism directly - particularly State-sponsored terrorism. Last April, the United States demonstrated that it will defend its interests and act against terrorist aggression. Let me assure all of you today, especially let me assure any potential sponsors of terrorism, that the American people are of one mind on this issue. Like other civilized peoples of the world, we have reached our limit. Attacks against our citizens or our interests will not go unanswered.
We will also do all in our power to help other law-abiding nations threatened by terrorist attacks. To that end, the United States believes that the understandings reached by the seven industrial democracies at the Tokyo summit last May made a good start towards international accord in the war on terrorism. We recommend to the General Assembly consideration of the Tokyo resolutions.
Moving to the economic realm, how ironic it is that some continue to espouse such ideus as a "new international economic order" based on State control when the world is learning, as never before, that the freedom of the individual, not the power of the State, is the key to economic dynamism and growth. Nations have turned away from centralized management and government controls and towards the incentives and rewards of the free market. They have invited their citizens'to develop their talents and abilities to the fullest and, in the process, to provide jobs, to create wealth, to build social stability and foster faith in the future for all. The economic summits of the industrial democracies have paid a tribute to these principles - as has the historic United Nations special session on Africa in
Hay. We applaud the African nations' call for reform leading to greater reliance on their private sectors for economic growth. We believe that overcoming hunger and economic stagnation requires policies that encourage Africa's own productivity and initiative; such a policy framework will make it easier for the rest of the world, including the United States, to help. The laws of economic incentives do not discriminate between developed and developing countries. They apply to all equally.
Much of the recent recovery in the world economy can be directly attributed to this growth of economic freedom. And it is this trend that offers such hope for the future. And yet this new hope faces a grave threat: the menace of trade barriers. History shows that the imposition of such barriers invites retaliation, which in turn sparks the very sort of trade wars that plunged the world in the 1930s deeper into depression and economic misery. Truly, protectionism is destructionism.
That is why the United States seeks the assistance of all countries represented here in the General Assembly in protecting the practice of free and fair trade. We applaud the success of the meeting of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) trade ministers last week in Uruguay, where agreement was reached to launch a new round of multilateral trade negotiations covering a wide range of topics important to economic growth, with over 90 other countries members of GATT, the United States is working to maintain the free flow of international trade.
In addition to resistance to protectionism, the United States is also seeking to stimulate world economic growth in other ways. Our Treasury bill interest rate is now just over 5 per cent, the lowest it has been in nine years - which provides enormous relief to debtor countries. America's new tax structure will open the way for greater prosperity at home, which will contribute to greater prosperity abroad.
Finally, the united States is working with other countries to minimize currency swings, to promote stability in the monetary markets, to establish predictability as a basis for prosperity.
But, the United States believes the greatest contribution we can make to world prosperity is the continued advocacy of the magic of the market-place - the truth, the simple and proven truth, that economic development is an outgrowth of economic freedom just as economic freedom is the inseparable twin of political freedom and democratic government.
And it is here that we come to our final category - human rights - the indispensable element for peace, freedom, and prosperity. I note that Mr. Gorbachev has used in recent speeches the same categories I have used here todays the military, the political, and the economic; except that he titled his fourth category: humanitarian.
The difference is revealing. The United States believes that respect for the individual, for the dignity of the human person - those rights outlined in the United Nations Universal Declaration of Hunt i Rights - does not belong in the realm of charity or "humanitarian" causes. Respect for human rights is not social work; it is not merely an act of compassion, it is the first obligation of government and the source of its legitimacy.
It also is the foundation-stone in any structure of world peace. All through history, it has been the dictatorships and the tyrannies that have surrendered first to the cult of militarism and the pursuit of war. Countries based on the consent of the governed, countries that recognize the inalienable rights of the individual, do not make war on each other. Peace is more than just an absence of war. True peace is justice, true peace is freedom. And true peace dictates the recognition of human rights.
Commitments were made more than 10 years ago in Helsinki concerning those rights and their recognition. We need only look to the East today to see how sadly unfulfilled those commitments are. The persecution of scientists, religious leaders, peace activists, political dissenters, and other prisoners of conscience continues unabated behind the Iron Curtain. You know, one section of the Helsinki Accords even speaks to: "improvement of working conditions of journalists".
So, it is clear that progress in the human rights area must keep pace with progress in other areas. A failure on this score will hinder further movement in East-West relations.
These, then, are the areas of concern and of opportunity that the United States sees in the quest for peace and freedom - the twin objectives of the United Nations Charter.
Last year, I pointed out in my address to the General Assembly the differences between the United States and the Soviet Union are deep and abiding. But I also called for a fresh start in relations between our two nations, a fresh start that could benefit our own people and the people of every nation. Since that time, the United States has taken action and put forth new proposals that could lead our two countries and the entire world in a direction we all have long sought to go. Now more than ever, it is the responsibility of the Soviet Union to take action and demonstrate that they too are continuing the dialog for peace.
As I have said, I believe that we can be hopeful about the world and the prospects for freedom. We only need look around us to see the new technologies that may some day spare future generations the nightmare of nuclear terror, or the growing ranks of democratic activists and freedom fighters, or the increasing movement towards free market economies, or the extent of world-wide concern about the rights of the individual in the face of brute, State power.
In the past, when I have noted such trends - when I have called for a "forward strategy for freedom" and predicted the ultimate triumph of democratic rule over totalitarianism - some have accused me of telling people what they want to hear, of urging them not: to engage the day but to escape it.
Yet, to hope is to believe in humanity; and in its future. Hope remains the highest reality, the age-old power; hope is at the root of all the great ideas and causes that have bettered the lot of humankind across the centuries.
History teaches us to hope - for it teaches us about man, and about the irrepressible human spirit, A Nobel laureate in literature, a great figure of the American South, William Faulkner, once said that the last sound heard on earth would be that of the two remaining humans arguing over where to go in the spaceship they had built. In his speech to the Nobel Committee in 1950, Faulkner spoke of the nuclear age, of the general and universal physical fear it had engendered, a fear of destruction that had become almost unbearable. But, he said:
"I decline to accept the end of a man. I believe that man will not merely endure: he will prevail. He is immortal ... because he has a soul, a spirit capable of compassion and sacrifice and endurance."
Faulkner spoke of the old verities and truths of the heart, of the courage, honor, pride, compassion, pity, sacrifice and, yes, that hope which is the glory of our past. And all of these things we find today in our present; we must use them to build our future. It is why today we can lift up our spirits and our hearts; it is why we resolve that with God's help the cause of humanity will not merely endure but prevail; that some day all the world - every nation, every people, every person - will know the blessings of peace and see the light of freedom.

