
In the name of the Chinese delegation, may I begin by warmly congratulating you. Sir, on your election to the presidency of the forty-second session of the General Assembly. I am sure that with your ability, wisdom and experience, you will fulfil this noble mission with distinction. I would also like to take this opportunity to express my appreciation and thanks to your predecessor, Mr. Humayun Choudhury, for his positive contribution to the work of the previous session.
Over the past year, people of the world have made unremitting efforts on various fronts in pursuit of peace and development and achieved new and encouraging results. The third world and many small and medium-sized countries have played an active role in international affairs, exerting an increasingly great influence. This shows that the forces for peace have grown in strength. There have been ever-stronger demands for a halt to the arms race and to aggression and expansion, and for genuine disarmament and an early settlement of regional conflicts. Under the circumstances, the United States and the Soviet Union have kept up their dialogue and there has appeared a somewhat relaxed atmosphere in East-West relations.
However, factors causing international tension and turbulence are still present. The arms race, far from coming to a halt, is extending into outer space and other high technology fields. None of the hot-spots in the world has been removed, and certain regional conflicts even threaten to escalate. The world economic situation remains grim. Many developing countries are faced with increasing difficulties and the North-South contradiction has become more acute than ever. All this cannot but cause grave concern to China and all the other countries which uphold justice and strive for peace and development. In order to join in a common search for effective solutions to those problems, I now wish to set forth the Chinese Government's position and propositions. 
It is the universal demand of the world's people and the consistent stand of the Chinese Government to stop the arms race and to remove regional conflicts. Effective disarmament constitutes an important link in the efforts to ease international tension and to maintain world peace. Since the resumption of the Geneva arms control talks between the United States and the Soviet Union in 1985, we have all along hoped that they would, through serious negotiations, reach agreements conducive to world peace and not detrimental to the rights and interests of other countries. Now there has been progress in their intermediate nuclear forces (INF) talks. The two sides have reached agreement in principle to adopt the global "double-zero option" on long range intermediate nuclear forces and short range intermediate nuclear forces. We hold that dialogue is better than confrontation, and relaxation better than tension. World peace is indivisible, and European security and Asian security are equally important. If the United States and the Soviet Union could formally conclude an INF treaty and implement it by thoroughly destroying all their long-range intermediate nuclear missiles and short-range intermediate nuclear missiles deployed in Europe and Asia, that would be a first step towards nuclear arms reduction and would undoubtedly be welcomed.
Of course, there is still a long way to go and much work to do before genuine disarmament can be realized. Even with the long range intermediate nuclear forces and short range intermediate nuclear forces dismantled, the nuclear weaponry of the United States and the Soviet Union would only be reduced by less than 5 per cent and each would still retain a nuclear force capable of destroying the world several times over. To maintain world peace and security, there should be complete prohibition and thorough destruction of all types of nuclear, space, chemical and biological weapons as well as other weapons of mass destruction, and a substantial reduction of conventional arms. 
The people of all countries long for development in peace. Disarmament is an urgent task, but the disarmament talks have been proceeding very slowly, since the INF talks alone have dragged on for almost six years, negotiations on strategic arms reduction or other disarmament issues will be even more difficult. If things move along at this pace, when could the approximately 50,000 nuclear warheads ever be destroyed completely? When could the above disarmament goals ever be reached? Naturally, the international community strongly hopes that the United States and the Soviet Union will drastically reduce their armaments as soon as possible, and that after reaching an INF agreement they will proceed to conduct earnest negotiations on disarmament in other areas and reach agreements followed by effective implementation. They should not stand still, let alone vie with each other in developing new types of even more sophisticated weapons in the wake of an agreement to dismantle INF missiles.
In order to promote disarmament, the Chinese delegation last year submitted to the General Assembly two draft resolutions on nuclear and conventional disarmament, which were adopted with the broad support of other United Nations Members. The two draft resolutions emphasized that the countries possessing the largest arsenals bear a special responsibility for disarmament and should take the lead in drastically reducing their nuclear and conventional armaments. This is the key to progress in disarmament. In the world today, it is the United States and the Soviet Union that possess the largest nuclear and conventional arsenals, and they alone are capable of launching a world war. if they could take the lead in drastic arms reduction, the threats to world peace would be greatly diminished.
China has not only actively put forward its views and proposals on disarmament, but has also taken a series of concrete actions towards disarmament. On the very first day when China came into possession of nuclear weapons, in 1964, we declared unilaterally that at no time and under no circumstances would China be the first to use nuclear weapons. We have also undertaken not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon States or nuclear-free zones. We neither advocate nor go in for nuclear proliferation; we do not help other countries develop nuclear weapons. China respects and supports the countries and regions concerned in their endeavour to establish nuclear-free zones or zones of peace on the basis of voluntary agreement to be reached through consultation among themselves. We have signed the additional protocols of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and of the South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty. Furthermore, in recent years we have stopped atmospheric nuclear testing, reduced the size of our armed forces by one million and cut down our military expenditures. We have also shifted some military industrial facilities to civilian production and put some military installations to civilian use or dual use.
Disarmament is an arduous and complicated task. Progress in disarmament requires the good faith of the countries concerned and, more importantly, the persistent efforts of all peace-loving countries and people. On the question of disarmament, which concerns the future of the world and the destiny of mankind, all countries, whether big, small or medium-sized, nuclear or non-nuclear, should have an equal say, and each has a positive role to play. Europe experienced the holocaust of two world wars and is now a place of direct confrontation between the two major military blocs. East and West European countries are particularly concerned about disarmament, which is closely related to their own security, and have played an important role in promoting the United States-Soviet arms control talks. When addressing the question of disarmament, the legitimate rights and interests and reasonable proposals of every country should be fully respected and taken into serious consideration.  Disarmament agreements of any kind should help to enhance the security of every country and region in the world and not to weaken 
Here I should like to refer to the recently concluded International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development, which unanimously adopted the final document through the concerted efforts of all sides. That Conference is of positive significance in heightening the international community's awareness of the close relationship between disarmament and development,
A fair and reasonable settlement of regional conflicts and the elimination of hot-spots are of great importance in easing international tension and safeguarding world peace. Despite the efforts made by the United Nations and by many justice-upholding countries towards this end in the past year, no substantive progress has been made so far. That is essentially because certain countries, in disregard of the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and the basic norms governing international relations, have refused to implement the relevant United Nations resolutions and have persisted in their policies of aggression and expansion. They have continued their occupation of other countries' territories and have kept encroaching upon others' sovereignty and interfering in others' internal affairs. As a result, regional conflicts have been continuing and it is difficult to remove the hot-spots in the world. 
China Is consistently opposed to the threat or use of force In International relations and Is all the more opposed to acts of aggression and Interference against other countries by any country under whatever pretext. It Is our view that the commission of aggression by one country against another Is the most serious international crime, which must in no way be confounded with the Internal problems of the country under aggression. China has always maintained that the five principles of mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful co-existence should be strictly observed by all countries in the world. We are in favour of a fair and reasonable political settlement of any regional conflict, because it is in the fundamental interests of the countries concerned and of world peace.
To achieve a fair and reasonable political settlement of a regional conflict, the primary requirement is to stop aggression and expansion against, and terminate military occupation of, other countries. Foreign troops must immediately and unconditionally withdraw from the territories they occupy, and the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of the countries under aggression must be restored. No country can get away with keeping the gains of aggression and expansion under the pretext of a "political settlement".
To achieve a fair and reasonable political settlement of a regional conflict, it is also necessary for the people of the countries or regions concerned to solve their own problems, free from outside interference, and to observe the principle of genuine self-determination. Disputes between States should be settled by the countries concerned through negotiations, in line with the basic norms governing international relations. Internal disputes of a country should be settled by its own people. To achieve a fair and reasonable political settlement of a regional conflict/ all parties concerned must observe the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and the five principles of peaceful co-existence.
The key to the settlement of the Kampuchean question lies in Viet Nam's cessation of its aggression and the speedy withdrawal of all its troops from Kampuchea. The United Nations General Assembly has adopted many resolutions in this regard. The Association of South-East Asian Nations (AS£AN) and other justice-upholding countries have also made sustained efforts to seek a political settlement of the question. Under the pressure of international public opinion, the Vietnamese authorities have over the year talked a lot about a "political settlement" but have in fact failed to show any sincerity. Their stubborn position of aggression and expansion has remained unchanged. Up till now, they have continued with their military occupation of Kampuchea under various pretexts, in defiance of the relevant United Nations resolutions. Being clearly the aggressor, the Vietnamese authorities bear an unshirkable responsibility on the question of Kampuchea. Yet, they brazenly try to disguise themselves as an outsider, insisting that Kampuchea's "national reconciliation" must come before their troop withdrawal. The kind of "political settlement" they have proposed is, to put it bluntly, designed to make the International community accept the Vietnamese aggression and occupation of Kampuchea as a fait accompli, prop up a Vietnamese-controlled "government" and ensure the Vietnamese vested interests gained through aggression and expansion. This is of course unacceptable to the coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea, the ASEAN countries and all justice-upholding countries and people.
China seeks no self-interest in Kampuchea. Our principled position on the Kampuchean question is to safeguard the norms governing international relations,
oppose aggression and uphold justice. We consider it essential to include in
 

earnest the relevant resolutions of the previous sessions of the United Nations General Assembly, we support Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the ASEAN countries and the United Nations Secretary-General in their efforts to seek a just and reasonable settlement of the Kampuchean question. The eight-point proposal on a political settlement of the Kampuchean question put forward by the coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea headed by Prince Norodom Sihanouk is fair and reasonable. It has won extensive sympathy and support from the international community and should serve as the basis for the settlement of the Kampuchean question. We are confident that provided Viet Nam withdraws all its troops from Kampuchea under international supervision, the Kampuchean people, led by the prestigious, great patriot Prince Norodom Sihanouk, will solve their internal problems through consultation free from outside interference, effect true national reconciliation and choose their new government through United Nations-supervised free elections, so that Kampuchea will become an independent, peaceful, neutral and non-aligned country. This will be in the interest of peace and stability in that region and in the rest of South-East Asia. Once the parties concerned reach agreement on a settlement of the Kampuchean question, China will be ready to join other countries in a relevant international guarantee.
The "cease-fire" declared by the Kabul regime has not put an end to the war in Afghanistan. As a matter of fact, the encirclement and suppression of the resistance movement, the killing of innocent civilians and incursions into Pakistan have been going on all the same. As long as the foreign aggressors do not	.
withdraw, the war of resistance to aggression will not stop. It is clear that "guarantee first, troop withdrawal next" or "reconciliation first, troop withdrawal afterwards" are nothing but excuses for putting off the withdrawal of troops from Afghanistan. If the Soviet Union really wants a political settlement, it should
comply with the relevant resolutions of successive sessions of the United Nations
 
General Assembly and withdraw all its troops from there as soon as possible. This is the key to the settlement of the Afghan Question and the only way to heal the "bleeding wound". We support Pakistan and other countries concerned and the United Nations in their efforts for a fair and reasonable settlement of the Afghan question. It is our hope that Afghanistan will regain its status as an independent, sovereign, neutral and non-aligned country at an early state.
The convening of an international conference on the Middle East question under the auspices of the United Nations is a feasible way to seek a peaceful settlement of the said question. The Chinese Government supports the United Nations Secretary-General's efforts towards this end. We hold that the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), recognized internationally as the legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, has the tight to participate in the conference on an equal footing with other members. China is always opposed to the Israeli policy of aggression and expansion and firmly supports the just struggle of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples to recover the occupied territories and restore their national rights. We sincerely hope that the Arab countries and the PLO will remove their differences through friendly consultations, close their ranks and co-ordinate their actions in a common endeavour towards an early, just and comprehensive settlement of the Middle East question.
At present, the situation in the Gulf is becoming more turbulent, with sharp confrontation in the region. The Chinese Government has expressed grave concern over this. We have all along taken a position of neutrality and of promoting reconciliation between Iran and Iraq and have urged them to bury the hatchet as soon as possible, engage in peaceful reconstruction and strive for further development rather than wearing themselves out in the war. Security Council resolution 598 (1987)" adopted unanimously by the Security Council through concerted efforts by all the members reflects the strong desire of the international community for e speedy end to the Iran-Iraq conflict and has provided a good basis for a peaceful settlement of the conflict. We appreciate the valuable contributions made by the Secretary-General of the United Nations to the implementation of this resolution and support him in his continued endeavours to ensure this. China has made and will continue to make efforts to promote comprehensive implementation of the resolution. With the desire to see an early end to the sanguinary conflict and the restoration of peace stability and prosperity In the Gulf region, the Chinese Government once again calls upon Iran and Iraq to stop immediately all their military actions and to implement Security Council resolution 598 (1987) in real earnest, in co-operation with the Security Council and the Secretary-General, so as to seek a just, reasonable and comprehensive settlement of the Iran-Iraq dispute. The Chinese Government also calls on the parties concerned to exercise restraint and ensure free and safe passage in the international waterways in the Gulf. It further calls on the big Powers to stop their military involvement in the Gulf so as to avoid escalation of the conflict, leaving the littoral countries of the Gulf to solve the Gulf problems themselves through consultations.
Over the past year there has been an ever-surging movement in South Africa and Namibia, with a steady growth of the struggle against the foreign rule and for national liberation and independence. The South African racist regime, though more and more isolated, la clinging obstinately to its apartheid system and brutally suppressing the South African people. It has kept Namibia under its illegal occupation and wilfully harassed its neighbours, trying hard to delay and Obstruct settlement of the problem of southern Africa. The Chinese Government strongly condemns the perverse acts of the South African authorities. We will, as always, firmly support the just struggle of the peoples of South Africa, Namibia and the rest of southern Africa. We call on the international community, and particularly countries that have influence with South Africa, to support the struggle of the peoples in southern Africa and, through further pressure and effective sanctions, force the South African authorities to abandon their policies of apartheid and of destabilizing the neighbouring countries and implement Security Council resolution 435 (1978) unconditionally, thus paving the way for the early independence of Namibia.
Recently, an important step forward has at last been taken in the peace process in Central America after repeated setbacks. The document entitled "Process for the establishment of firm and lasting peace in Central America", signed more than a month ago at a summit meeting of five Central American States, is of positive significance in easing the tension and turbulence in the region. That document gives expression to the desire of the Central American States for peace and is a result of the peace mediation of the Contadora and Lima groups. We sincerely hope that all the parties concerned will respect the hard-won achievements of the meeting so as to facilitate the smooth implementation of that accord and bring about peace and stability in Central America at an early date without interference from outside.
Tension on the Korean peninsula can be eased only through reduced military confrontation and increased contacts and dialogue between the north and the south of Korea. The Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea has recently put forward successive proposals, such as phased disarmament by both the north and the south, withdrawal of United States troops and tripartite talks by the north and south of Korea and the United States at the Foreign Minister level. Those proposals are constructive and reasonable and we hope that they will receive a favourable response from the parties concerned.
The present world economic situation is yet another major issue about which the international community is deeply concerned. Over the past year economic growth in developed countries has remained slow and the economic friction among them has been exacerbated. The developing countries are faced with unprecedented serious difficulties owing to their worsening external economic environment. The prices of many of their primary products have remained at the lowest level since the end of the Second World War, while the export of their manufactured goods has been hindered by ever-increasing trade protectionism. The export earnings of the developing countries have plummeted, while the inflow of funds has dropped drastically. The debts of developing countries, which exceeded $US 1 trillion last year, are weighing more and more heavily on them. Under the circumstances, their economic growth on the whole remains very slow and their difficulties are mounting, although they have made strenuous efforts to achieve economic readjustments or reforms. In the case of the least developed countries, there are even more difficulties.
The world economy is an integral whole. The North and the South need each other and are interdependent. The economic stagnation and growing poverty of developing countries are bound to affect the world economy as a whole and, naturally, the economic growth of the developed countries. Those that benefit the world will benefit from the world. The developed countries should do their best to improve the world economic environment and help developing countries overcome their economic difficulties. To this end, we wish to put forward the following propositions.
First, the developed countries should adopt measures to stabilize the prices of primary products and provide financial assistance to the developing countries for diversifying their export commodities so as to help stabilize and increase their export earnings. 
Secondly, the developed countries should honour their commitment to reduce and stop protectionist trade practices. They should also expand the treatment granted to the developing countries under the Generalized System of Preferences. The interests of the developing countries should be taken fully into account in the new round of multilateral trade negotiations.
Thirdly, the developed countries should try to fulfil as early as possible the official development assistance quotas set by the United Nations and provide more funds to the developing countries in other forms. International financial bodies should also make efforts to provide funds to the developing countries on favourable terms in the light of their actual conditions.
Fourthly, debtor and creditor nations, international financial institutions and commercial banks should share the responsibility for the solution of the debt problem and agree upon practical measures through continued dialogue so as to reduce as much as possible the debt burdens of the developing countries.
Fifthly, special preferential treatment should be given to the least developed countries in respect of trade, funds, assistance and debt, and effective measures should be adopted to implement the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990, approved unanimously by the special session of the United Nations General Assembly last year.
During the Seventh United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) held not long ago there were extensive discussions on such questions as the development of resources, commodities, world trade and the least developed countries, thereby creating favourable conditions for the furtherance of the North-south dialogue. We hope that at the current session the General Assembly will make new progress on this basis in its deliberations on the Questions concerned. We hold that the developed and developing countries should continue and step up dialogue and work together to establish a new type of North-South relationship, a just and rational relationship based on equality and mutual benefit, so as to strengthen international co-operation and revitalize the world economy.
China is marching forward along the road of building a socialist society with Chinese characteristics. Now, stability and unity prevail throughout the country. Reform and the open policy are being implemented steadfastly. The Chinese economic registers a sustained and steady growth, and the people's living standards keep improving. Of course, we are fully aware that China's productive forces are cooperatively weak and its economic relatively backward. China is still at the Initial stage of socialism. During this fairly long historical period, our main: task is vigorously to expand the productive forces so that China will gradually lift itself out of poverty, backwardness and underdevelopment. To this end, we must persist in reform and opening up at home and to the outside world, work hard to develop a planned commodity economy and continue to expand our economic and technological exchange and co-operation with other countries in the world, leading to a dynamic and rapid development of the productive forces. The forthcoming thirteenth National Congress of the Communist Party of China will review the historic changes that have taken place in China in the past nine years, reaffirm a series of fundamental principles and policies that have proved effective and give a theoretical exposition of reform and the open policy. The Congress will draw up new plans aimed at accelerating and deepening the economic structural reform, and work out a blueprint for political structural reform with a view to promoting the cause of socialist modernization.
Like reform and the open policy, China's independent foreign policy of peace is also our fundamental State policy which will remain unchanged for a long time. By pursuing this policy, China aims at both securing a lasting international environment of peace for our socialist modernization drive, and fulfilling its responsibilities and obligations for world peace and development in tune with international developments. The policy is in keeping with the fundamental interests of the people both of China and of the world as a whole. By persisting in reform and the open policy as well as in the independent foreign policy of peace, China will develop faster and contribute more to mankind.
As the most important global organization of our time, the United Nations is playing an important role in maintaining peace, promoting development and strengthening co-operation. We are glad to see that such a role is being further strengthened. At its last session, the United Nations General Assembly adopted - through efforts on various sides - the resolution on the strengthening of administrative and financial efficiency of the United Nations. At present, the United Nations is at a critical juncture of its reform. We support this world body in its efforts to introduce necessary and rational reforms so as further to improve its efficacy and give better expression to the purposes of the Charter. The United Nations is the Organization of all the countries in the world, and it needs the support of all its Member States. It is our hope that the big Power directly responsible for the current financial difficulties will fulfil its obligations as provided for by the Charter. As a permanent member of the Security Council, China will, as always, strictly abide by the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and discharge its obligations in real earnest. We are ready, together with other Member States, to make our contributions to further strengthening of the role of the United Nations in its many areas of endeavour.
﻿
Mr. President, I offer you sincere congratulations on having been elected to your high office and wish you luck and success in carrying out your responsible task. At the same time I extend my thanks to Foreign Minister Choudhury for his circumspect and successful guidance of the forty-first session of the General Assembly, which ended a few days ago.
I also take the opportunity cordially to thank the Secretary-General for his untiring endeavours on behalf and in the interest of our Organization. His latest report gives us confidence and a perspective for the future. As in the past, he can count on our unqualified support. The principal task of the United Nations is to maintain and safeguard peace. We begin this session of the General Assembly with hopeful signs of new thinking in West-East relations and in the field of disarmament. Yet the world is still filled with war: war between countries, in which people suffer and die; man waging war on man, for where human rights are violated war is being conducted against man; global terrorism is waging war against order in every form; deadly diseases are waging war on life; mankind is waging war on nature; and what is the hunger and poverty suffered by many nations but the outcome of war on human dignity through man's failure in North and South? 
In the final analysis, it is always man who threatens man. Our children cannot be blamed for the state of the world, but it is they who suffer most. They expect us to give them a world free from war, free from expulsion, free from fear, free from hunger and disease. Parents all over the world love their children. But ate we in the United Nations really doing enough to protect the rights and the future of our children? We want to leave our children a better world, a world in which human dignity and social justice are guaranteed, in which peace prevails and in which the natural foundations of life are protected and cultivated.
But, above all, we must fight against the war inside us as well as that outside us. Peace begins within ourselves; it begins in the mind, with respect for our neighbour and awareness of our responsibility for that neighbour and for all who will come after us.
War strategies must be superseded by peace strategies. We want peace in a comprehensive sense. If we fail in our task, none of us will survive. Hence, the crucial task today is to ensure the survival of mankind. Mankind has become a community in pursuit of survival. No one can steal away from our common fate. A nuclear war would destroy us all.
Contaminated rivers, seas and soil, desertification, dying forests - especially tropical forests - and the widening hole in the ozone layer are all problems that affect and concern us all.
A few weeks ago the world population passed the 5 billion mark. If the present demographic trend continues the world community will number more than 6 billion by the turn of the century. Our children will live to see that day. If we do not act the world's problems will pass beyond our control solely as the result of population growth. Now is the time to set the right course. This is the responsibility of every civilization, every religion, every ideology and every political and social system.
The call must be; fight the wars that threaten mankind from all sides. The peace we need is more than the elimination of military conflicts. It implies common responsibility, solidarity and respect for our neighbours. Peace implies making our world human. It implies respecting our natural environment. It implies securing freedom, life and the survival of mankind.
Many people live in poverty, exposed to hunger, ignorance and disease. The prospects for the third world depress us all. Commodity prices are falling. This means that developing countries must continuously increase production, and this in turn reduces prices still further.
In the industrial countries, however, demand is on the wane because markets for certain commodities are satiated and other commodities are increasingly being replaced by new materials. The disintegration of commodity prices is not a temporary market fluctuation  it is a long-term trend. For most developing countries, however, commodities are still the principal - indeed, in many cases, the only - source of income. Thus their one-sided dependence on commodity exports must be reduced. We must help them to turn their raw materials into manufactures and semi-manufactures of their own. But the diversification of an economy takes time. Until that point is reached, ways and means must be sought of improving existing arrangements, as in the case of the European Community's Community model for off-setting shortfalls in export earnings.
Last year the indebtedness of the third world rose by 9 per cent, to l trillion. In 1986 over 30 per cent, and in some cases nearly 50 per cent of the income of 22 sub-Saharan countries was mortgaged for debt service. The debt problem threatens to explode. It is a threat to the economic, social and political future of many heavily indebted countries, but it also poses a threat to donors. It threatens to undermine the will of North and South to co-operate with one another.
All those concerned, whether in the public or the private sector, need to increase their efforts. Every country should be treated according to its special circumstances. But the general principle must be to make debt-servicing reasonably proportionate to a country's productive capacity. It is in the true interest of donors to seek in their negotiations with debtors to solutions that will provide a perspective for the future. Hopelessness will crush the best will in the world.
Since 1978 the Federal Republic of Germany has remitted 4,2 billion marks of the debt owed it by the poorest countries. I appeal to all donor countries to follow suit, and I appeal to the socialist countries of the North also to provide adequate development aid, at long last.
Proceeding from future-oriented reform programmes and financed by new loans on easy terms, the economies of the debtor countries must be put back on a course of growth. But diversification and investment in growth sectors will be helpful to developing countries only if the industrialized world opens its markets wide to their manufactures and semi-manufactures and adapts its own economic structure to such new conditions. We are prepared to make that adjustment.
To restrict the role of the developing countries in the world economy to that of mere suppliers of raw materials and energy would be to deprive them of their prospects for the future. The industrial countries must eliminate import 

restrictions and other barriers to trade. They must stop subsidizing branches of industry that no longer pay their way.
They must also reduce agricultural surpluses. The adjustments necessary in the industrial countries are difficult and painful but that can be no reason to keep putting them off. At any rate, exports of weapons are not the solution to these problems. On the contrary, they Increase tensions and the danger of war, and they squander resources that are needed for works of peace. Weapon exports facilitate neither the necessary structural change in the industrial countries nor the process of economic recovery in the developing countries.
At its seventh session, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) underscored the special significance of peaceful international trade for development. The final act of that Conference indicates the strategies that need to be pursued with regard to finance and indebtedness and trade and commodities, and with regard to the problems of the land-locked developing countries. Now is the time for action.
The industrial countries are undergoing a technological revolution, a revolution that will completely change society. At the moment we have but little idea of the repercussions it will have on the developing countries. Whatever happens, it must not be allowed to divide the world for ever into rich and poor. We cannot allow the great human dream that has inspired all nations, the dream of one just, peaceful and free world, to be outstripped by technological development. On the contrary, science and technology must be the powerhouse for the development of mankind. Only modern science and technology are capable of solving the world's problems of food supply, health, education and energy. Genetic engineering, modern medical research, state-of-the-art information technologies and new forms of energy must be pooled to this end.
AIDS (acquired immune-deficiency syndrome) is a challenge to the whole of mankind. It threatens all nations. My Government is pleased to note that the gravity of this problem is increasingly recognized by Governments and by international organizations.
Advanced technology not only provides opportunities; it also entails risks. Chernobyl has demonstrated to the world that the safety of nuclear power stations is the common responsibility of all countries producing nuclear energy. A progressive human society cannot regard nuclear energy as the ultimate solution to the world's energy problems.
The task of eliminating the political, social and moral risks inherent in high technology and science is common to the whole human race.
Genetic engineering can secure adequate food supplies for many billions of people, but it can also be abused to violate the dignity of man if it is used solely as a means of manipulating man, if it encroaches upon each person's individuality. The United Nations is the forum where the best brains in our countries can establish common ethical standards with which to measure the consequences of technological development.
The earth's atmosphere and its high seas are the common property of mankind. They have to be preserved so that the human species can survive. But, like the world's climate, they too are being jeopardized. The Brundtland report has presented a plan for development that is both lasting and environmentally compatible, and it must be taken seriously. The world must be made more acutely aware of these issues and interactions. This is a matter for the United Nations. We should soon consider proclaiming a year of global environmental protection. We should also consider proclaiming the 199Os a decade for the environment to provide the necessary stimulus worldwide.
Everywhere we face problems which we can only solve together or not at all. We have long since entered an age of global domestic policy in which each one of us is dependent upon everyone else. Thus, the importance of the United Nations grows from year to year. It is our common duty to preserve and develop the world Organization. The gap between the concept of the United Nations and its present indateriali2ation in a world of nation-States is still considerable. We must all learn to find global answers to global problems. The United Nations offers a wide range of instruments for this purpose. The more determined our efforts to reform the world Organization, the more effectively will be able to use those instruments. I wish at this juncture to thank the Secretary-General for his far-sighted approach to this problem.
Many forms of co-operation can also develop in a smaller framework. Here in lies the special significance of regional organizations. The European Community has shown the world the kind of dynamism for peace that can emanate from regional organizations. For centuries the nation-States of Europe fought one another in wars, which also spread beyond their continent to other parts of the world. Today, war among the 12 members of the European Community is impossible; it is inconceivable.
That is the first and most important task of a regional organization: to make sure that war in its region will be impossible. The more nation-States become integrated the better their chances of achieving that aim. That is why my Government strongly supports all efforts to establish peace in crisis areas originating in the region itself. 
We welcome the signing of the Arias Plan by five Central American countries as a step towards peace and stability in Central America and encourage them on that road. The result of the Guatemala conference is a sign of hope. We give our unqualified support to the nations of Central America in their efforts to secure social justice, to ensure the application of the principles of democracy, to secure independence and to foster peace and co-operation. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany is helping the cause of world peace by encouraging co-operation between the European Community and the regional organizations in Central and South America, Asia, the Middle East and Africa.
The countries of one region can best preserve and develop their cultural identity through joint efforts. The wealth inherent in cultural diversity is the purest source of energy for man's task of safeguarding peace. All nations on earth are, without distinction, civilized nations. Their cultural contribution is indispensable for the creation of a single global society based on justice, peace and freedom. We are serving the cause of peace if we preserve and protect the unmistakable identities of these civilizations. Nations that respect the cultural achievements of other nations cannot be stirred up against one another. Cultural arrogance has time and again been the root cause of catastrophes.
Thus the North-South dialogue, too, needs a cultural dimension. Only if nations start from the basis of their individual culture and cultural exchanges and partnerships with others can they develop the national consciousness that will help solve mankind's common problems.
Regional organizations in the third world are the best way to ensure that their members are not drawn into the West-East confrontation. This is also the great mission of the Non-Aligned Movement, which is a growing factor of stability in the world. Genuine non-alignment offers third-world countries in particular a great opportunity to preserve their identity and consolidate their Independence.
We are all aware of the magnitude of the world's problems. This being so, we know we cannot solve political, social, religious and ideological differences in one gigantic leap. These differences exist and we have to live with them. But that should not stop us, notwithstanding all the differences of principle and ideology, from doing what we can to safeguard world peace now.
There is a growing awareness of this. The seventh session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), like last year's special session of the General Assembly on Africa, has given encouraging signs that North and South are capable of disregarding positions of principle and concentrating on what is necessary and feasible at the present time.
We must now take this opportunity to move forward. Security Council resolution 598 (1987) is an encouraging sign of common responsibility for global peace. The special significance of that resolution lies in its unanimous adoption. It can serve as an example for the settlement of other regional conflicts as well.
We strongly support resolution 598 (1987) and the Secretary-General's efforts to establish peace on its basis. That resolution affords Iraq and Iran an opportunity to embark on the road of peace. With Iraq having stated its approval, I urgently appeal to Iran to implement the resolution fully.
War has been going on in Afghanistan, too, for nearly eight years now. We expect the Soviet Union to withdraw its forces from that country and put an end to the suffering of the Afghan people. No one apart from the afflicted people of Afghanistan should gain advantage from the Soviet withdrawal. Consequently, the conditions for the genuine independence and non-alignment of the new Afghanistan must be established now.
We also call for the withdrawal of foreign troops from Kampuchea so that this country may exercise its right to self-determination. The new, fundamental developments between West and East with their far-reading consequences for world peace have only become possible through both sides opting for co-operation. The clearest manifestation of that willingness are the negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union aimed at the global elimination of their intermediate-range nuclear missiles. For the first time, agreements are being made between West and East which not only limit but actually remove arms. This marks a turning-point in history.
We Germans greatly encouraged this development and we welcome the result - this great agreement - with relief. It enhances security and stability in Europe. My Government has viewed its role in this process not merely as that of an interested spectator. We have played an active part in achieving this success as a country aware of its responsibility for peace. Through our advocacy of the "double-zero solution" we have paved the way for the world-wide elimination of intermediate-range missiles.
I endorse the statement Chancellor Kohl made on this subject on 26 August 1987 that, by the time the American and Soviet intermediate-range nuclear forces have been removed as agreed, the German Pershing la systems will also have been phased out.
This agreement is still a long way from completely solving the problem of nuclear disarmament, but it represents the first, and thus the crucial, step towards the great objective to which the nuclear Powers committed themselves before the world in the nuclear-test-ban Treaty.
A process has been set in motion which must be made irreversible. Further steps must, and will, follow. We deem it essential that the United States and the Soviet Union should now concentrate on a drastic reduction of all strategic offensive weapons and in so doing also consider the further application of the Treaty on anti-ballistic missiles (ABM).
In the Western Alliance we will move ahead with the preparations for negotiations on nuclear missiles with a range of less than 500 kilometres. We will vigorously pursue the negotiations on conventional stability in Europe. The statements issued by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the Warsaw Pact afford a good basis for such negotiations. A convention globally banning chemical weapons is overdue. That convention must now be concluded  We cannot permit an ever larger number of countries to manufacture or produce these ghastly weapons of destruction. The best protection against their proliferation is their global elimination and their global prohibition. 
In our efforts to achieve that aim, we are not facing an insurmountable wall. New thinking that stems from the knowledge that we can only survive with one another, not against one another, governs oar actions more and more· Ho nation can have a greater interest in the success of all these negotiations than that of the Germans, for most weapon systems are concentrated in their country - on both sides of the dividing line - so they would be the first to be threatened with extinction·
The agreement on intermediate-range nuclear force© will provide the spark the effects of which will be carried well beyond the confines of arms control. Both sides will draw from that agreement the energy and the confidence to extend their co-operation to all fields where such co-operation is currently possible. That will be a major step towards the political objective of Atlantic defensive community, which is to establish solid structures for peace in Europe through co-operation between West and East in all areas and on the basis of a reliable defence capability.
The fact that we can cherish this hope today in the result of the discernment and the constructive approach of both sides that had already become clear at the summit meeting of the United States and the Soviet Union in Reykjavik. There, the two super-Powers showed that they are conscious of their responsibility for mankind's survival· in this they deserve the support of all peace-loving people. We must not stray from this path. ·The signposts to a better future are not the prejudices and enemy-images of yesterday but the will of nations, the will of every individual, to live in peace and dignity. Only in that manner shall we fulfil our responsibility for the future of mankind.
The era that was dominated by hegemonic aspirations, the era in which the world risked being pulled into the vortex of a never-ending arms race, is drawing to a close. This process cannot be stopped} it is paving the way to a better world. In such a· world there can no longer be any room for the old enemy-images. If we dismantle our weapons we must also dismantle those enemy-images. On a global scale and in Europe we must create reliable systems for maintaining security on a co-operative basis, as well as mechanisms for the early detection and management of crises. The Federal Republic of Germany will assist in this task in the North Atlantic alliance and in the European Community. We shall do everything in our power to promote the process of European union and to strengthen our alliance, the aim of which is to prevent war.
Our desire to achieve the union of the twelve European democracies, our desire for co-operation with our Eastern neighbours, is a manifestation of the policy of the Federal Republic of Germany for peace in Europe. We are aware of our responsibility  we shall use all our energy and every opportunity in working for a better Europe, a Europe based on peace.
The position of the twelve members of the European Community of international issues and on the Community's internal development was presented by the Danish Foreign Minister two days ago. The Single European Act, which entered into force on 1 July this year, is significant for the international community. The Twelve wish, as is stated in the preamble to the Act, to make together "their own contribution to the preservation of international peace and security in accordance with the undertaking entered into by them within the framework of the United Nations Charter".
To that end we intend to establish a common Community foreign policy. 
The completion of the European internal market, scheduled for 1992, will greatly increase the Community's strength. Significant steps towards a common monetary policy and towards the aim of converging the economic and financial policies of its members will have to follow, as will steps towards the creation of a technological community. That is the road to European union. To our neighbours in the East we extend the hand of wide-ranging co-operation - envisaged in the Final Act of the Helsinki Conference on Security
and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) as the course towards the establishment of a peaceful order in Europe. At the CSCE follow-up conference in Vienna we are not merely seeking progress in matters of security: we are also seeking progress on the realization of human rights, on humanitarian issues, on economic exchanges, on the exchange of science and technology, on the exchange of information and culture. West and East can give each other a great deal through co-operation through confrontation they can deprive themselves of progress entirely - they can lose everything. Through co-operation we seek to build confidence, to serve mutual interests and, in a positive sense, to create dependencies that will make peace and co-operation irreversible.
We do not want to bleed one another to death through the arms race, nor do we want to cripple anyone economically. The political and military division of Europe is bad enough. We must not divide Europe economically and technologically when there are already gulfs to be filled and walls to be climbed. Our aim is to help achieve genuine progress in all fields. If the Soviet Union opens up to the world it will find a reliable and constructive partner in the Federal Republic of Germany. The Treaty of Moscow affords a basis for such co-operation as well as the necessary perspective. We shall have recourse to that Treaty, aware of the central importance of German-Soviet relations, which have an impact on the situation in the whole of Europe beyond their bilateral relationship.
If, after decades of confrontation, it were possible today to reach a turning point in the East-West relationship it would be a mistake of historic dimensions if we were to let the opportunity pass. All must shoulder their responsibility. Twelve years after the signing of the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) we can declare: a process has been set in motion leading to a peaceful order in Europe. My country has made substantial contributions towards this goal through its accession to the European Community and the Western defensive alliance and through the unprecedented Franco-German partnership.
We have cleared the way for a new West-East relationship by means of the Treaty of Moscow; the Treaty of Warsaw, which established the basis for a new beginning with the Polish People's Republic in the awareness of the special quality of the German-Polish relationship following the vicissitudes of their history; and also through the treaty with Czechoslovakia and the Basic Treaty on Relations with the German Democratic Republic.
Not only is there no feasible alternative, there is no responsible alternative to this process. We always perceive Europe as a whole; we want to improve the situation in the whole of Europe. We realize that the wheel of history can never be turned back, only forward.
Part of this perspective for Europe's future is the relationship between the Federal Republic of Germany and the other German State, the German Democratic Republic. Both States are firmly integrated in their respective alliances. But precisely this fact makes it possible for them to campaign in their alliances for co-operation throughout Europe. The differences in their two value-systems are fundamental. Nevertheless the two German States are agreed: never again must war originate on German soil, only peace.
There is still disagreement between the two German states as to the future of the German nation. The Federal Republic of Germany remains committed to its aim of working for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will regain its unity through free self-determination.
The visit to the Federal Republic of Germany by Mr. Erich Honaker, Chairman of the Council of State of the German Democratic Republic, demonstrated the intention of both German States to render a major contribution to stability in Europe by improving the quality of their relations and through their efforts to promote disarmament. Through these efforts we are also serving the welfare and interests of the people.
Mr. Honaker's visit revealed not only fundamental differences but also a willingness to co-operate with one another. We Germans, too, must live with the disparities that characterize the world, and above all Europe, even though they affect us more than other nations. But these disparities must not prevent us Members of this great world Organization from meeting our responsibility for peace and the survival of mankind.
Common international responsibility also means a common responsibility to combat terrorism, to combat racism and to prevent violations of human rights. Today, now, this must be the great common denominator for all nations who have committed themselves to the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. The community of nations' are becoming increasingly aware that terrorism is a threat not only to political enemies but also to one's own country. We can confront terrorism only if its perpetrators are unable to find refuge anywhere in the world. But we shall be able to rid ourselves of terrorism for good only if we also remove its causes, and there are many.
The Middle East crisis, for instance, may keep on spawning violence. Consequently, peace must at long last be established in Lebanon on the basis of freedom, sovereignty and territorial integrity. The Middle East conflict, as we have seen in the course of past years, cannot be settled by force, only by negotiation. We therefore advocate an international conference on the Middle East, which must proceed from Israel's right to exist within recognized and secure borders and from the right of self-determination of the Palestinian people.
If terrorism is inimical to any order, racism is the most terrible deprecation of human dignity. A regime that rules in the name of race must be opposed by the conscience of the world in the name of humanity. The Western democracies are a community oriented to common values and based on equal dignity for all. In view of this, we condemn the violation and mockery of human rights in the Republic of South Africa. We call upon the South African Government to create at last the conditions that will enable black and white to meet at the conference table and commence the dialogue that is so urgently needed. Apartheid must be totally eradicated; it is not capable of reform.
The state of emergency must be lifted, the political prisoners, first among them Nelson Mandela, must be released unconditionally and the banned organizations of the black majority must be allowed to operate again. If this is done, there is still hope that the violence that is bound to keep on producing yet more violence can be stopped. With regard to Namibia, we demand the application, at long last, of resolution 435 (1978), without any ifs and buts.
We condemn violations of human rights wherever they occur. A particularly horrific aberration of State authority is torture. It is not an instrument with which to fight one's political opponents. Least of all it is a means of administering justice. It is the most abhorrent and barbaric manifestation of injustice. By means of the United Nations Convention against torture, the world has taken a big step forward in the development of its political culture. 

By virtue of its Charter, by virtue of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the human rights covenants and its human rights institutions, the United Nations is a citadel and a bulwark of human rights. The exercise of civil, economic and social human rights is essential in the construction of a better world. A high commissioner for human rights and a court of human rights would be able to protect and promote these rights.
Only on human tights and the right of self-determination of nations can the universal house of peace be built. They are its foundations. That is why my country reaffirms to everyone before this world Assembly its pledge to respect every nation's right, to self-determination and to defend human rights all over the globe.
And with the same earnestness we pledge ourselves, by dint of our policy of peace at home and abroad aimed at developing peaceful relations with our neighbours and all nations on earth and at making peace with nature, to safeguard life on this planet and the survival of mankind for this and all future generations.
Only when there is life is there freedom and human dignity. To preserve it must be the aim of our Organization. 
﻿It is a great honour for me to address the General Assembly. Mr. President, I am pleased to extend to you France's congratulations on your election, which is testimony to the confidence all delegations have in you. We are convinced that under your presidency the work of the Assembly will be pursued with authority and efficiency. I wish you every success and assure you of our full co-operation.
In the time that has elapsed since the last session of the General Assembly the international situation has been marked by three principal characteristics.
First, there has been a disturbing lack of progress in resolving regional conflicts. Not only has none been resolved - either the situation is still blocked, as in southern Africa and Cambodia, or progress that had been announced, as in Afghanistan, or broached in outline, as in the Middle East with the proposal for a conference, has failed to be translated into action - but, even worse, in some instances the situation has deteriorated. That is the case with the conflict between Iraq and Iran, which, beyond the serious confrontations it periodically produces, threatens to spread to the whole of a strategic region whose equilibrium is Important for the entire world. 
The second characteristic is the persistence of major economic and financial problems. In this respect too the period has not produced much to give rise to much satisfaction. The issue of indebtedness, despite some adjustments that have been introduced, continues to compromise the situation in a good many third-world States. Instability in the prices of many raw materials has continued to disrupt both International trade and, even more serious, the courageous efforts of countries whose fate is closely linked to the prices of those products. In these conditions, the development of those States continues to be handicapped, with demographic pressures still a factor even as the legitimate aspirations of the populations concerned grow. 
The third characteristic that currently has centre place in international attention is the opening in American-Soviet relations. Along with the concerns and disappointments that I have just mentioned, 1987 will probably be marked as the year in which East-West relations were given renewed impetus. Each of us is naturally aware of the prospects that have been opened up, both in respect of an agreement on dismantling American and Soviet medium-range missiles, which new appears close, and in developing contacts among the peoples of Europe's divided continent, as witnessed - and you, Mr. President, are more aware of this than anyone - by Mr. Honecker's visit to the Federal Republic of Germany. In this same context is the work of the third meeting of the follow-up Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, which will be able, we hope, to complete its work in Vienna between now and December with balanced results, including gains in the area of human rights and contacts among individuals.
However positive, the improvement in relations between Washington and Moscow remains for the time being confined within precise limits: United States-Soviet talks on disarmament have yet to focus on reducing the huge strategic arsenals of the Soviet union and the United States, They have centred above all on Europe.
Given the world situation as it now stands, three important questions have to be asked; How far can United States-Soviet talks go towards improving the climate between East and West? Can the change in East-West relations affect regional crises? Will we be more capable of grappling with ways to resolve the economic and financial problems confronting the world?
France believes that the international community must meet these three challenges: by encouraging progress but also by reaffirming the conditions for genuine detente between East and West) by bringing about conditions conducive to the search for solutions to regional crises by the countries concerned by bringing 
imagination and courage into play to devise new ways to help resolve the problems of indebtedness and development.
A world of greater stability and interdependence must also be a safer world. France is well aware of the stakes, such as the ramifications of the present normalization of relations between the Soviet Union and the United States. We hope that this will not result in decreased security for other countries, especially in Europe. France has followed very attentively the preparation of the treaty to eliminate American and Soviet intermediate-range missiles. It has welcomed, as was fitting, the decisions by the Soviet Union to remove the obstacles that country had placed on the road to an agreement, whether concerning the link between the various aspects of the bilateral negotiations in Geneva, the claim to take into account British and French independent nuclear forces, or the request to maintain a number of SS-20s facing Asia.
Nevertheless, we must continue to keep our vision clear. More disarmament does not automatically mean greater security. We cannot, in particular, disregard the threats to Europe that come from the substantial imbalance in conventional and chemical weapons.
This is why as early as 1978 France took the initiative for a conference on disarmament in Europe and welcomes the gains made a year ago in Stockholm. Together with its partners in the Atlantic Alliance and in the context of the multilateral process of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, it will spare no effort to enable the second phase of the Conference, which, we hope, will begin in 198-8, to advance towards greater stability in conventional arms on our continent. 
For this reason also, we attach the utmost importance to the Geneva negotiations to ban completely the manufacture of chemical weapons in the world and to destroy existing stockpiles. But until there is progress towards the destruction of those stockpiles known to be the largest, it is advisable to maintain the option of a minimum stock for security. Western Europe cannot be disarmed in the area of chemical weapons 10 years before the Soviet Union itself completes the verified destruction of its stockpiles.
With the proposed elimination of medium-range nuclear forces we should not lose sight of the fact that Europe will continue to be subject, without limitation at this stage, to the threat of a far more considerable number of intercontinental systems, which are also capable of reaching targets on our side of the Atlantic. France, therefore, hopes that the United States and the Soviet Union, without neglecting those aspects related to defensive systems and the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, will at long last return to the teal priority of arms control, namely, the strategic systems of the two countries.
In this spirit, France welcomed the goal of a 50 per cent reduction in Soviet and American strategic arsenals that was set at Reykjavik last year. Admittedly, halving these arsenals merely brings the Americans and Soviets back to the level prevailing at the end of the preceding decade when SALT II was signed. Nevertheless, this would clearly be a step in the right direction and would establish, as a real priority, not the illusory quest for denuclearization but the gradual and verified reduction of the excessively huge central arsenals. There is virtually no other serious alternative and it seems scarcely reasonable to envision the complete elimination of nuclear weapons within the foreseeable future.
France will not decline to participate, when the occasion arises, in multilateral negotiations on nuclear disarmament. Such talks, however, would be justified only as a later phase of a process of nuclear-arms reduction in which the two super-Powers would already have made very substantial progress. The President of the French Republic, speaking here in September 1983, enumerated the conditions for his country's participation. I would like to repeat those conditions: Soviet and American arsenals must be reduced to a level at which the disparity between their arsenals and those of other nuclear Powers changes in nature  the defensive systems that could destabilize the current bases of deterrence must not be strengthened  the imbalance in conventional weapons must be eliminated  and the elimination of the chemical threat must become a fact.
Until such time as these conditions are met, France will not agree to its forces being taken into account, directly or indirectly, in negotiations to which it is not a party. As the Prime Minister, Mr. Jacques Chirac, indicated from this rostrum last years
"As long as French security rests on nuclear deterrence, the first requirement for my country is to maintain the credibility of its strategic forces at the necessary level. For that reason, France has naturally declined to go along with any form of planned obsolescence of its forces while other Powers retain a huge excess nuclear capacity. It will accept neither a quantitative nor a qualitative freeze on its arsenals nor will it halt its nuclear tests. That arsenal does not exceed the level considered" indispensable for our security and our independence. The nuclear tests are being carried out in unquestionably safe conditions ..." (A/41/PV. 8, p. 71). These have been acknowledged as such by independent experts from Pacific countries whose concerns for the environment we understand and share.
In the area of information, France is prepared to take a new step. After welcoming several Heads of State or Government from the region to the test site on Mururoa this year, it now invites the leaders of the Andean countries bordering the Pacific. Other States regularly carry out far more tests than France does, and have been doing so for a longer period. None, we believe, has so far offered such guarantees. The Improved climate of East-West relations has had no effect to date on the principal regional conflicts. Recognizing this fact, the international community must increase its attention and its effort, in particular to bring about conditions favourable to the search for appropriate solutions by the parties directly concerned. Yet we must make a distinction among the different types of crises confronting the world.
In some cases, the situation continues to be stalemated. This Is true of southern Africa. With Its sense of community with all of Africa, and especially with countries close to It because of history, language and exceptional human ties, France believes that new impetus can and should be given to the reduction of tensions, the resumption of dialogue and the restoration of peace in southern Africa. Prance has already taken action along these lines, for example regarding the unprecedented exchange of prisoners that recently took place following a French initiative and after the many contacts France had over a period of months with various States in the region. We hope that this exchange will be followed without delay by new developments as envisioned. The official visit to Paris at this time by the President of Angola, and the visit next week by the President of Mozambique, both of whom played a key role in effecting the exchange, will make it possible to assess the prospects that have been opened up.
But there can be no return to peace In the region in the absence of dialogue in South Africa itself among all the components of South African society that have together built that country. The release of political prisoners and the renunciation of violence and of preconditions are the prerequisites for this necessary dialogue. Its purpose can be none other than the dismantling of apartheid. The French Government whole-heartedly condemns the system of apartheid, which is intolerable. It has consistently supported, particularly within the European Community, he Implementation of restrictive measures designed to make the South African Government begin such a dialogue.
Somewhat different Is the conflict in Western Sahara; although no visible progress has been observed. It does perhaps offer more promising prospects for a solution, given the mediation attempts under way. The combined efforts of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the President of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and friendly Arab leaders should at last lead to a settlement within the framework of the right to self-determination of the populations concerned. No country would welcome more whole-heartedly than France a solution that brings closer together the countries of North Africa with which it maintains truly privileged relations.
At the other end of the Sahara, the conflict between Chad and Libya has gone through a dramatic change over the past few months, but the final outcome has yet to be determined. Combining determination, courage and audacity, the Chadian army succeeded, under the authority of President Hissein Habre, in liberating from foreign occupation almost all the provinces in the north. There remains the dispute over the Aouzou Strip. Clearly, this dispute, with which the OAU and its ad hoc committee have been seized, will find a lasting solution in the present context only when it has been settled according to law. France, which brought Chad to independence and thus bequeathed to it its borders, considers this territory to belong to Chad. It is ready once again to communicate the documents in its possession to bodies that so request. For the rest, true to its commitments,
Prance will keep the purely defensive and deterrent military arrangements it now has there for as long as it believes necessary.
In Cambodia, despite the efforts of the ASEAN countries, the situation remains deadlocked. Nothing, however, warrants the foreign occupation which, by its continuation, has increasingly assumed overtones of colonization. Viet Nam should  understand the deadlock in which it now finds itself. It must try to find, together with its neighbours and with help from all, particularly Prince Sihanouk, whom Prance is pleased to be welcoming again, the paths towards a political solution. For the people of Prance, who are linked to the Khmer people by an old and ever-present friendship, such a solution can only be the restoration of a Cambodia that is free from all foreign occupation and free to determine its destiny.
There are other situations in which stated intentions have unfortunately not been translated into concrete actions. It is therefore incumbent on the international community to redouble its efforts and its firmness.
Covering Afghanistan, certain Soviet statements led to the assumption that the new team of leaders in Moscow had perhaps understood that the invasion, followed by the occupation, of this independent non-aligned country, which was not at all hostile to the Soviet Union, was a grave mistake. It is a fact that eight years of fiercely waged war have not shaken the determined resistance of a courageous people. Their unyielding determination, the sweeping condemnation of the aggressor by the international community and the resolute support for the cause of Afghanistan, and also for Pakistan, which has generously welcomed on its soil 3 million refugees forced into exile, should convince the Soviet Union that it cannot rely on time to impose a solution by force. While the conditions for a settlement have already been largely defined, thanks to the efforts of the Secretary-General and his special envoy, Mr. Cordovez, the fact remains that the Geneva talks on a timetable for the withdrawal of Soviet troops have still not achieved their objective. If the Soviet leaders sincerely wish to embark upon the path to a negotiated solution, they should act accordingly and, in order to end promptly this conflict of another age, fully accept the right of the Afghan people freely to determine its future. That is what France and almost all the countries represented here expect of them. To a considerable extent the evolution of the international climate will depend on this.
In the Middle East, after years of deadlock, the Israeli-Arab conflict recently showed renewed and hopeful signs of progress towards a comprehensive settlement in the revised framework of an international conference which would bring together the parties to the conflict and the permanent members of the Security Council. Since the beginning. Prance has been favourable to such a project, in which it hopes to take an active part. To our mind, such a conference should serve for reflection and advice, without imposing itself on or taking the part of the parties themselves. It should serve to sanction and enrich the dialogue which, thanks to the bold initiatives of certain Arab and Israeli leaders, has begun to take hold. The movement towards peace, unfortunately, appears to be at a standstill at this time. It is essential for its momentum to be restored, naturally on the initiative of the parties directly concerned, but also with the encouragement of the international community as a whole, and particularly States that have special responsibilities and therefore special duties. After 40 years of confrontation, it is more than time to ensure Israel's right to live in peace within secure and recognized borders, and that of the Palestinian people to choose its future by means of self-determination, with all that that implies.
At the centre of this conflict, against its wishes, Lebanon, a torn and ravaged country, is paying an ever heavier tribute to the crises of the region on which it has no influence. To the tragedy of war are now added the effects of an unprecedented economic crisis. Prance has decided to continue its presence in Lebanon in spite of the risks and dangers. It continues to be a part of the United Nations Force which, despite its shortcomings, embodies the commitment of the international community to Lebanon's sovereignty and territorial integrity. The entire world should now mobilize and make an exceptional effort on behalf of all the populations of Lebanon without exception. France, for its part, has Increased its aid again this year. It calls on everyone to contribute to the special fund set up by the recent summit of French-speaking countries. Lebanon, however, will find peace only in the reconciliation of the Lebanese themselves and the establishment of normal relations with the countries of the region. This is the position which we have consistently conveyed to each of Lebanon's leaders and each of the neighbouring States.
Lastly, one crisis, far from abating, seems likely to spread to an entire region. The devastating war between Iraq and Iran has been going on for seven years. In terms of the number of victims and ferocity of the fighting, this war must already be counted among the deadliest of this century. Forms of warfare have been resorted to that are particularly to be condemned, such as the use of chemical weapons and sending to the front children who are barely in their adolescence, today the fighting directly threatens other countries and seriously impinges on the principles of the freedom and safety of navigation endorsed by the international community. 
France, along with the majority of States represented here, calls for an end to a conflict that can be dealt with only in its entirety. Over and above the cruel suffering of the two peoples, France is particularly sensitive to the concerns of riparian States of the Gulf and intends to demonstrate in concrete terms its commitment to freedom of navigation. Some of our ships are present in the region where they are ensuring the protection of our interests. But we are deliberately maintaining this action within specific limits and have declined to participate in any multinational actions that could give the situation the overtones of an East-West confrontation.
With a tenacity to which I should like to pay a tribute, the Secretary-General nine months ago called on the Security Council to try new efforts. After close consultations among the five permanent members of the Council and a constructive debate among all the members, these efforts led, on 20 July, at a meeting at which I had the honour of presiding, to the unanimous adoption of resolution 598 (1987). This balanced resolution should be implemented in its entirety, starting with the decision on the cease-fire it imposes.
Two months have since elapsed. The Secretary-General has been to Tehran and Baghdad. It appears that one of the two belligerents has confirmed its acceptance of the resolution in its entirety while the other seeks to impose its own reading of the text and its own conditions. The authority of the Security Council, which has acted under Chapter VII of the Charter, and the authority of our Organization as a whole are at stake. Great firmness is called for because, as our Prime Minister, Mr. Jacques Chirac, emphasized a year ago from this rostrum the stubborn pursuit of this absurd war, beyond the suffering it imposes on the two peoples, threatens to shatter the equilibrium of a region of strategic importance for the whole world. 
Other regional crises in addition to those I have just mentioned remain unresolved and continue to retain our full attention. In Cyprus, a de facto situation, which France does not recognize, persists despite the efforts of the Secretary-General, who is in the best position to help bring forth a solution. In the Korean peninsula, where a remarkable process of democratization is under way in the south, we hope that direct contacts between Seoul and Pyong Yang will be resumed at an early date and that the Korean people as a whole will at last he represented in our Organization.
I should like finally to mention the situation in Central America, of which Costa Rica's President has just underlined the hopeful aspects. After more than four years of persevering effort at the initiative of the Contadora Group, the Presidents of the five countries of the isthmus have reached an overall agreement. Admittedly, no one supposes that the road ahead is without obstacles.
Nevertheless, an important step forward was made with the summit in Guatemala. The Central American countries themselves have demonstrated their determination to break the cycle of confrontation and settle their disputes themselves. The hopes occasioned by that meeting should be sustained. The commitments made should, by involving all the interested parties, make it possible to extend democracy to the whole region and lay the foundations for a lasting peace.
It is obvious that the improvement in East-West relations does not, of itself, imply a solution to regional crises. Solutions can result only from the efforts of the countries directly concerned and action by the international community to bring about conditions conducive to the success of those efforts, Europeans, who in the past have been torn by fratricidal wars and are today resolutely committed to building a common future, know this well. France, for its part, is ready to contribute to any regional attempt to settle conflicts and to act in a way that may allow Europe to contribute.  The serious economic and financial problems besetting the international community reveal the extent to which all too often selfish, short-term responses still prevail over awareness of the necessary Interdependence and shared interests. In this respect the European experiment is showing the way.
The European Community is growing stronger. Its enlargement in January 1986 to include Spain and Portugal has enhanced the Mediterranean dimension of the Community. The Single European Act, in effect since July 1987, has opened up new areas for action, while setting for the Community a key objective; the completion in 1992 of a huge internal market. Since its establishment nine years ago the European monetary system has become a pole of stability in an international monetary system in crisis. Technological Europe, lastly, has distinguished itself by achievements that at times go beyond the Twelve, as in the case of Ariane and Eureka.
Encompassing 320 million Europeans and open to the world, the Community is determined to acquire both a political and a security dimension enabling Europe to regain its rightful place.
Like its partners, France is convinced that this movement towards Europe's unity would lose its significance and thereby its force, if it led Europe to turn inwards on itself. The Twelve have demonstrated their firmness in the face of rising protectionism and continue to favour the development of foreign trade. The world's leading exporter, the Community is also one of the most open markets. The majority of its imports are exempt from all customs duties or levies, the exemption being applicable to 90 per cent of the products from the developing countries. The Lomé Convention, which governs the privileged relations with African, Caribbean and Pacific countries, has established an exemplary form of North-South co-operation. The system of generalized preferences offers other countries important guarantees with respect to the flow of their products to the Community's markets. Finally, Europe has concluded association and co-operation agreements with regional organizations and numerous States, particularly Mediterranean States.
We are now prepared to go further, and accordingly the Twelve are entering on a new round of trade talks. These will include, as everyone knows, the sensitive area of agriculture. The Community, including France, are prepared to address seriously the imbalances of world agricultural markets, but we cannot be asked to call into question the principles and achievements of the common agricultural policy. The new round of trade negotiations that I have just mentioned offers an opportunity for considerable trade liberalization. World economic expansion is based on the further development of international trade, which should largely benefit the poorest countries, with each country or group of States doing its share.
There has been a greater awareness over the past year that the disorder in the international monetary system since the end of the 1960s has undoubtedly been one of the causes of the mediocre performance of the world economy. France has worked consistently for greater stability in exchange rates and the reduction of interest rates. In this respect 1987 has been characterized by changes in the right direction. The Louvre agreement, concluded in Paris last February and confirmed by the Venice summit, comprises, as we had hoped, specific objectives for the stabilization of exchange rates of the principal currencies and the convergence of economic policies. Such agreements have produced encouraging initial results, but clearly everyone realizes that much remains to be done to ensure a stable international monetary order.
We have long advocated concerted action in the area of commodities. Prices for these commodities continue to be unstable and low. Apart from sound market organization, diversifying the economies of the producer countries is a necessity. One of the headings of the Common Fund meets this objective. France hopes that this agreement will enter into force at an early date. 0f all the evils troubling the world economy, the most serious and the most fraught with danger is, of course, the issue of third world indebtedness. For some States the situation has become critical. Prance is aware of the difficulties they are encountering in this respect, especially in Africa; it is familiar with the adjustments and restructuring many of them have courageously undertaken, and the painful consequences that can result for the populations. These States should benefit most particularly from the international community's support, and the conclusions of the special session of the General Assembly devoted to the African continent should not be allowed to remain a dead letter.
France has made proposals regarding debt that would extend the grace period and time-frame for repayment in the case of the poorest countries. These recommendations have since begun to be implemented by the Paris Club. Financial flows to the developing nations should be substantially increased. All lenders should contribute, and the participation of banks is more necessary than ever, especially in Latin America. The multilateral institutions should also step up their efforts to help the third world. It is, therefore, indispensable for the resources of the World Bank to be enlarged and for the discussions on tripling the resources of the Structural Adjustment Facility to be completed before year's end so that concessional loans to the poorest countries can be speedily increased.
Increasing official development assistance remains an imperative need. In the case of Prance, it has been decided to raise aid for development to 0.54 per cent of the gross national product in 1988. We are continuing to move closer to the target of 0.7 per cent of the gross national product for development assistance. Our effort will be directed as a matter of priority to the poorest nations, whose situation should be examined anew by the international community. Accordingly we have offered to host the next conference of the least developed countries in Paris in 1990. Without consultation and dialogue control of the international economic situation will not be attained. For this reason we welcome the results of the recent United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), at which the European Community made a substantial contribution, as my colleague from Denmark, current President of the Twelve, has recalled. That Conference revealed the existence of a general resolve to address the third world's problems realistically, in a spirit of openness and generosity. 
Efforts to come up with solutions to the problem of underdevelopment and, by the same token, to improve the material situation of the majority of human beings, cannot be separated from the international community's struggle to ensure greater respect for human rights in the world.
Human rights transcend East and West, North and South. At issue is the dignity of each man. It is inadmissible to say that one can look at the human person differently depending on place or circumstances, or to think that liberty may have several faces or that certain fundamental rights should have priority over others. France will never be silent so long as human rights ate trampled underfoot, whether it be in South Africa or Cambodia, Afghanistan or Chile. It will always be on the side of those who want democracy to live despite threats, whether in the case, today, of the Philippines or Haiti.
Precisely because Prance wishes to be above reproach on this score, it recently organized a vote on self-determination in New Caledonia. The New Caledonian population made a clear and indisputable choice, in conditions that were calm and beyond dispute, in favour of the territory remaining within the French Republic. In the spirit of open-mindedness that has always been its hallmark, the French Government is proposing, after broad consultations with all Caledonians, a statute for broad autonomy that should be acceptable to all.
Among attacks on individual rights, one of the most odious is terrorism because it systematically targets innocent people and resorts to the most cowardly actions - from a bomb thrown to kill in a place of worship or in a department store, to the taking of hostages, accompanied by blackmail for their lives, thereby submitting the victims to interminable torture and their families to unbearable anguish. Experience has shown dramatically that no State, however powerful, no person, however well protected, is safe from this scourge. No struggle, however legitimate, can Justify resorting to such crimes which constitute, along with the intolerance and fanaticism that feed them, an ongoing threat to the entire international community.
The measures that must be taken at the national level to prevent, fight and punish terrorism cannot be totally effective unless they are backed by a more concrete co-operation among States. The efforts against this outrage should be accompanied by unequivocal condemnation, no encouragement or complicity, even passive, should be tolerated. France urges all countries of the world to pursue this fight unsparingly, unceasingly, with absolute resolve, until this leprosy of our age is completely tooted out.
In conclusion, whether we are talking about East-West relations, the settlement of crises or responses to the major issues of our time, much still remains to be done. Were the international community, out of weariness or discouragement in the face of constantly new obstacles, to give up in one or another area, all our efforts would be reduced to nothing.
These are the responsibilities of the United Nations. It is easy to highlight the shortcomings, the defects, the red tape of the United Nations. There is nothing surprising about this since these deficiencies are our own and pertain to each and every one of us.
First we must adapt our Organization to the changes taking place in the world and undertake the necessary reforms while preserving the indispensable balances. We should be distrustful of reforms that would undermine the foundations of the system put in place in San Francisco it has proved itself irreplaceable. Real reforms should have as their objective a better Implementation of the Chatter and a better functioning of the machinery. This is why we believe the prompt implementation of the conclusions of the Group of 18 is desirable, and we are hoping for a settlement of the financial problem weighing over the life of our Organization and its specialized agencies. This is also why we, together with all the French-speaking nations recently represented at the Quebec Summit, are asking for the strict application of the regulations regarding the use of languages, especially French.
With regard to what has been done, as well as what remains to be done, we know that the Organization has been and will be able to rely on the man who is at one and the same time its soul and its principal officer, the Secretary-General. I should like to express again to Mr. Perez de Cuellar the French Government's high regard and appreciation for the remarkable services he renders the international community with a skill, talent and courage that has earned him the esteem and the constant support of all of us.
This mission, more than any other, is performed in the service of peace. Over-used and often misused, the word "peace" must remain the expression of our greatest ambition and, at the same time, the expression of the greatest reason. Our highest priority, of course, is to put an end to conflicts: solutions imposed by force will never be as enduring as a settlement freely negotiated and consented to. Efforts to bring about peace must also include organizing an effective and controlled disarmament that ensures our security. Working for peace, lastly, means addressing the causes of conflicts and bringing about the conditions that lessen tension. Security, disarmament and development, as was shown by the recent United Nations Conference devoted to this relationship, remain Interdependent,
Hence the reasonable ambition which is ours: namely, a genuine peace that la not dissociated from the reduction of inequalities in the world, nor from aid to development and co-operation.
Here again, we find the central role o£ the United Nations, together with all the specialized agencies of the United Nations family, in ensuring that the Immense wealth engendered by modern technology should benefit not a few peoples but the greatest possible number. There, transcending quarrels often Inherited from centuries past, lies the true challenge of our age. 
﻿
Mr. President, let me first extend to you my congratulations on assuming the presidency of the General Assembly, and at the same time express my country's warm appreciation to the outgoing President, and representative of a fellow Commonwealth country, the Foreign Minister of Bangladesh.
The General Assembly meets this year at a moment of great hope for the world, yet also at a moment of grave and mounting danger: hope because, after years of effort, an historic arms agreement between the United States and the Soviet Union is within sight; and grave and mounting danger because the conflict between Iran and Iraq poses daily a more serious threat to wider peace and security.
In the Gulf two proud, independent countries, themselves both founding Members of the United Nations, have been mauling each other relentlessly for seven years. That is almost twice as long as the First World War. We have before our eyes the image of hundreds of thousands of corpses, young people blown up, gunned down or gassed to death, civilians on both sides mercilessly bombed. The combatants have moreover extended this senseless destruction and loss of life into the international waters of the Gulf. Only two days ago another British vessel, the Gentle Breeze was attacked with loss of innocent life. This was a disgraceful and unprovoked act of aggression against an unarmed vessel, the sixth attack on a British ship in the Gulf.
Ships have sailed this great seaway for centuries. It is an international thoroughfare; no State may dictate who uses it. As it has done throughout its long history, the United Kingdom will continue to champion freedom of navigation. Individual States that take action to uphold that freedom are entitled to support from the entire community of nations. Yet today, and for many months now, freedom of navigation in these waters is threatened - threatened by indiscriminate attacks on unarmed vessels, by harassment of innocent merchant shipping and, most reckless of all, by the laying of random mines. The world saw another example on Monday, as Iran sowed mines in the path of a convoy in international waters. The response of the United States to that insane act was fully justified, and it should be supported by all those who wish to bring this conflict to an end, for the stability of the entire region is menaced by this escalating threat to peace.
The challenge to this institution and all it stands for could not be more direct. The blunt truth is that the way in which the United Nations handles the conflict between Iran and Iraq must have a decisive effect upon its reputation in the eyes of all the peoples whom we represent.
If the United Nations is to rise to this challenge, to help end this grotesque slaughter, then we must strive for and maintain a degree of unity that has hardly ever been achieved before. Other international groupings can give a powerful lead, by condemning the conflict and mobilizing all their energies in the cause of Peace. That is why we value the mounting weight of support from the Organization of African Unity, the Arab League, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the Organization of the Islamic Conference. In the same sense, the twelve members of the European Community are giving their United backing.
All this shows how deeply the world cares about ending the Gulf conflict. But caring is not enough. The Security Council has a particular responsibility to act. That responsibility has been unanimously accepted by the Council, and that unanimity has been built on the collective determination of the five permanent members. Each permanent member has resisted the temptation to put its national interest before the cause of peace - and must continue to do so, for there is an overriding need for the five to continue working together, as the motor of action by the whole Security Council. 
No one has understood and emphasized that need more than the Secretary—General himself. So it was particularly fitting that he personally should have undertaken the difficult and delicate mission recently entrusted to him by the Security Council· For this, as for all his service in the cause of peace, he deserves our warm thanks and admiration.
As a result, we now know the views of the Iraqi and Iranian Governments on resolution 598 (1987). That resolution, legally binding, demanded that both Iran and Iraq should cease fire. It paid due attention to the legitimate concerns and grievances of both Iran and Iraq. And, rightly, it provided that in the absence of compliance the measures necessary for enforcement would be put in place, The Security Council's determination to ensure compliance must remain firm. What we now have to decide is whether the Security Council should move without further ado to an arms embargo.
After Iran's deeds and words this week, can anyone still believe that it intends to comply with the resolution? Monday's two unprovoked attacks, with missile and mine, show Iran's true intentions. So do the words of its President from this rostrum yesterday. He described the Security Council as "a paper factory for issuing worthless and ineffective orders". He invited the world to conclude that "the only option left is to use violence' (A/42/PV.6, p. 57).
The United Kingdom therefore thinks it essential now to start work on the further measures foreseen in resolution 598 (1987). The first step should be an arms embargo, to prevent the flow of arms to those wishing to ignore the United Nations and to prolong the conflict. For action is needed - action to show that the Security Council is neither worthless nor ineffective, that it will uphold its authority. We in Britain will not hesitate to take the steps at home which we judge necessary. I can announce today that we have decided to close down the operations of the Iranian military procurement offices in London. For us, the cynical attack on the "Gentle Breeze" was the last straw. The United Nations as a whole should learn the same lesson from what Iran has said and done this week.
The Gulf conflict is the most imminent danger. But it is not the only threat to world peace. The Arab-Israel dispute has already dragged on for decades. But the present deadlock is no solution, no panacea. Far from it: It is highly unstable. In the occupied territories, misery and repression persist. In Israel itself, the Palestinian population is rapidly expanding. Already two generations of Arabs and Israelis have lived out their lives under the shadow of war and insecurity. Yet the basis for the settlement that must one day be reached is plain to see: Israel's right to a secure existence; and the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination.
Virtually the whole world now accepts the idea of an international conference under United Nations auspices. The United Kingdom is convinced of the need for it. An international conference will provide a framework for negotiations. It will not be a trick or a trap. It will not impose solutions, nor have the right to veto agreements reached between the parties. It need not be feared by any man of goodwill. Nor can the international community ignore Lebanon, where the United Nations Interim Force needs our full support. The Lebanese must be left to tackle their problems free from outside interference. All foreign forces should withdraw, and Lebanon's international borders must be respected. 

There are far too many innocent victims of all these conflicts. They include those who have been taken hostage, some of whom, alas, are citizens of my own country. We have some experience of defending ourselves against terrorism. Our position is clear and quite unshakeable. We will do no deals with terrorists. That is the only policy that makes sense. Every sordid deal by a Government, every ransom paid, makes another terrorist act worthwhile and increases the threat to all out citizens.
I say to those who are holding Britons hostage; we shall never submit to your blackmail. You will gain nothing. You will only bring your cause into disrepute. Set the hostages free. I urge all those with Influence over those holding hostages to say the same. And I urge this whole Assembly, on behalf of the hostages of every nation, to send the same plain and urgent message.
Another problem cries out for a United response from the International community; southern Africa - never off the agenda of this Organization, and tightly so. For although South Africa may not be the only example of racial Intolerance in this world, it is unique in the Institutionalised domination of other races by the white population. Apartheid is morally repugnant, indefensible, inhuman. But it is indeed more than that; it is also suicidal for those who practise it. All the lessons of history tell us that. Apartheid breeds discontent, violence and revolution. We understand the seething discontent of the black population, who can fall to be moved by the thought that a whole generation  as come of age while Nelson Mandela has remained behind bars?
And yet a prosperous, stable and just South Africa cannot be built by violence that is the way to ruin, despair and death. Those who rule South Africa must change course before it is too late. There are signs that some of them realize that, but reforms so far have been too slow and too limited. The time bomb is in place and the clock is ticking; it must be defused before it is too late.
We all share one common aim: the elimination of apartheid as quickly as possible. What can the world do to encourage South Africa in the right direction? The answer cannot lie in further measures which would serve only to unite the whites against the world, to slow the process of change, to prolong apartheid, and to blight the lives of the very people we wish to help. Yet we must maintain the moral pressure on the rulers of South Africa. They must not be allowed to put their faith in the status quo. We must convince them that peace and security can be achieved only through genuine dialogue with the leaders of the other races, and by comprehensive reform. We are working to that end.
Of course, apartheid afflicts not only those who live in South Africa; it also destabilizes South Africa's neighbours. The United Kingdom is taking a lead in helping the front-line States: for some of them we are giving practical help in training and equipping their military forces to ensure the security of their transport links; for others we have given extensive aid to develop alternative transport systems and to pay for training and equipment. Our aid to the States of the Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference (SADCC) over the last five years totals more than $1 billion. Few if any of the States represented here today can match that record.
South Africa is by far the world's worst example of racial intolerance. But very few areas of the world are free from quarrels founded on differences of race, religion or language. Such quarrels need not be insoluble. The European Community is one of the most successful examples in history of making shared values and aspirations rise from the ashes of war and division. Yesterday's speech by the Foreign Minister of Denmark, which now holds the presidency, was eloquent testimony to our progress towards "ever closer union". In Sri Lanka there are hopeful signs that ethnic conflicts might be ended. The agreement between President Jayawardene and Mr. Gandhi is a bold step forward. The deplorable terrorist attack on the Sri Lanka President last month underlined the dangers besetting those who work for an agreement of this kind. They displayed great courage. Everyone must now work for its continuing success.
Likewise in Cyprus we support the Secretary-General's efforts to bring the two sides towards a settlement. The United Kingdom knows that difficult decisions are needed. We call on both sides to show the necessary courage.
And, in Korea, the United Kingdom notes with close interest the recent moves to restart dialogue between North and South. We support moves to reduce the tensions in that divided peninsula. We hope that the Korean people may soon be represented here. All these political problems demand the urgent attention of the United Nations. So do those in the economic field, which directly affect so many Member States.
One economic burden, one which has featured prominently in many speeches from this rostrum, is the cycle of debt. Here Britain has recently put forward an initiative to help the poorest countries of sub-Saharan Africa, which are striving to set their economies on a sustainable basis for development. This means converting aid loans into grants, rescheduling official loans with longer grace periods, and reducing interest rates on official loans. Already in this region we have written off aid debts to the tune of £244 million.
Yet despite all our efforts, glut and famine still disfigure the world. In the industrial countries we subsidize our farmers to produce food nobody wants and sell it below the cost of production. In developing countries, the subsidy, if there is one, goes to the consumer, and price control deprives the farmer of the incentive to produce more. So he leaves the land to find work in the city - and his Government has to buy from abroad the food he would have produced. The cost to the world and the waste are enormous.
The huge and urgent task of agricultural reform is to recreate market incentives and progressively to eliminate protectionist measures around the world. Food must be on the agenda whenever nations gather for discussion. It will be much on our minds at next month's important meeting of Commonwealth Heads of Government in Vancouver, to which Britain much looks forward.	.In Europe in the last 40 years we have shown that the divisions of history can be healed by wholly peaceful means, by political co-operation and by economic integration. Military force, as we Europeans know to our cost, seldom brings a lasting solution to anything) it can be only a last resort when everything else has failed.
That is just as true in Central America. Here, too, long-term security can only be assured by a peaceful settlement reached with the free consent of all its peoples, democratically expressed. That is why we welcomed the agreement signed by the five Central American Presidents in Guatemala in August. We wish it every success.
It is true too in the South Atlantic. We shall continue to look for ways of restoring more normal relations with Argentina while upholding the Falkland Islanders' rights to self-determination.
This universal truth applies to Asia as well, and nowhere more than in Afghanistan. During eight years of Soviet occupation, tens of thousands have been killed and 5 million refugees have been driven to leave their country. That is a bitter indictment of Soviet polices and a grave burden for Pakistan, which has shouldered it nobly. 
But the Soviet Union of today is not the Soviet Union which invaded Afghanistan. Since he took over the reins of power, Mr. Gorbachev has made a remarkable effort to reform, to restructure, to let in light and air from the outside. We have publicly applauded this, and we wish him well. We believe that a more prosperous and efficient Soviet Union will be easier for the world to live with and for its own citizens to live in.
I believe that Mr. Gorbachev knows that he needs a stable international environment to carry out his programme of reform. I detect a genuine wish to find a way to end the war in Afghanistan and to bring Soviet soldiers back from the rocky valleys where so many of them have fallen. Of course that is not an easy task. But the Soviet leaders must make the necessary leap of Imagination if glasnost and perestroika are to have the effect that they should on Soviet foreign, as well as domestic, policy.
The Soviet Union can reasonably seek to avoid instability or threats to its security on its borders. But it must accept that only when a government emerges in Afghanistan that truly commands the confidence and trust of the Afghan people, only then will Afghanistan be stable. The Soviet Union must grasp the nettle: it must withdraw its troops and let the Afghan people decide their own future.
So yet again we meet in the shadow of numerous conflicts. But the gloom is not unbroken. The arms control agreement announced last week by the United States and Soviet Foreign Ministers has lit a beacon of hope for all those who see in greater co-operation and mutual trust between the super-Powers the key to a less troubled world, for the hope must be that an intermediate-nuclear-force (INF) treaty, once concluded, will have benefits extending beyond the agreement itself. It has always been clear that arms control cannot on its own carry the weight of placing and keeping East-West relations on an even keel. Indeed, recent years have shown how difficult it is to make progress in arms negotiations if relations between East and West are generally sour.
But these things do cut both ways. An INF agreement which, for the first time ever, bites into the nuclear arsenals of each side, which, for the first time ever, provides for stringent verification - such an agreement should significantly increase the mutual confidence without which any significant progress in East-West relations is unattainable.
We have not suddenly arrived at some promised land, but an INF agreement will give a shot of adrenalin to the often lethargic and lumbering process of arms control. The next priorities are a 50 per cent cut in the strategic arsenals of the super-Powers, a world-wide ban on chemical weapons, the removal of imbalances in conventional weapons from the Atlantic to the Orals. They are complex and difficult and will test to the utmost the skill, patience and determination of both sides' negotiators.
But an INF agreement will begin to erode the thick ice-cap of mistrust that has accumulated over the years. Of course the melting process will itself release dangerous ice blocks and floes around which we shall all have to navigate with care.
The key is greater trust. If we can see the Soviet Union making a genuine effort to co-operate in solving the world's regional tensions; if we can see them putting the solution of such tensions before the pursuit of national interest; if we can see a more just, free and humane society developing in the Soviet Union, then I think we shall see greater trust between East and West.
I am not unhopeful. The co-operation between the Five on Security Council resolution 598 (1987) may be a sign of better things to come; and the· last year has seen real progress on human rights in the Soviet Union. But there is still a long way to go. For our part we have worked intensively to build up the East-West dialogue. The visit to Moscow by the British Prime Minister and myself in March was an occasion for unusually deep and valuable exchanges. They will continue.
At the beginning of this statement I spoke of a moment of hope. The INF agreement and the impending summit between President Reagan and Mr. Gorbachev are indeed reason for hope. I think it will be the prayer of every one of us here that' that still faint shaft of light will grow and will drive the shadows of fear and distrust ever backward until they ate finally eliminated from this world.
In opening the first General Assembly session in London, Clement Attlee, then British Prime Minister, described the simple truth behind the formation of the United Nations; "The realization by all nations that without co-operation for peace there can be no security for any nation".
That is still the most basic truth. That is why we are here.
﻿Mr. President, your election to the presidency of the United Nations General Assembly at its forty-second session attests to your personal eminence and distinction and our confidence in the guidance and leadership you will provide to our deliberations. We are particularly happy since you come from a country with which India has warm and fraternal relations. We congratulate you on your election and look forward to working together with you.
Allow me also to pay a tribute to our esteemed friend and neighbour from Bangladesh, Foreign Minister Humayun Rasheed Choudhury, for the effective manner in which he conducted the proceedings of our last session.
We greet also our distinguished Secretary-General, and wish him well in the discharge of his many exacting responsibilities.
The year 1987 has special significance for us in India. Four decades ago our people won freedom from colonial bondage through a unique non-violent struggle. Independent India took its rightful place in the comity of nations. We have sought to strengthen the foundations of new India by keeping what is best from our own tradition and by assimilating what is admirable from other civilizations. The fundamental concepts of tolerance, non-violence and equality have conditioned our Weltanschauung. Tolerance and non-violence are embedded in our policy of peaceful coexistence and the principles of Panchshila. Equality lies at the root of our belief in democracy and in the sovereign equality of all nations, a principle that is embodied in the Charter of the United Nations.
Even before our independence, the people of India reposed great faith in this Organization. We were present at its creation. The founder of modern India, our first Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, proclaimed that India's attitude towards the United Nations was one of wholehearted co-operation, and of unreserved adherence, both in letter and spirit, to its Charter, It was in this spirit that he promised that India would; "participate fully in its varied activities and endeavour to assume that role in its Councils to which her geographical position, population and contribution towards peaceful progress entitled her."
In our own way, we have endeavoured to fulfil this promise. Though the Organization has had many ups and downs in its short but chequered history, our commitment to it has never wavered. We ate happy that it has been resilient enough to withstand the attempts to retreat from multilateralism and the financial and budgetary pressures brought to bear upon the Organization.
My delegation welcomes the significant understanding between the United States and the USSR to eliminate in termediate-1ange nuclear forces. Even though these forces constitute only a very small fraction of the world's nuclear arsenals, we see the significance of the understanding in the prospects it has opened up for more wide-ranging agreements, which could eventually lead to meaningful nuclear disarmament.
This understanding vividly demonstrates that, given political will, disarmament measures can become a reality. It is imperative that this momentum towards peace and disarmament be sustained. While the primary responsibility for nuclear disarmament rests with the United States and the Soviet Union, a decision by other nuclear-weapon Powers to eliminate nuclear weapons would be an important contribution to the promotion of peace.
Not long ago, on 22 May 1987, Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi joined with leaders of Argentina, Greece, Mexico, Sweden and Tanzania in emphasizing that: "For too long, fear and mistrust have prevented progress in disarmament. Arms and fears feed on each other. Now is the time to break this vicious circle and lay the foundation for a more secure world". (A/42/319, Annex). It may perhaps be premature to believe that the "vicious circle" is broken·, but it has perhaps been dented and we hope that the momentum will not be lost.
A historic event in this continuing struggle to save humanity from a nuclear holocaust was the signing of the Delhi Declaration on principles for a nuclear-weapon-free and non-violent world, in New Delhi last November. Its importance lies in the fact that a major nuclear-weapon Power, the USSR, joined with a major non-aligned country, India, to announce 10 principles that could pave the way to a nuclear-weapon-free civilization. We are happy that a beginning has been made by the super-Powers towards translating at least some of the principles of the Delhi Declaration into concrete action.
The international arms race and its deleterious effect on the world economy was the focus of a conference earlier this month. The International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development threw into stark relief the deplorable dilemma of massive global expenditure on arms, on the one hand, and the non-availability of resources for meeting the basic needs of a large portion of the world's population, on the other. An overwhelming majority of nations took part in it. I had the privilege of presiding over that Conference, which reaffirmed, at the political level for the first time, the relationship between disarmament and development. It is important that follow-up steps be taken quickly so that the conclusions of that Conference may be translated into action. May we now hope that those who stayed away from those discussions will participate in this effort. 
I now turn my attention to southern Africa, where the struggle for freedom and equality continues to this day. The racist regime in Pretoria violates every norm of civilized conduct. Its policy of apartheid is an affront to the conscience of mankind. The Pretoria regime remains in illegal occupation of Namibia and continues to carry out acts of aggression against the front-line States. It is thus the root cause of tension, instability and conflict in the region, endangering international peace and security. It has rejected every initiative for a peaceful resolution of the problems of the region. 
In the face of the intransigence of the racist regime, the only peaceful course before the international community is to impose comprehensive mandatory sanctions against South Africa·, the alternative is violent upheaval. We reiterate our full support for the freedom struggle of the people of Namibia, under the leadership of the South West Africa People's Organization. The only basis for a peaceful settlement of the Namibian question lies in Security Council resolution 435 (1978), without bringing in any linkages.
The non-aligned countries, at their summit meeting in Harare last year, decided to set up the Africa Fund, with the object of assisting the front-line States and national liberation movements in southern Africa against the depredations of the racist regime. India is privileged to have been chosen to chair the fund, which has become operational with wide support from the international community. Those of us who believe in the moral need to work for the peaceful resolution of the problems of southern Africa have a duty to support and contribute to the fund.
On 29 July President Jayawardene of Sri Lanka and Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi signed a historic agreement which has brought peace and tranquillity to Sri Lanka after four years. We had throughout stressed the importance and the necessity of a political settlement to the ethnic conflict that had plagued Sri Lanka since 1983. I should like to pay tribute to the President of Sri Lanka for signing this agreement, which is a manifestation of the fact that non-aligned countries can resolve their problems without outside interference. Bearing in mind the recent history of the conflict, there are inevitably minor hitches and problems, but they are not insurmountable. Given the existing understanding and goodwill between the two countries they will be resolved sooner rather than later.
The situation in West Asia is gravely worrying. The core problem is the question of Palestine. The people of Palestine are still denied their inalienable human rights, including the right to establish an independent state in their homeland. We support the struggle of the Palestinian people, led by the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO). We urge that an international peace conference on the Middle East be convened at an early date, under the auspices of the United Nations and with the participation of all the parties concerned, including the PLO.
The continuing hostilities between Iran and Iraq concern us greatly. We have close historical ties with both countries. Our heartfelt desire is to see those two nations live in peace. The conflict between two important members of the Non-Aligned Movement, taking place as it does in a region which is in our immediate neighbourhood, has consistently engaged our attention. The United Nations has been deeply involved in seeking ways and means to end the war. The Security Council adopted unanimously resolution 598 (1987) and the Secretary-General has been engaged in important consultations relating to its implementation. We commend and support these continuing efforts in the hope that they will bring about a	'
negotiated, mutually acceptable settlement of this tragic conflict.
India supports the efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special Representative to secure an early and peaceful solution to the situation in Afghanistan. The military presence of great Powers in the Indian Ocean is ominous. Such presence has unfortunately intensified in recent months. The heightened military, presence of outside Powers is in conflict with the 1971 Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace. It demonstrates vividly that the main objective behind the 1971 Declaration is as valid today as it was when the Declaration was made.   What is more, it shows the futility of efforts to dilute the thrust of the primacy in the objective of the Declaration, which is to tackle the external threat in the Indian Ocean. In that context we believe that for the proposed international conference on the Indian Ocean to achieve meaningful results it will be necessary to ensure that all big Powers having a military presence in the Indian Ocean participate.
I come new to another neighbouring region of ours with which we have very close historical and cultural links. As we have always advocated in conflict situations, the south-east Asian question can be resolved only through political dialogue. The legitimate interests and concerns of the countries in the region must be taken into account. We are encouraged by the fact that all countries in the region want a peaceful solution and are engaged in finding a formula for a regional dialogue. We have seen possibilities of common areas of understanding emerge following the recent meeting of the Foreign Ministers of Indonesia and Viet Nam I have myself recently visited all the countries belonging to the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the Indo-China States. We believe that such contacts must be strengthened and more widely established among the countries of the region.
The Korean peninsula continues to remain divided. We support the desire of its people for peaceful reunification. There have been encouraging developments in Central America. Following the invaluable work of the Contadora and Support Groups the Central American States have taken a regional initiative of great importance. We warmly welcome the Guatemala accord and the subsequent follow-up action. We trust that all parties, both within and outside the region, will co-operate fully to ensure the success of this regional initiative, which offers the prospect of peace, progress and stability in Central America.
We reaffirm once again our solidarity with the people of Cyprus, whose country remains divided with part of it under foreign occupation. We reaffirm our support for the unity, territorial integrity, sovereignty, independence and non-alignment of Cyprus, a country with which we have traditionally had close and friendly relations. We support the efforts of the Secretary-General to bring about a satisfactory resolution of this issue.
The events in Fiji have been deeply distressing. It is particularly tragic that at a time when the political parties representing the people of Fiji had come to an agreement which could have taken the country on the path of national reconciliation the armed forces have dealt a severe blow to that process, by seizing power for a second time. Attempts to deprive citizens of the country of their legitimate rights merely on the basis of their racial origin are against all tenets of democracy and human rights and are contrary to the United Nations Charter. What is happening in Fiji has distinct and unacceptable racial overtones. This development is reprehensible. We believe that the path to peace and prosperity in Fiji lies in the restoration of democracy and the rule of law.
This year India achieved the unique distinction of becoming the first registered pioneer investor under the United Nations regime of the oceans with the allotment of a deep sea-bed mine site in the Central Indian Ocean. An equivalent mine site has been reserved for international exploration and exploitation. We believe that this historic event has set in motion the international regime of deep sea-bed mining and has strengthened the rule of international law. 
I now turn to the world economy, which continues to be in a state of deep disarray. The rates of growth of even developed countries are historically very low. All future projections indicate even lower rates of growth for those countries. The per capita incomes of many developing countries have dropped to levels lower than they were a decade ago. Commodity prices in real terms have collapsed to their lowest levels in 50 years. Despite the launching of the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations, the proliferation of protectionist measures continues unabated. Interest rates continue to be high in real terms. International liquidity has suffered a sharp contraction in relation both to the volume of trade and to the needs of developing countries. The pattern of trade balance is extremely skewed, with unsustainable surpluses in some countries and deficits in others, and exchange rates continue to show wide fluctuations. It is now widely recognized that the world economy faces a structural crisis which cannot be overcome within the framework of the system instituted after the Second World War. There is therefore an urgent need for evolving co-operative strategies informed by the explicit recognition of increasing global interdependence. We require concerted and comprehensive policy measures in the interrelated areas of money, finance, debt, trade, resource flows and development. The current crisis of the world economic system can be overcome only if we work towards a new international economic order.
In the area of international trade, the highest priority must be given to the preservation and strengthening of an open multilateral trading system, and particularly to translating into practice the oft-repeated commitments on standstill and rollback. It is important to ensure that the Uruguay round of negotiations leads to the emergence of a truly international trade regime conducive to growth and development, with a clear recognition of the needs of developing countries. Multilaterlism and non-discrimination must form the basis for the sustained expansion of trade.
In the area of commodities, we reaffirmed at the seventh session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) the continued validity of the integrated Programme for Commodities. We trust that with the new ratifications the Common Fund will become operational before the end of 19B7. We also hope that the new round of consultations on commodities not covered by existing agreements and arrangements will be initiated soon.
The flows of financial resources from developed to developing countries should be increased substantially and the resources of international financial institutions should be augmented so as to enable them to play a leading role in development finance. We are disappointed that the eighth replenishment of the International Development Association is no larger in real terms than the sixth replenishment. We are however encouraged by the recent move towards reaching agreement on a general capital increase of the World Bank.
The external debt crisis is one of the most serious problems afflicting the developing countries today. The solution to the debt crisis has to be equitable, flexible and development-oriented, based on the concept of shared responsibility and political dialogue. For the success of such a strategy, the promotion of parallel objectives - such as increased access to markets for exports of developing countries, lower interest rates, strengthened and stabilized commodity prices, more stable exchange rates and more vigorous growth-oriented macro-economic policies in major developed countries - is indispensable.
In the light of the generally dismal state of the international economic dialogue, the recent seventh session of UNCTAD must be viewed as a modest success. In at least some areas progress was achieved. Viewed against the background in which the Conference was held, its major significance lies in the reaffirmation of the validity and mandate of UNCTAD.
The report of the World Commission on Environment and Development is a major contribution to the subject. We are glad to note that the Chairman of the Commission, Prime Minister Brundtland, in her address to UNCTAD VII, sought to allay apprehensions that environmental concerns could be used for imposing additional conditionality in the lending policies of international financial institutions. The Brundtland report clearly demonstrates the importance and urgency of tackling environmental issues on a global level. If we seriously want to attach high priority to this objective, the international community must find additional resources for sound environmental measures. Any diversion of existing resources from growth-focused to environment-focused disbursement will be counter-productive. Poverty pollutes. Any slowing down of development can only aggravate environmental problems in developing countries.
We meet here each year in the month of September to deliberate on what ails mankind. Does looking back on the past nine months fill us with hope or despair? This is a time for stocktaking, self-criticism and introspection. The international horizon presents a dark and sinister picture. Here and there an all too brief break in the clouds is visible; otherwise we seem to be looking at clouds that have no silver lining.
Some weeks ago the world population exceeded the 5 billion mark - a sobering event. The drain on sources of energy is unabated. The affluent are burning their candles at both ends and in the middle too, while the less fortunate are deprived of the basic necessities of life. The daily onslaught on the environment continues. The economic scene is not cheering. Terrorists and fanatics disturb the peace and repose of nations.
The United Nations does not offer salvation, but it has paved, it can pave, the way, create the atmosphere, provide the venue and propose the agenda for peace. As somebody has said, while it cannot, perhaps, negotiate for the world, the United Nations can help the world to negotiate.
﻿
Permit me, Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the General Assembly.
I wish to take this opportunity to express our support for the relentless efforts of the emissary of peace and goodwill, the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar.
In a world grown cynical of the super-Powers increased arms competition and fearful of the technologies it has unleashed, the people of Israel appreciate the readiness of the United States and the Soviet Union to begin a process of nuclear disarmament. This is not just a technical accord. It is a political dictum: no longer can we find military answers to political problems. What is necessary are political answers to the military menace. The world remains divided. While on the global level the parties seem to edge slowly towards accommodation, on the regional level passion still endure.
Today, threatening mines in international waterways are symbols not of the modernity of warfare but of its persistence. In our region, mines of extremism lurk just beneath the surface; they may explode when least expected.
Thus, we support the attempt to introduce a durable cease-fire in the Persian Gulf. In the vicinity of the world's most significant source of oil, two flames send dark clouds that obscure the horizon: the flame of fundamentalism launched to overpower moderation, and the flame of belligerency, residue of the Arab-Israeli dispute, seemingly calm, yet hardly extinguished. Each flame may reinforce the other.
Never before was the menace of extremism so perilous; never before were the moderate forces of the Middle East, on both aides, closer to an understanding than today.
Both Arabs and Israelis can be at peace with themselves only if they reach peace with each other.
Fundamentalism threatens moderation. Belligerency requires resources that can help contain extremism.
Arabs are troubled by the thrust of fundamentalism as they struggle with an impossibly expensive arms race and the need to address the just expectations of a rapidly growing population. Israelis are troubled by a demography wrought by war and the need to sustain a defence posture of "the few against the many". That is the heavy toll of the region's flames. They can be further fuelled; they can also be put out. Our actions today can either unleash forces of yet untold destruction, or they can launch us on a course of a new promise. Israel is celebrating its fortieth anniversary; four decades studded by hostility and war. From the memories of the Holocaust we have had to build a new life, as tragic biographies merged into a history of hope. We have returned to the birthplace of our faith, to the cradle of our biblical values. The language of the Prophets now echoes with the joy of children in the mountains and valleys where it began. Deserts were turned into gardens, human talent into industries. No emergency has delayed the growth of the democratic spirit; no war has prevented the construction of a just society and a modern economy.
The historical analogy is inspiring: For 40 years our people wandered in the desert before Moses brought them to the promised land. Today again, after 40 years in the wilderness of belligerency, we stand at the gates of a new promise to our children and to the children of our neighbours: to live in understanding despite the differences; to determine their own fate without interference by armed forces triggered by hate.
Can we offer them a Middle East where the intellectual challenge is man's conquest of nature, free of man's conquest of man? In brief, can we bring peace?
We remember the last words of Moses before he parted from his people at the gates of the promised land. We admitted his inability to provide them with adequate clothing and fresh bread, and he offered them the right of choice;
"I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing: therefore, choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live". (Deuteronomy, 30:19)
I speak with a sense of urgency, as the coming few months may be crucial.
During this brief period we may begin negotiations on one of the most important issues of our day, or miss the ark of hope. This brief period may produce the long-sought-after breakthrough or be absorbed by political paralysis. 
Confidence that was built carefully, almost tacitly, among several parties in the area may evaporate. A coalition for peace held together by fragile links may fall apart with uncertain likelihood of revival.
Present crises - in the Persian Gulf or Lebanon - may take unexpected turns; disillusionment with the absence of progress may produce new coalitions of hostility. Thus, in the absence of a vibrant peace process, the political skies may become capricious again, bringing drought to a thirsty region.
Against these prospects of uncertainty stands the unprecedented if vulnerable reality whereby relevant parties to the conflict see a way to begin negotiations. Indeed, two years ago both Arabs and Israelis announced from this podium support for the current initiative for peace. Moreover, since then further progress has been made.
We have rekindled our peace with Egypt and intensified the dialogue with its leaders and its people. We have found President Mubarak to be a builder of a better life for his people and of bridges for comprehensive peace in the region.
At the cedar groves of the mountains of Ifrane, we met courageous leadership; King Hassan of Morocco calling for peace, aloud, and clearly.
Across the Jordan River, rich in history and poor in water, we hear the echo of the voice of King Hussein, an experienced leader who wishes, like us, to bring our peoples out of the darkness of old hostility into the new greenhouses of peace, security and development.
In the West Bank and Gaza, we notice an unannounced change. Many Palestinians seem to have concluded that violence leads nowhere, that dialogue should not be postponed. There is a real readiness to negotiate in a joint Jordanian-Palestinian delegation to solve a problem that all of us need, and would like, to solve; the Palestinian problem. 
We have all matured politically with the repeated failure of attempts to produce peace plans for our region. We have realized that none can be acceptable as a pre-condition of negotiation, for it is the object of negotiation to produce solutions that are otherwise unattainable. Hence, over the past three years efforts have focused on the most promising plan; to begin negotiations without pre-planning their outcome.
Five months ago those efforts crystallized and found expression in a document worked out with the support of American emissaries, whose tireless and creative efforts should be credited with much of what has been accomplished. That document reflected a meeting of minds, Arab and Jewish, on the basis of eight principles.
First, the goal is peace and direct negotiations are the way to reach it. Second, an international conference is the door to direct negotiations. Once convened it should lead immediately to face-to-face bilateral negotiations. Third, the conference would not impose a settlement or veto agreements reached bilaterally. Fourth, those who would attend the conference must accept Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and renounce terrorism and violence. Fifth, negotiations would be aimed at solving the Palestinian problem in all its aspects. This would be done in negotiations between the Jordanian-Palestinian delegation and the Israeli delegation. Sixth, negotiations would be conducted independently in three bilateral-geographic committees: a Jordanian-Palestinian delegation and an Israeli delegation in one·, a Syrian and an Israeli delegation in another·, and a Lebanese and an Israeli delegation in the third. All delegations, as well as an Egyptian one, would be invited to participate in a fourth, multilateral, committee. Seventh, whereas the bilateral committees would be engaged in solving the conflicts of the past, the multilateral committee would deal with the charting of opportunities for the region's future. Eighth, the five permanent members of the Security Council would serve as the matchmakers, entrusted with bringing the parties together and legitimising the process whereby the parties would negotiate freely and directly, without uninvited - and occasionally divided - external involvement. This would not be a ceremonial role but an essential one in facilitating negotiations.
Israel is United in its search for peace, in our desire to negotiate directly with our neighbours. We differ over how best to move the process forward. The idea of an international conference raises opposition in some Israeli quarters, while others see it as a real opening. The Israeli Cabinet is divided on the issue and has yet to make a decision. Much depends on the nature of the conference. Unless the permanent members of the Security Council respect the current consensus, rather than insisting on their old preferences, the international conference may remain just a slogan.
We call upon the Soviet Union to credit us with the same good faith in our efforts towards peace as we credit it within its readiness to make glasnost a way of life. The Soviet Union is not our enemy. It must be aware of our historical and family attachment to our brethren living in its land. We appeal to the new leadership in Moscow to allow the Jewish people to express their identity freely and to reunite with their destiny in the land of their ancestors.
We call upon the People's Republic of China, a great country that we respect, not to be timid or one-sided in its support for negotiations.
To both Moscow and Beijing we say candidly that diplomatic relations are not the prize for peace but a channel for communication. Those wishing to participate in bringing peace cannot confine their relations to one side in the rivalry alone.
I should like to address myself to the Palestinian people. The time for recrimination and blame is past. They have brought only violence and terror. Now is the time to turn from violence to dialogue and to travel jointly towards a different destiny. There, your children, like ours, will live in self-respect, exercise self-expression and enjoy freedom and peace. We, who have experienced domination by others, do not wish to dominate others. We, who sought justice and security, do not wish to deny them to others.
For the past 40 years our ancient region has become - not by choice - a testing ground for the technology of war. Thousands of human lives, Arab and Jewish, have been tragically lost and billions of dollars have been spent to no avail.
We are unable to change the past but we can design a future in which our region will be able to develop into a testing ground for mobilizing science and technology, to offer a new source of growth; a future in which peace attracts economic investment; a future in which resources saved by restraining the arms race are invested in basic and higher education.
It is this vision of an alternative future that has given birth to the suggestion that in the wake of the opening of political negotiations an economic conference, without political strings attached, should take place. Such a conference, composed of those having a stake in regional stability and the capacity to contribute to it, could offer a most Imaginative plan for regional development.
To those who preach indecision, to those who take shelter in the illusion of a tranquil status quo, we say: this is our moment of choice; decisions of today will determine the fate of our people for decades to come. Our choice is between hatred and dialogue, suspicion and hope. Our choice is between investment in an arms race and investment in the well-being of our people, of our children. Our choice is between extremism and moderation, between fundamentalism and reason. It is our choice to prevent the next war.
It is up to us to make the months to come a time for reason.
I welcome the forthcoming visit of Secretary Shultz to our region as an opportunity to negotiate on the remaining obstacles. I am convinced that there are no conflicts for which there is no hope for solution, only people who have best hope in their search for solutions. I am convinced that the real conflict in the Middle East today is not between Jew and Moslem·, Arab and Israeli; Palestinian and Zionist. The conflict is between "past-oriented" leadership and "future-oriented" leadership; between those resigned to the fatalism of belligerency and those determined to alter this fate. For the future of our children, for a better tomorrow, we must all stand up to the preachers of war.
To the advocates of destruction, United we have to say there are no holy wars, only holy human lives.
On the very first day of our independence I learned from my mentor, David Ben-Gurion, who said this time and again, that peace is the highest degree of security·, and that the moral call is the highest degree of wisdom. I shall remember it forever.
﻿To the representatives of the countries of the world - greetings. Bring to us from your home countries the gifts we can all share, your words of wisdom and your love. I am very happy that we have all arrived here at this gathering of world leaders. 
On behalf of New Zealand I add my congratulations, sir, to those of the many speakers who have preceded me on your election as President of the forty-second regular session of the General Assembly.
Seven weeks ago the New Zealand Labour Government was re-elected with an increased majority. The Government was greatly encouraged by that demonstration of support from the people of our country for the policies we have pursued at home and overseas. My address today provides an opportunity for me to reaffirm the commitment of the New Zealand Government and people to the United Nations. That commitment comes from 42 years of membership of the Organization, from active participation in its work and from New Zealand's firm adherence to its ideals.
In this spirit of steadfast support for the United Nations I am happy to be able to announce here that the New Zealand Government has recently reviewed its capacity to contribute to United Nations peace-keeping operations. As a result, we have decided to notify the Secretary-General of our willingness to expand our practical contribution to that most important part of the United Nations work. We have participated in United Nations peace-keeping operations in the past. At present, we provide personnel for the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) and we contribute financially to the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) and the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). In future, we anticipate giving favourable consideration to requests from the Secretary-General for future involvement of New Zealand forces in peace-keeping for the United Nations. In our case, that would probably, for example, take the form of specialist teams from the New Zealand armed forces. Our broad purpose in making this commitment is to demonstrate active, practical support ; for the United Nations role of strengthening and monitoring international peace and security. 
Fundamentally the job of the United Nations is to preserve peace. That was why it was founded 42 years ago. That is why it remains so important in the world today· And in today's world that means that this Organization must address clearly and critically the overriding threat to international peace and security posed by the global arms race, and in particular the nuclear-arms race.
New Zealand's first priority in this Assembly is to work for the achievement of urgent reductions in nuclear weapons. The ultimate goal must be a world rid of nuclear weapons; a world in which no country can claim to have to rely on nuclear weapons as the guarantor of its security.
New Zealand has been greatly encouraged by recent developments in relations between the two super-Powers. Along with all other nations we welcomed their decision to agree in principle to scrap an entire class of nuclear weapons - the intermediate-range nuclear forces (INF) stationed in Europe and Asia. If that agreement in principle is followed, as it must be, by a treaty giving legal force to the political commitments made in Washington, it will mark a turning-point in the arms race. The INF agreement will be the first ever nuclear-arms reduction treaty. It will be testimony to the conviction that security can be maintained with fewer, not more, armaments, and that an increasing number of weapons is not necessary to preserve the peace.
An INF agreement will be a welcome first step. But it is only a first step. It must be followed by measures to bring about deep reductions in strategic nuclear weapons, and by measures to prevent an arms race in outer space. Moreover, if progress is to be made on those two fronts, it will be necessary to address as a matter of priority the perceived imbalance in conventional forces and thus to achieve a balance of such forces at significantly reduced levels.
President Reagan and General Secretary Gorbachev have themselves pointed the way. At Reykjavik last year they showed that there is no disagreement on the goals that must be achieved: a 50-per-cent reduction in strategic nuclear arsenals and, ultimately, the complete elimination o£ nuclear weapons. We urge them not to turn away from those objectives, not to turn away from the vision we saw from Reykjavik of a world without nuclear weapons. That vision will not be realized this year, perhaps not even this century. Yet it is an objective in the achievement of which every country in the Assembly has a direct and vital interest.
The immediate challenge is to find ways of working towards that goal while at the same time maintaining the security of every State and region.
New Zealand has long held that concluding a comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty is one important way to do that. In the resolutions that we, together with Australia and a number of other countries, have put before the Assembly, we have urged the international community to seize on the central means of putting a brake on the nuclear-arms race. While we have welcomed, therefore, the recent agreement between the United States and the Soviet Union to begin stage-by stage negotiations on nuclear testing, we would nevertheless still urge the participants to see that those negotiations are more closely linked to the objective the Assembly has reiterated for so many years - an end to all nuclear testing by all States in all environments for all time. 
We will again be putting a resolution on nuclear testing before the First Committee of the Assembly. We will be calling on the Conference on Disarmament to break the impasse which has strangled effective multilateral consideration of this issue for the past five years.
Another issue which the multilateral disarmament process has so far failed to address adequately is the prevention of an arms race in outer space. Three years ago my Prime Minister David Lange noted from this rostrum the disquieting indications that the military competition between the two super-Powers might be moving into the new environment of outer space. Developments since that time have done little to allay our concern. New Zealand is unequivocally opposed to the extension of the arms race into outer space. We will be following closely the deliberations at the Conference on Disarmament on this subject next year and at the third special session of this Assembly on disarmament, where it can be expected to receive considerable attention.
However, there have been some notable achievements this year. Progress has been made at the Geneva negotiations on a convention to eliminate chemical weapons - some of the most barbaric instruments of war, the use of which we unequivocally condemn. We look forward to the early completion of that most urgent work. In addition, the successful conclusion o£ the International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development, which I was privileged to address just over a month ago, should have restored some faith in multilateralism. The consensus achieved at that Conference is all the more significant when considered against the pessimism that marked its preparatory process. It should encourage us as we prepare for the third special session on disarmament next year. 
As a smaller nation with little power to influence the great nuclear-weapon States, We simply make a plea, an impassioned plea, to our brothers and sisters that have that power. We are now at a historic turning-point in the modern era. Having gone steadily forward in preparation for defence or conflict since men first formed groups and alliances, we have come to the brink. We, most of us, want to turn back. But there are still abroad fears that those whom we have not learned to knew or to trust will keep pressing ahead, that to proceed with disarming will undermine our own security. Learning to trust each other enough, learning to tone down the rhetoric we use against each other/ is now fundamental to the steps we need to take to enable this small, delicate planet and its people to survive.
That is why my country is so determined to see progress towards disarmament. The stakes are enormous. While the arms race continues in its nuclear and conventional dimensions, the security of each of us is at risk. New Zealanders do not expect others to act while we do nothing ourselves. Equally, we do not tell others how to resolve the particular security imperatives of their region as they seek to give substance to the principles of the Charter and to the international community's desire for a safer, less militarised world.
At home my Government has enacted legislation to ensure that New Zealand remains nuclear free. With our partners in the South Pacific Forum we have made a contribution to the security of our region through the adoption and entry into force of the South Pacific Nuclear-Free-Zone Treaty. That Treaty reinforces the non-proliferation undertakings already given by nearly all Forum countries through our adherence to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. It gives expression to the unanimous desire of all the independent and self-governing States of our region that our part of the world should not be used as a testing ground for nuclear weapons or a dumping ground for nuclear waste. For the zone established by the Treaty to be truly effective, however, we rely on the nuclear-weapon States to commit themselves unreservedly to respecting its provisions. It is our earnest hope that all five nuclear—weapon States will demonstrate respect for the wishes of South Pacific States by adhering to the protocols to the Treaty. It is our particular hope that France will demonstrate its understanding of the sensitivities of our region, the region in which it seeks to be a partner, by putting an end to its nuclear-testing programme in the South Pacific.
The control and reduction of armaments may help to maintain international security. It is the use of arms that destroys it. The Charter accordingly imposes an obligation on all States to settle their differences by negotiation and not to go to war. In the Security Council the Charter created the means by which the United Nations could uphold the rule of law and work for the peaceful settlement of disputes and the ending of conflict. The Council's record is far from unblemished we believe that its performance could be improved if its members could co-operate to settle disputes before the parties turn to conflict and its decisions might be less often disregarded or defied if the policies and actions of the great Powers showed greater respect for the laws they enjoin others to follow.
New Zealand welcomes the rare unanimous decision by the Security Council to seek an end to the war between Iran and Iraq. We regret only that the conflict was allowed to continue for seven years before the Council intervened to fulfil the role assigned to it by the Charter. The Secretary-General may be assured of our full support in his patient efforts, on behalf of the Council and with the trust of both parties, to settle the conflict in accordance with resolution 598 (1987). It is to his office, too, that we look for assistance in ending the aggression against the peoples of Afghanistan and Kampuchea, which has continued year after year regardless of the wishes and condemnation of the General Assembly. Political settlements in both countries and the withdrawal of foreign forces from them are long overdue. In Korea, the armed confrontation still continues after more than three decades. The absence of Korean representation is a major gap in the universality of the United Nations. New Zealand shares the widespread view that the two Koreas should be admitted as Members of the United Nations as soon as possible and should pursue their negotiations towards reconciliation and, if possible, national reunification.
Pew situations have preoccupied the United Nations longer than the South African Government's racist practices, its illegal occupation of Namibia and its policies of destabilization in the region. Like those of the Commonwealth Group which last year sought to initiate a dialogue between the Government and genuine representatives of the black community, mediation efforts by the United Nations have come to nothing. The South African Government equates justice with white supremacy and right with the forces at its disposal. Its armies have marched in territories of neighbouring States. Its police have detained both black leaders and children looking for something better than education for a life of subjection. For our part we have given effect to the measures against South Africa recommended by the Commonwealth to impress on the authorities in Pretoria the urgency of dismantling apartheid. But, sadly, I have to say that, in the absence of effective action by more countries or a firm response to the threat by the Security Council, I see little prospect that the South African Government will depart from its determination not to reject apartheid, but to tinker with it, at its own pace and in its own time.
Apartheid is a most brutal manifestation of racism and disregard of human rights. It is not, however, the only such manifestation. We all know too well the many abuses of human rights that occur in various countries represented in this body. The United Nations has done much valuable work in codifying universal standards of respect for human rights. We must ensure that this work continues and that the standards already set are fully respected.
Abuses of human rights are a direct attack on the integrity of the individual. Terrorism strikes at the integrity of the community. It kills the innocent and cruelly disrupts the normal operations of society. It is also a threat to world peace. An important task at this session will be to build on the achievement of resolution 40/61 and thereby encourage the adoption of practical measures to deal with international terrorism. Another item of importance to New Zealand is that on Antarctica, an issue that has been on the Assembly's agenda since 1983. New Zealand is firmly committed to maintaining the Antarctic Treaty which has preserved the peace and stability of the region to our south over the past 27 years. We hope that the Assembly's deliberations on Antarctica at this session will bring further understanding and support for the Treaty, which any Member of the Organization is free to join.
Events in Fiji show that the South Pacific is not immune from turmoil or change. For New Zealand - a close friend and neighbour - these events have been a matter of very great sadness. Since the time of the first coup New Zealand has steadfastly supported the efforts of Fiji's Governor-General to return the country to parliamentary rule·, we continue to regard him as the legitimate source of authority in Fiji. It follows that New Zealand does not recognize the legality of Colonel Rabuka's self-declared republic. Even at this late stage we hope that the people of Fiji will pull back and insist that their leaders find a just political solution which takes account of the interests of all. New Zealand trusts that the Governor-General will hold fast to the principles of legitimacy which have guided him thus far. We very much hope that no constitution will be adopted that would make Fiji Indians second class citizens in their own country. We want to see Fiji regain its rightful position in the Pacific region and on the wider world stage. Like all its neighbours New Zealand wants to see Fiji strengthened by a reassertion of its traditions of tolerance and good sense, playing an active part in the peaceful development of the South Pacific. Failure to achieve a solution would be a major set-back, not only for Fiji but for the entire South Pacific region.
Fiji's crisis is a recent development. We have, however, been concerned for some time at the dangers inherent in the situation in our closest neighbour New Caledonia if the natural progress of that Territory to self-determination is frustrated. At the initiative of the countries of the South Pacific Forum, the General Assembly last year resolved that New Caledonia was a Non-Self-Governing Territory within the meaning of the United Nations Charter. Forum countries sought to have New Caledonia re-inscribed on the list of Non-Self-Governing Territories because of their wish to see a more constructive approach by the administering Power. Present policies serve to exacerbate divisions within the Territory and appear likely to frustrate movement towards independence.
My Government believes that France has a continuing role to play in the South Pacific region. But that will require a far-sighted approach to resolving the problems of New Caledonia and a sensitivity to the views and feelings of the peoples of the region. We have watched with genuine regret what has appeared to us to be a policy that does not take sufficient account of long-term concerns and solutions, bringing with it the prospect of more confrontation and division within New Caledonia.
Since last year's vote, France has promoted a referendum in New Caledonia, an exercise which in our view has not helped the political process there and about which, as we know from the debate which surrounded the passage of the referendum legislation through the French Parliament earlier this year, there are considerable doubts in France itself. A referendum which did not offer the full range of choices prescribed by United Nations practices and guidelines is deficient. It cannot be regarded as a free choice when the administering Power is committed to promoting one particular choice and the forces of government are directed to that end. A process of preparation during which options were not fully presented and were not adequately explained is a further serious deficiency. A period of preparation in which there was only circumscribed dialogue within the Territory and throughout which there was a strong military presence, is no atmosphere for free and impartial consideration of New Caledonia's long-term future. In short, a political consultation that forced a substantial sector of the community to repudiate the very process, is inherently flawed. It is not a valid act of s el f -determination.
I appeal to the French Government to resume contact with all interested parties in New Caledonia, to accept the offer of dialogue which the South Pacific Forum has made and to involve the United Nations in the political process that is to take place in New Caledonia.
Elsewhere in the South Pacific the United Nations has played a valuable role in the decolonization process as Non-Self-Governing Territories have moved to self-government or to independence in accordance with United Nations principles and practices. For this reason my Government urges strong support for the moderate, principled and constructive resolution on New Caledonia which will be taken up in the Fourth Committee at this session of the Assembly.
For the most part the decolonization process in the Pacific has been peaceful and has laid the basis for good regional co-operation. That tradition has been continued this year with the proclamation of the Compacts of Free Association of ' the Marshall Islands and the Federated States of Micronesia. New Zealand welcomes them as new members of the South Pacific Forum. We look forward to increasing contacts with the Micronesian Governments in the years to come and to the fulfilment of the United Nations role in the Trust Territory of the Pacific.
Political security must be reinforced by economic security. Not only in the South Pacific, but throughout the world, the effect of low commodity prices is having a serious effect. Growth in developing countries is expected to average only 4 per cent in 1987, half the average of the 1960s and 1970s. Hardest hit is the agricultural sector which, in low-income developing countries, employs 70 to 80 per cent of the population.
Yet the undisciplined nature of world agricultural trade means that countries with a comparative advantage in agriculture have to compete for markets with subsidized exports that distort prices. The twin spectres of surpluses and starvation are an economic and moral outrage that cannot be allowed to continue  a contradiction which we must find ways to remove.
At its seventh session, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development noted that while many countries, developed and developing, are adjusting their economies, much remained to be done to reduce or eliminate "growth retarding distortions and rigidities". The positive forward-thinking spirit that marked that session should guide us in our efforts towards the elimination of trade-distorting measures. Crucial to these efforts are the negotiations currently under way in the Uruguay round. If we really believe in having a healthy international economy, contributing to world peace, we must ensure that these negotiations succeed.
As we work to improve the functioning of the system of international relations we must also work to improve the functioning of the institution that underpins so much of the system. Last year's financial crisis made clear that we, the membership, had failed to ensure that this Organization remained responsive to changing demands and circumstances. The financial crisis itself was precipitated by a failure on the part of some of the Members to fulfil their Charter commitments. It served to highlight, however, a more long-standing failure of the collective membership and of the institution to ensure the continuing revitalization of the Organization.	.
Every institution, no matter how noble its goals, needs to undertake from time to time a thorough-going reappraisal of its structures and procedures. In recognition of this need, for instance, my Government is in the process of carrying out a far-reaching reform of the functioning of government in New Zealand. The United Nations is no different. It needs to change with the times.
From the work of the past year a number of studies and reforms are under way. They must be pursued to their conclusion. The financial crisis may have abated to a degree: the need for change has not. One of the areas to which my Government will pay particular attention is the review of management of the United Nations development effort to be undertaken by the Economic and Social Council over the next year. The United Nations and its agencies have a unique role to play in development assistance, particularly in areas such as the establishment of development planning mechanisms and negotiations by Governments with trans national corporations. But such assistance must be appropriate and effective. The special needs of the isolated island developing nations of the South Pacific are often inadequately met by structures and rules which have been set up to cover large continental recipients in other regions. Any decisions taken on the spot in the South Pacific by a more coherent United Nations presence would reflect more truly the South Pacific realities than decisions taken in places such as Geneva, New York or Bangkok. 
I offer those remarks not as the representative of a country that is critical of or disenchanted with the United Nations. Quite the reverse: as 1 said at the beginning, the New Zealand Government and people are firm supporters of the United Nations. We shall remain so. But we would be bad friends of the Organization if we failed to encourage it to change where change is necessary. The process of change is under way. Let us keep up the momentum, and let us get the balance right. I end as I began, drawing on the wisdom of the Maori people of New Zealand. There is a Maori saying which goes,
"A warrior who works hard at growing food will not fail".
That expresses in a nutshell what this Organization is all about. We must be firm in our resolve to retain the peace, but must look also to improving the lot of all our peoples. Getting the balance right is an international imperative.
﻿
The Soviet delegation has instructed me Sir, to congratulate you on your election to the honourable post of President of the forty-second session of the General Assembly of the United Nations.
One of the rules of procedure of this Organization reserves a minute for prayer or meditation. Each session of the United Nations General Assembly is an occasion for reflection on the future of the world. Today the world is on the threshold of great changes and our thoughts are about that. For the first time in history, the idea of nuclear disarmament is close to the beginning of fulfilment. It is not a new idea. What is new is that this is proving to be possible. Only yesterday, all we could see ahead of us was a blank wall: today we can see far ahead.
Two thousand warheads are but a small part of nuclear arsenals, but that is a big enough part forbids disappearance to give to the world a new vision. The agreement on these weapons is only a small part of what has happened. Something much more important has taken place; the Soviet Union and the United states have finally spoken together the first word in a nuclear-free vocabulary. When that word becomes deed, the world will also gain new knowledge. It will become convinced that nuclear weapons and security are not synonymous and that security becomes stronger when those weapons disappear.
For the present, that principle is being established in a specific case, but it is already being established in practice. The whole question now is whether we shall be able, proceeding from the same logical premise, to abandon the entire nuclear arsenal rather than just a part of it, to scrap all weapons of mass destruction.
The Soviet Union is convinced that we shall be able to do so. The launching pad is small but it provides a boost to a great undertaking. The recent agreement may be followed by an accord on the reduction by as much as one half of strategic weapons - provided, of course, that the Treaty limiting anti-ballistic missile system is preserved.
Today there is an increasingly realistic prospect of a convention on the prohibition and complete destruction of chemical weapons. We can expect a productive development of the parallel process of reduction of conventional weapons based on the concept of sufficiency. There is a possibility of making headway because we have bold ideas and willingness to remove the remaining obstacles.
An affirmative answer to the question of whether it is possible to scrap nuclear arsenals will become a reality if the international community once again helps us.
There is no need to compete here for the palm of victory, which does not go well with the olive branch of peace. I could describe how the Soviet Union has worked towards the global double zero, but let others claim the credit if they wish. For that matter, if we have to compete in something it should be only in nuclear disarmament. What is important for us is that what was sought has now been achieved and the outcome is not at variance with the will of the majority.
We are moved by the enthusiasm with which the world has welcomed the agreement. It convinces us once again that we are on the right track. Listening to the voices of approval and solidarity, which drown the morose and solitary voice of the nuclear profiteers, your Soviet colleague, without sharing the euphoria and yet without curbing the optimism  keenly feel that today all of us here are truly United nations - United not merely by formal membership in this Organization but by a common destiny and a shared objective. We thank you for this wonderful feeling. It should be treasured and carried further. Thank you for the atmosphere of unity of thought, co-operation and support which alone could have produced an agreement.
In this sense the agreement is yours. And the fact that it belongs to everyone is, as we see it, the best guarantee of its implementation.
"We were born to live together. And our community is like an arch which holds up precisely because Its stones prevent each other from falling ..." One is amazed by the ability of human thought to establish the supreme ethical law for all times. "We were born to live together", so wrote Seneca to Lucillius many years ago in his Epistles, but it is only today that this idea is being understood as the imperative of our time.
Today, Lenin's Decree of Peace is perceived as a message of supreme morality addressed to our time. The repudiation of secret treaties, open and public conduct of International affairs, the immediate withdrawal from the war and the rejection of War as a method of resolving conflicts reflected, even as far back as 1917, a common need, which has now become the will of the entire International community.
A long and difficult road must be traversed for human thought to become action, but it does happen sooner or later. When, in Washington, we were discussing the techniques of the destruction of nuclear warheads we were suddenly struck by the fact that only a year ago this had seemed something well beyond our grasp. Our American partners can confirm this. It is hard to find words to express this. Let us just say that the past gives a powerful impetus to the present, and the present gives guarantees to the future.
"The reality and the guarantees of a secure world" is the title of Mikhail Gorbachev's article published before this session began, and it conveys the gist of our thinking today.
A secure world is possible. It Is possible because anything else is too dangerous. The possibility of a secure world is commensurate with the need for it This is the reality. As for guarantees, we see them in a comprehensive system of security. It is the natural task of the United Nations to give inspiration to and take the lead in building such a system.
This, reduced to a concise formula, is the logic of that article, which develops the doctrine of a secure world. It stems from the history of our country and is the fruit of political thinking that honestly analyses the entire preceding period.
In this context I would venture to remind the Assembly that its forty-second session coincides with the eve of the seventieth anniversary of the Great October Socialist Revolution. This is our celebration and we are not imposing it on anyone. The feelings aroused by the birthday of our State are ours. Nevertheless, I would venture to share with representatives my thoughts on some of the international implications of that date.
I do not think that it can be disputed that the October Revolution was one of the major events of this century and has had a tremendous impact on the destinies of peoples, not only those of the former Russian Empire. We think that the process of renovation which is under way in our country is more than just a strictly domestic affair of the Soviet Union, It is impossible to describe as purely the concern of the Soviet Union its desire to do away with one of the products of the cold war, which is the splitting of the world into hostile alliances.
All this, naturally, is also part of the objectives of perestroika - our process of change - while glasnost - openness - and dialogue are, as logically, its instruments, in both domestic and foreign policies. Between these two there exists a direct and open relationship and one cannot be implemented without the other. This, and this alone, allows me, when speaking about the seventieth anniversary of our revolution, to invite you all to take thought together.
If we have a concept of a world revolution, which is most closely linked with the process of revolutionary change in our country, we make no secret of it. It is this: organizing the entire human community on the basis of recognizing peace as the supreme value of existence, human life, freedom and dignity as a general yardstick, and peaceful coexistence as a universal principle of relations among States. This concept, proclaimed in the Political Report to the 27th Congress of our Communist Party, has been substantiated by a series of practical steps taken by the Soviet Union,
Perestroika has also heralded major changes in international affairs. It should not be obstructed. But, of course, unlike the position in 1917 or 1918, in 1987 no external action could halt our revolution. Today we live in different times, and it is a different country. And that could be one of the greatest achievements of the October Revolution. The price of this was enormous. It was set by the foreign intervention and the civil war; the ruined economy and the economic blockade; terror and the attempts to subvert the foundations of our multinational State; Nazi aggression and the cold war, which was imposed on us; nuclear blackmail and constant attempts at political diktat. Not a single day passed without our having to pay the highest price.
Unlike many other revolutions, the October Revolution was almost bloodless. Unlike many others, its architects never Intended to build their temple on blood; they never thought, as had many before them, that cruelty, violence and fear were the best glue for cementing their ideal.
It was the policies of conspiracy, terror and intervention against Soviet Russia that made it shut and lock its doors and cut itself off from a hostile world. 

In order to survive it was necessary to do the maximum within the historically minimum space of time. A chronic lack of time and unending pressure on all fronts also helped create the conditions which resulted in innocent victims and irreparable losses. We are saying this for all to hear: there is not and there cannot be any justification for that. We do more than just say it. As heirs to both victories and defeats, achievements and mistakes, we are doing our utmost to consolidate the victories and to prevent even the slightest possibility of the errors being repeated In either domestic or in foreign policies. 
This is a distinctive feature of our perestroika, its dominant trend, any indicator of the vigour and health of our society, a guarantee of Its future, of its profound internal democratism, openness and integrity. And there is no need to engage in linguistic research to try to provide listeners with an English equivalent of the word glasnost. One might go astray in a foreign language, as has indeed already happened with the same speaker, who claimed that there is no word meaning "freedom" in the Russian language. It is generally dangerous to play with words in this forum in which by no means everyone is ready to applaud insults summarily flung at entire countries and peoples. Freedom does indeed serve peace - but it is not the freedom that is interpreted as licence to interfere in the affairs of others and to finance counter-revolution as a most profitable business.
As for our perestroika, no one should be a prey to illusions. We shall not turn aside from the main road or borrow from others their norms and rules of democracy. We thank them for their advice, but we shall conduct perestroika according to our own design, on our own socialist basis. Allow us to determine for ourselves what the Soviet Union is going to be and that will be what the Soviet people want it to be.
Those who want to support us will also support the project of rebuilding international relations on a broad democratic basis. They will support the concept of a nuclear-free world and all actions to resolve the knottiest issues of world politics. For here the interests of most members of the community fully coincide.
This rostrum is not a pulpit for preaching "free enterprise". This Hall is not a schoolroom or a university auditorium in which one can teach lessons in rhetoric or lecture the international community on the manners of "good political behaviour". it is even less worthy to adopt the tone of pastoral admonition and tell the Organization that "sometimes it has strayed" and "it is time for it to come home". One can say, however, that this rostrum and this Hall are the very place where new political thinking should be expressed.
However much the world is split by confrontation and hatred, it is United in facing the need to preserve itself and to perpetuate mankind.
Prom this objective reality there emerges another guiding light for new political thinking; in our time, the correlation between the national interest and the interest of all mankind has changed. It has changed in the sense that truly national interests cannot be opposed to common interests.
If, on the pretext that something is contrary to the interests of national security or to considerations of national prestige, one rejects everything that is born of the political thinking of the systems or governments that one does not like, then, sooner or later, this will boomerang on the genuine national interests of one's own people and State.
New political thinking must put an end to that. New political thinking will put an end to it if it is put into action. And there is no doubt that it will be, for action, unity of concept and implementation, of thought and its realization, of word and deed, are crucial conditions for the existence of mankind.
New political thinking will inevitably make its way, for it is nourished by some remarkable elements: by the accumulation of progressive political experience  by strictly scientific analysis, evaluation and forecasting of contemporary realities} and, ultimately, by the freedom of new political thinking from national narrow-mindedness that provokes animosity towards countries, groups of countries or social political systems.
In this regard, let me say that the policy of hostility towards socialism is now bankrupt, both in theory and in practice. The very fact of the establishment of the United Nations contained the embryo of the new political thinking. Even at that time its principles were embodied in the articles of the United Nations Charter  which is undoubtedly one of the greatest statutory instruments of all time and of all nations.
The fact that our Organization has been functioning for over 40 years now is testimony to the triumph of mankind's common interests over narrow-minded nationalism and great-Power attitudes. In fact, all the post-war decades have been nothing but the history of the struggle between outdated political concepts and the new political thinking that was born in the agony of war.
When life on earth depends on one's ability to destroy it 20 times over, there is something wrong either with oneself and one's trust in such a guarantee of life, or with the very idea of deterrence. Most likely, it is both. New political thinking exposes the absurdity of the idea of safeguarding anyone's security with nuclear weapons.
However, a question immediately arises: Is it possible to ensure peace by other methods and, indeed, do such methods exist at all? New political thinking answers: Yes. And here again I should like to focus on a comprehensive system of international security.
As emerges clearly from Mikhail Gorbachev's statements, we envision its formation as a multilinear process extending over time and implemented through collective efforts. In essence, its objective is that peace should be ensured exclusively by the United Nations and its Security Council on the basis of strict observance of the principles and provisions of its Charter. I anticipate a question here: If that is your objective, then what is the meaning of your proposal? After all, the Charter of the United Nations already exists and the universal organization for peace is functioning.
Let me remind the Assembly that the United Nations was established for a world free of nuclear weapons and that its Charter was, naturally, designed to solve the problems of such a world.
Nuclear weapons gave rise to a different reality which, in the final analysis, made it impossible to use the United Nations fully as the principal mechanism for the maintenance of peace and security. It so happened that the nuclear tumour limited the scope of, and the possibilities for applying the Charter. Now the prospect of militarization of outer space threatens to erode its principles even further. There should however be no question of adapting the Charter to the realities of the nuclear and space age or, still less, of wrecking it. The Charter is a great document, which even today contains all the necessary provisions to enable mankind to live and solve its problems without war.
However, even the Charter cannot do the impossible. No organization, no set of rules, no code of behaviour can save the world in the few minutes between the launching of a missile and a nuclear holocaust. If and when the implementation of the "Star Wars" programme begins, the "shagreen leather" of that time interval will shrink even further. And yet that programme has been touted here once again as a way "to ensure a safer world".
This is not so. And here I will refer to a person whose statements have been quoted so readily by the President of the United States - even the day before yesterday. That person is academician Andrei Sakharov, who said:
"My opinion as regards this programme is different from that of the Reagan Administration... it is also wrong to assert that the existence of the SDI programme has made the Soviet Union negotiate on disarmament. To the contrary, the SDI programme impedes the negotiations."
If we are to believe an academician in one area, why should we not believe him in another, in which he is really a qualified expert and a professional?
Leave the ocean of space to peaceful vessels, so that future generations - our children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren - will not have to build space minesweeper s.
Excluding the nuclear and space component from the security equation is the only path towards real security. We regard a comprehensive system of security as a kind of interim programme for reasserting the role of the United Nations and its Charter as the primary instruments for peace.
What, then, are the practical aspects of a comprehensive system? Throughout the past year the sponsors of the resolution on this question have held consultations with Members of the United Nations and discussed their proposal in international forums. As a result many things have now become clearer, our ideas have become more concrete, and an atmosphere of teamwork has arisen. The system is taking precise shape in all its four aspects: politico-military, economic, environmental and humanitarian.
In the politico-military area, it comprises the obligation of Governments not to be the first to use nuclear weapons or any force or threat of force making military doctrines exclusively defensive in nature) making public data regarding defence expenditures and calendars of exercises and manoeuvres) the adoption by all of the principle of non-offensive defence} and instituting a reliable system of verification.
We are convinced that a comprehensive system of security will also provide the key to the settlement of situations of regional conflict. That may be one of the roost difficult tasks of today.
In this connection I shall venture to make a brief digression to address some ideas presented here the other day. I am referring to the statement made here by the President of the United States the day before yesterday. I am not going to relish engaging in polemics with him. The emotions aroused by the agreement we have reached, ray status as a guest and respect for seniority restrain  e from taking up, point by point, allegations and arguments that are groundless in the extreme. But since the President mentioned the human heart - claiming, as it were, a monopoly on having a heart while denying it to others - I should like to say the following.
It is heartless to declare regions and continents zones of special interest for the so-called free world out of which it pumps into its own economy resources belonging to other peoples. It is heartless to recruit and arm mercenaries, to proclaim them freedom fighters, and to pay millions of dollars for the murders committed by them. It is heartless to put into the hands of bandits weapons they use to shoot down civilian aircraft. The human heart is an extremely sensitive organ, and it shudders at such treatment.
Those who have not suffered have no compassion for anyone, we know what war on our own territory means. Therefore it is not for the sake of rhetorical effect that we declare our support for the efforts of the United Nations.
It plays an extremely important peace-making role in Afghanistan, where the mission of the Personal Representative of the United Nations Secretary-General organically combines with the policy of national reconciliation. It is now becoming increasingly clear that the Afghans themselves are able to decide the future of their own country and indeed are doing so. This new encouraging trend is in keeping with our sincere desire to withdraw Soviet forces from Afghanistan as soon as possible, and in this we are meeting with the full understanding of the Afghan leadership.
In Central America, the States of the region themselves have made impressive headway towards a long-awaited peace. Their success is shared by members of the Contadora Group and the Support Group and by all Latin American countries.
Dialogue between the countries of Indo-China and the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) has revealed promising elements. The policy of national reconciliation is also beginning to work in Kampuchea.
Real possibilities exist for the settlement of the Korean problem. The yearning of the Korean people for an easing of tension in the peninsula and the withdrawal of foreign troops and nuclear weapons cannot but evoke sympathy.
The United Nations has a detailed plan for giving effect to the resolution on the granting of independence to the Namibian people. Its implementation would also constitute a major step towards a settlement of the situation in southern Africa. A consensus is emerging in favour of convening a conference on the Middle East problem. In Cyprus, our Organization and its Secretary-General have also been taking vigorous action and refusing to retreat in the face of obstacles.
Here is our view of the situation in the Persian Gulf. It has become critically dangerous and might get out of control. We are not at all pleased that the development of events - which we warned was quite possible from the very outset - shows that we were right. The greater the military presence, the higher the probability of yet another conflict and the involvement in it of a State not belonging to the region. This is a source of great anxiety to us; it also strengthens our resolve to act in a sober and carefully considered manner and leads us once again to emphasize the question of removing the danger of a massive military presence.
In the circumstances, it is extremely important to preserve the unity in the Security Council. That is not an end in itself, but a prerequisite for implementing resolution 598 (1987) . In their individual actions, each member of the Council must abide by the resolution's requirements and not violate them.
The safety of navigation in the Gulf can and must be ensured by the entire world community, on whose behalf the United Nations will be acting. If necessary, appropriate and sufficient forces should be made effectively available to it, and the Soviet Union would agree to such a decision.
It is necessary to secure, concurrently and immediately, a cease-fire between Iran and Iraq and to work for the fulfilment of the Secretary-General's mission with respect to an impartial body to investigate the question of responsibility for the conflict. The Security Council should receive a report within a clearly established time-frame. This would also make it possible painlessly to withdraw foreign naval and other armed forces from the Persian Gulf.
It is very important now, in our view, to keep our composure and render every assistance to the Secretary-General and the Security Council.
In the economic field, a comprehensive system of security seeks to promote co-operation that would be free of confrontation and would cover the entire system of co-ordinates of international economic relations. A failure to resolve issues in this area is fraught with an explosive potential which, if detonated, would spell catastrophe for mankind. The picture of prosperity painted here the day before yesterday fades in the harsh light of reality, it is hard to imagine a "march of democracy" in the developing countries saddled as they are with a trillion-dollar debt. It is Impossible to talk seriously of equal opportunities when a new, technological, variety of colonialism is at work.
It is imperative to act.
We believe that the international community could reach agreement to reduce interest payments on bank credits, institute further benefits for the least developed countries, limit the annual debt-service payments of each developing country to a fixed portion of its annual export earnings, accept export products of debtor nations as payment for their debts and remove protectionist barriers to their imports, and refrain from charging additional interest for loan-payment rescheduling and debt refinancing.
These, of course, are only suggestions for discussion, but even now consideration could be given to devising a programme of Immediate action to ease the debt burden of the developing world.
Over the long term it is also necessary to restructure the entire international monetary system. And, of course, nothing would be more conducive to the economic development of nations than the most far-reaching programme of disarmament.
We are familiar also with a different viewpoint which does not acknowledge the relationship between disarmament and development. There are some who explain poverty by the inability of people to work and build their own lives. This is but another form of outright racism. No people is without talent or incapable of creating material and spiritual wealth. It is just a matter of different conditions that either help a people to realize its potential or thwart its efforts to do so. The elimination of economic discrimination creates favourable conditions for people to prosper economically and spiritually.
The environmental aspect of the proposed concept reflects the evolution of thinking about the relationship between man and nature. The achievement of mankind's environmental security is as imperative as the threat of an ecological disaster facing it is real. Today we must realize that the protection of the environment must be ensured on a world-wide basis. Confrontation narrows the scope for concerted action, while co-operation can expand it. Our concept provides for a set of measures in this area.
The human dimension is the primary yardstick for a comprehensive system of security. Nations can and must co-operate in establishing the best international conditions for safeguarding the fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual everywhere, democratising internal conditions and building trust and harmony on that basis.
We should together begin to devise a broad range of practical steps in the humanitarian area, promote co-operation in eradicating apartheid, racism, chauvinism, nationalism and discrimination on those bases, deal jointly with the problems of national minorities and refugees, and safeguard the rights of emigrants.
We submit that for States and nations trust begins at home and that to a large extent it is based on the unity of words and deeds and in complete accord between political declarations and actual positions. Our domestic and foreign policy is and will continue to be guided by that principle, and we reserve our right to demand the same of all other Governments/ our partners. The political, social, economic and cultural rights of the individual should be safeguarded on the basis of generally accepted international instruments. That is the way it should be everywhere.
The countries that have put forward this proposal do not claim a certificate of copyright. The system of security grows out of what has already been accomplished in the process of the peaceful coexistence of nations in the post-War years. It grows out of the activities of the United Nations, It is rooted in a broad legal foundation and the treaties which restrain the arms race. It is rooted in the negotiations on the central problems of our time and the codification of human rights standards/ in regional security-building processes and in the Non-Aligned Movement.
As a logical result of the development of mankind's common culture in this century, that system promises to become in the future a framework for the collective application of the creative efforts of all countries and peoples. Today, when 2/000 weapons can be removed from the face of the earth/ when a historic breakthrough has been achieved in a 42-year-long trend/ such a system reflects what we believe to be a genuine, irreversible process; a product of will and perseverance. For we are indeed born to live together and we shall stand together if we become an arch in which we support each other.
Our Assembly session provides the best occasion for reflecting on this. Its time should not be taken up with confrontation and hostility, I tell you frankly that the world is tired of that. There have been too many quotations intended to prove that you are dealing with the spawn of Hell. That is simply not serious or well founded. There have been too many accusations that detract front the dignity of nations. It is time for us to proceed to earnest dialogue; time to get down to business.
In these moments, as we stand face to face with the past and the present, we are keenly aware that when this pause for reflection is over we shall once again have to act, and again act.
﻿Let me first welcome the Secretary-General back from his pilgrimage for peace in the Middle East. Hundreds of thousands have already fallen in the bloody conflict between Iran and Iraq. All men and women of goodwill pray that the carnage can soon be stopped, and we pray that the Secretary-General proves to be not only a pilgrim but also the architect of a lasting peace between those two nations. Mr. Secretary-General, the United States supports you, and may God guide you in your labours ahead.
Like the Secretary-General, all of us here today are on a kind of pilgrimage. We come from every continent, every race and most religions to this great Hall of hope where, in the name of peace, we practise diplomacy. Now diplomacy, of course, is a subtle and nuance craft - so much so that it is said that when one of the most wily diplomats of the nineteenth century passed away, other diplomats asked, on reports of his death, "What do you suppose the old fox meant by that?"
But true statesmanship requires not merely skill but something greater, something we call vision, a grasp of the present and of the possibilities of the future. I have come here today to map out for you my own vision of the world's future - one, I believe, that, in its essential elements, is shared by all Americans. And I hope those who see things differently will not mind if I say that we in the United States believe that the place to look first for the shape of the future is not in continental masses and sea lanes, although geography is obviously, of great importance. Neither is it in national reserves of blood and iron or on the other hand, of money and industrial capacity, although military and economic strength are also, of course, crucial. We begin with something that is far simpler and yet far more profound - the human heart.
All over the world today, the yearnings of the human heart are redirecting in course of international affairs, putting the lie to the myth of materialism and historical determinism. We have only to open our eyes to see the simple aspirations of ordinary people writ large on the record of our times.
Last year in the Philippines, ordinary people rekindled the spirit of democracy and restored the electoral process. Some said they had performed a miracle, and, if so, a similar miracle - a transition to democracy - is taking place in the Republic of Korea. Haiti, too, is making a transition. Some despair when these new young democracies face conflicts or challenges, but growing pains are normal in democracies. The United States had them - as has every other democracy on earth.
In Latin America, too, one can hear the voices of freedom echo from the pea з and across the plains. It is the song of ordinary people marching, not in uniforms and not in military file, but, rather, one by one in simple, everyday working clothes - marching to the polls. Ten years ago, only a third of the people in La in America and the Caribbean lived in democracies or in countries that were turning to democracy. Today over 90 per cent do.
But this world-wide movement to democracy is not the only way in which simple, ordinary people are leading us in this room - we who are said to be the makers of history - leading us Into the future. Around the world, new businesses, new economic growth, new technologies are emerging from the workshops of ordinary people with extraordinary dreams.
Here in the United States  entrepreneurial energy - reinvigorated when we cut taxes and regulations - have fuelled the current economic expansion. According to scholars at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, three quarters of the more than 13.5 million new jobs that we have created in this country since the beginning of our expansion rate from businesses with fewer than 100 employees - businesses started by ordinary people who dared to take a chance. And many of our new high technologies were first developed in the garages of fledgling entrepreneurs. Yet America is not the only or perhaps even the best example of the dynamism and dreams that the freeing of markets set free.
In India and China, freer markets for farmers have led to an explosion in production. In Africa. Governments are rethinking their policies, and where they ate allowing greater economic freedom to farmers, crop production has improved. Meanwhile, in the newly industrialized countries of the Pacific Rim, free markets in services and manufacturing as well as agriculture have led to a soaring of growth and standards of living. The nations of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), Japan, Korea and Taiwan have created the true economic miracle of   the last two decades, and in each of them much of the magic came from ordinary people who succeeded as entrepreneurs.
In Latin America, this same lesson of free markets, greater opportunity and growth is being studied and acted on. President Sarney of Brazil spoke for many
others when he said that "Private initiative is the engine of economic Development. In Brazil we have learned that every time the state's penetration in the economy increases, our liberty decreases." Yes, policies that release to flight ordinary people's dreams ate spreading around the world. From Colombia t Turkey to Indonesia, Governments are cutting taxes, reviewing their regulations, and opening opportunities for initiative.
There has been much talk in the halls of this building about the "right to development". But more and more the evidence is clear that development is not itself a right. It is the product of rights: the right to own property; the right to buy and sell freely; the right to contract; the right to be free of excessive taxation and regulation, of burdensome government. There have been studies that determine that countries with low tax rates have greater growth than those with high rates.
We are all familiar with the phenomenon of the "underground economy". The scholar Hernando de Soto and his colleagues have examined the situation of one country - Peru - and described an economy of the poor that bypasses crushing taxation and stifling regulation. This "informal economy", as the researchers all it, is the principal supplier of many goods and services, and often the only ladder for upward mobility. In the capital city it accounts for almost all public transportation and most street markets. And the researchers concluded that, thanks to the informal economy, "The poor can work, travel, and have a roof over their heads". They might have added that, by becoming underground entrepreneurs themselves or by working for them, the poor have become less poor and the nation itself richer.
Those who advocate statist solutions to development should take note - the free market is the other path to development and the one true path. And, unlike many other paths, it leads somewhere. It works.
So this is where I believe we can find the map to the world's future - in the hearts of ordinary people in their hopes for themselves and their children  and in their prayers as they lay themselves and their families to rest each night. These simple people are the giants of the Earth, the true builders of the world and shapers of the centuries to come. And if Indeed they triumph, as I believe they will, we will at last know a world of peace and freedom, opportunity and hope, and, yes, of democracy - a world in which the spirit of mankind at last conquers the old, familiar enemies of famine, disease, tyranny, and war.
This is my vision - America's vision I recognize that some Governments represented in this Hall have other ideas. Some do not believe in democracy or in political, economic, or religious freedom. Some believe in dictatorship - whether by one man, one party, one class, one race, or one vanguard. To those Governments I would only say that the price of oppression is clear. Your economies will fall farther and farther behind. Your people will become more restless. Is it not better to listen to the people's hopes now, rather than their curses later?
And yet, despite our differences, there is one common hope that brought us all to make this common pilgrimage - the hope that mankind will one day beat its swords into the hope of peace. In no place on Earth today is peace more in need of friends than in the Middle East. Its people's yearning for peace is growing. The United States will continue to be an active partner in the efforts of the parties to come together to settle their differences and build a just and lasting peace.
This month marks the beginning of the eighth year of the Iran-Iraq war. Two months ago the Security Council adopted a mandatory resolution demanding a cease-fire, withdrawal, and negotiations to end the war. The United States fully supports implementation of Security Council resolution 598 (1987), as we support the Secretary-General's recent mission. We welcomed Iraq's acceptance of that resolution, and remain disappointed at Iran's unwillingness to accept it.
In that regard, I know that the President of Iran will be addressing representatives tomorrow. I take this opportunity to call upon him clearly and unequivocally to state whether Iran accepts Security Council resolution 598 (1987) or not. If the answer is positive, it would be a welcome step and a major breakthrough. If it is negative, the Council has no choice but rapidly to adopt enforcement measures.
For 40 years the United States has made clear its vital interest in the security of the Persian Gulf and the countries that border it. The oil reserves there are of strategic importance to the economies of the free world. We are committed to maintaining the free flow of this oil and to preventing the domination of the region by any hostile Power.
We do not seek confrontation or trouble with Iran or anyone else. Our objective is now, and has been at every stage, finding a means to end the war with no victor and no vanquished. The Increase in out naval presence in the Gulf does not favour one side or the other. It is a response to heightened tensions and followed consultations with our friends in the region. When the tension diminishes, so will our presence.
The United States is gratified by many recent diplomatic developments - the unanimous adoption of Security Council resolution 598 (1987), the Arab League's statement at its recent meeting in Tunis, and the Secretary-General's visit. Yet problems remain.
The Soviet Union helped in drafting and reaching an agreement on Security Council resolution 598 (1987). But outside the Security Council, the Soviets have acted differently. They called for removal of our navy from the Gulf, where it has been for 40 years. They made the false accusation that somehow the United States - rather than the war itself - is the source of tension in the Gulf. Such statements are not helpful. They divert attention from the challenge facing us all - a just end to the war.
The United States hopes the Soviets will join the other members of the Security Council in vigorously seeking an end to a conflict that should never have begun, should have ended long ago, and has become one of the great tragedies of the post-war era.
Elsewhere in the region, we see the continuing Soviet occupation of Afghanistan. After nearly eight years, a million casualties, nearly 4 million others driven into exile, and more intense fighting than ever, it is time for the Soviet Union to leave.
The Afghan people roust have the right to determine their own future free of foreign coercion. There is no excuse for prolonging a brutal war or propping up a regime whose days are clearly numbered. That regime offers political proposals that pretend compromise, but really would ensure the perpetuation of the regime's power. Those proposals have failed the only significant test: they have been rejected by the Afghan people. Every day the resistance grows in strength. It is an indispensable patty In the quest for a negotiated solution. 
The world community must continue to insist on genuine self-determination prompt and full Soviet withdrawal  and the return of the refugees to their homes in safety and honour. The attempt may be made to pressure a few countries to change their vote this year, but this body# I know, will vote overwhelmingly as every year before, for Afghan independence and freedom.
We have noted General Secretary Gorbachev's statement of readiness to withdraw. In April I asked the Soviet Union to set a date this year when this withdrawal would begin. I repeat that request now, in this forum for peace. I pledge that, once the Soviet Union shows convincingly that it is ready for a genuine political settlement, the United States is ready to be helpful.
Let me add one final note on this matter. Pakistan, in the face of enormous pressure and intimidation, has given sanctuary to Afghan refugees. We salute the courage of Pakistan and the Pakistani people. They deserve strong support from all of us.
Another regional conflict we all know is taking place in Central America - in Nicaragua.
To the Sandinista delegation here today I say: Your people know the true nature of your regime. They have seen their liberties suppressed. They have seen the promises of 1979 go unfulfilled. They have seen their real wages and personal income fall by half - yes, half - since 1979, while your Party elite live lives of privilege and luxury.
This is why, despite a billion dollars in Soviet-bloc aid last year alone, despite the largest and best equipped army in Central America, you face a popular revolution at home. It is why the democratic resistance is able to operate freely deep in your heartland. But this revolution should come as no surprise to you. I' is only the revolution you promised the people, and that you then betrayed.
The goal of United States policy towards Nicaragua is simple. It is the goal of the Nicaraguan people and the freedom fighters as well: it is democracy - real free, pluralistic, constitutional democracy. Understand this: we will not, and the world community will not, accept phoney "democratisation" designed to mask the perpetuation of dictatorship.  In this 200th year of our own Constitution, we know that real democracy depends on the safeguards of an institutional structure that prevents a concentration of power. It is that which makes rights secure. The temporary relaxation of controls - which can later be tightened - is not democratisation. Again, to the Sandinistas, I say: we continue to hope that Nicaragua will become part of the genuine democratic transformation that we have seen throughout Central America in this decade. We applaud the principles embodied in the Guatemala agreement, which links the security of the Central American democracies to democratic reform in Nicaragua. Now is the time for you to shut down the military machine that threatens your neighbours and assaults your own people. You must end your stranglehold on internal political activity. You must hold free and fair national elections. The media must be truly free - not censored or	'
intimidated or crippled by indirect measures such as the denial of newsprint or threats against journalists or their families. Exiles must be allowed to return, to minister, to live, to work, and to organize politically. Then, when persecution of religion has ended and the jails no longer contain political prisoners, national reconciliation and democracy will be possible.
Unless this happens, democratisation will be a fraud. And until it happens, we will press for true democracy by supporting those fighting for it.
Freedom in Nicaragua, or Angola, or Afghanistan, or Cambodia, or Eastern Europe, or South Africa or anyplace else on the globe is not just an internal matter. Some time ago the Czech dissident writer, Vaclav Havel, warned the world that
"respect for human rights is the fundamental condition and the sole genuine guarantee of true peace". And Andrei Sakharov, in his Nobel Lecture, said:  "I am convinced that international confidence, mutual understanding, disarmament, and International security are inconceivable without an open society with freedom of information, freedom of conscience, the right to publish, and the right to travel and choose the country In which one wishes to live."
Freedom serves peace. The quest for peace must serve the cause of freedom. Patient diplomacy can contribute to a world In which both can flourish. We are heartened by new prospects for improvement in East-West and, particularly. United States-Soviet relations.
Last week Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze visited Washington for talks with me and with Secretary of State Shultz. We discussed the full range of issues. Including my long-standing efforts to achieve, for the first time, deep reductions in United States and Soviet nuclear arms. It was six years ago, for example, that I proposed the 2ero option for United States and Soviet longer-range intermediate-range nuclear missiles. I am pleased that we have now agreed in principle to a truly historic treaty that will eliminate an entire class of United States and Soviet nuclear weapons. We have also agreed to intensify our diplomatic efforts in all areas of mutual Interest.
Towards that end Secretary Shultz and the Foreign Minister will meet again, a month from now, in Moscow, and I will meet again with General Secretary Gorbachev later this fall.
We continue to have our differences and probably always will. But that puts a special responsibility on us to find ways - realistic ways - to bring greater stability to our competition and to show the world a constructive example of the value of communication and of the possibility of peaceful solutions to political problems. Here let me add that we seek, through our strategic defence initiative, to find a way to keep the peace through relying on defence - not offence - for deterrence and for eventually rendering ballistic missiles obsolete. The strategic defence Initiative has greatly enhanced the prospects for real arms reduction. It is a crucial part of our efforts to ensure a safer world and a more stable strategic balance.
We will continue to pursue the goal of arms reduction, particularly the goal that the General Secretary and I agreed upon: a 50 per cent reduction in our respective strategic nuclear arms. We will continue to press the Soviets for more constructive conduct in the settling of regional conflicts. We look to the Soviets to honour the Helsinki accords. We look for greater freedom for the Soviet peoples within their country/ more people-to-people exchanges with our country and Soviet recognition in practice of the right of freedom of movement.
We look forward to a time when things we now regard as sources of friction and even danger can become examples of co-operation between ourselves and the Soviet Union. For instance, I have proposed a collaboration to reduce the barriers between East and West in Berlin, and more broadly in Europe as a whole. Let us work together for a Europe in which force or the threat of force, whether in the form of walls or of guns is no longer an obstacle to free choice by individuals and whole nations, I have also called for more openness in the flow of information from the Soviet Union about its military forces, policies and programmes so that our negotiations about arms reduction can proceed with greater confidence.
We hear much about changes in the Soviet Union. We are intensely interested in these changes. We hear the world glasnost which is translated as "openness" in English. Openness is a broad term, it means the free, unfettered flow of information, ideas and people, it means political and intellectual liberty in all forms. We hope, for the sake of the peoples of the USSR, that such changes will come. And we hope, for the sake of peace, that it will include a foreign policy that, respects the freedom and independence of other peoples.
No place should be better suited for discussions of peace than this Hall. The first Secretary-General, Trygve Lie, said of the United Nations:
"With the danger of fire, and in the absence of an organized fire department, it is only common sense for the neighbours to join in setting up their own fire brigades."
Joining together to drown the flames of war - this, together with a universal declaration of human rights, was the founding ideal of the United Nations. It is our continuing challenge to ensure that the United Nations lives up to these hopes.
As the Secretary-General noted some time ago, the risk of anarchy in the world has increased because the fundamental rules of the United Nations Charter have been violated. The General Assembly has repeatedly acknowledged this with regard to the occupation of Afghanistan, The Charter has a concrete practical meaning today because it touches on all the dimensions of human aspiration that I mentioned earlier: the yearning for democracy and freedom, for global peace and for prosperity.
That is why we must protect the Universal Declaration of Human Rights from being debased as it was through the infamous "Zionism is racism" resolution. We cannot permit attempts to control the media and promote censorship under the ruse of a so-called new world information order. We must work against efforts to introduce contentious and non-relevant issues into the work of the specialized and technical agencies where we seek progress on urgent problems, from terrorism to drug trafficking to nuclear proliferation, which threaten us all. Such efforts corrupt the Charter and weaken this Organization.
There have been important administrative and budget reforms. They have helped. The United States is committed to restoring its contribution as reforms progress. But there is still much to do. The United Nations was built on great dreams and great ideals. Sometimes it has strayed. It is time for it to come home. It was Dag Hammarskjold who said:
"The end of all political effort must be the well-being of the individual in a life of safety and freedom."
Should this not be our credo in the years ahead?

I have spoken today of a vision and of the obstacles to its realization. More than a century ago a young Frenchman, Alexis de Tocqueville, visited America.
After that visit he predicted that the two great Powers of the future world would be, on the one hand, the United States, which would be built, as he said, "by the ploughshare"; and, on the other hand, Russia, which would go forward, again as he said, "by the sword". Yet, need it be so? Cannot swords be turned to ploughshares? Can we and all nations not live in peace?
In our obsession with antagonisms of the moment, we often forget how much unites all the members of humanity. Perhaps we need some outside, universal threat to make us recognize this common bond. I occasionally think how quickly our differences worldwide would vanish if we were facing an alien threat from outside this world. And yet, I ask, is not an alien force already among us? What could be more alien to the universal aspirations of our peoples than war and the threat of war?
Two centuries ago, in a hall much smaller than this one, in Philadelphia, Americans met to draft a constitution. In the course of their debates, one of them said that the new Government, if it was to rise high, must be built on the broadest base - the will and consent of the people. And so it was. And so It has been.
My message today is that the dreams of ordinary people reach to astonishing heights. If we diplomatic pilgrims are to achieve equal altitudes, we must build all we do on the full breadth of humanity's will and consent and the full expanse of the human heart.

﻿
In the name of the Chinese delegation, may I begin by warmly congratulating you. Sir, on your election to the presidency of the forty-second session of the General Assembly. I am sure that with your ability, wisdom and experience, you will fulfil this noble mission with distinction. I would also like to take this opportunity to express my appreciation and thanks to your predecessor, Mr. Humayun Choudhury, for his positive contribution to the work of the previous session.
Over the past year, people of the world have made unremitting efforts on various fronts in pursuit of peace and development and achieved new and encouraging results. The third world and many small and medium-sized countries have played an active role in international affairs, exerting an increasingly great influence. This shows that the forces for peace have grown in strength. There have been ever-stronger demands for a halt to the arms race and to aggression and expansion, and for genuine disarmament and an early settlement of regional conflicts. Under the circumstances, the United States and the Soviet Union have kept up their dialogue and there has appeared a somewhat relaxed atmosphere in East-West relations.
However, factors causing international tension and turbulence are still present. The arms race, far from coming to a halt, is extending into outer space and other high technology fields. None of the hot-spots in the world has been removed, and certain regional conflicts even threaten to escalate. The world economic situation remains grim. Many developing countries are faced with increasing difficulties and the North-South contradiction has become more acute than ever. All this cannot but cause grave concern to China and all the other countries which uphold justice and strive for peace and development. In order to join in a common search for effective solutions to those problems, I now wish to set forth the Chinese Government's position and propositions. 
It is the universal demand of the world's people and the consistent stand of the Chinese Government to stop the arms race and to remove regional conflicts. Effective disarmament constitutes an important link in the efforts to ease international tension and to maintain world peace. Since the resumption of the Geneva arms control talks between the United States and the Soviet Union in 1985, we have all along hoped that they would, through serious negotiations, reach agreements conducive to world peace and not detrimental to the rights and interests of other countries. Now there has been progress in their intermediate nuclear forces (INF) talks. The two sides have reached agreement in principle to adopt the global "double-zero option" on long range intermediate nuclear forces and short range intermediate nuclear forces. We hold that dialogue is better than confrontation, and relaxation better than tension. World peace is indivisible, and European security and Asian security are equally important. If the United States and the Soviet Union could formally conclude an INF treaty and implement it by thoroughly destroying all their long-range intermediate nuclear missiles and short-range intermediate nuclear missiles deployed in Europe and Asia, that would be a first step towards nuclear arms reduction and would undoubtedly be welcomed.
Of course, there is still a long way to go and much work to do before genuine disarmament can be realized. Even with the long range intermediate nuclear forces and short range intermediate nuclear forces dismantled, the nuclear weaponry of the United States and the Soviet Union would only be reduced by less than 5 per cent and each would still retain a nuclear force capable of destroying the world several times over. To maintain world peace and security, there should be complete prohibition and thorough destruction of all types of nuclear, space, chemical and biological weapons as well as other weapons of mass destruction, and a substantial reduction of conventional arms. 
The people of all countries long for development in peace. Disarmament is an urgent task, but the disarmament talks have been proceeding very slowly, since the INF talks alone have dragged on for almost six years, negotiations on strategic arms reduction or other disarmament issues will be even more difficult. If things move along at this pace, when could the approximately 50,000 nuclear warheads ever be destroyed completely? When could the above disarmament goals ever be reached? Naturally, the international community strongly hopes that the United States and the Soviet Union will drastically reduce their armaments as soon as possible, and that after reaching an INF agreement they will proceed to conduct earnest negotiations on disarmament in other areas and reach agreements followed by effective implementation. They should not stand still, let alone vie with each other in developing new types of even more sophisticated weapons in the wake of an agreement to dismantle INF missiles.
In order to promote disarmament, the Chinese delegation last year submitted to the General Assembly two draft resolutions on nuclear and conventional disarmament, which were adopted with the broad support of other United Nations Members. The two draft resolutions emphasized that the countries possessing the largest arsenals bear a special responsibility for disarmament and should take the lead in drastically reducing their nuclear and conventional armaments. This is the key to progress in disarmament. In the world today, it is the United States and the Soviet Union that possess the largest nuclear and conventional arsenals, and they alone are capable of launching a world war. if they could take the lead in drastic arms reduction, the threats to world peace would be greatly diminished.
China has not only actively put forward its views and proposals on disarmament, but has also taken a series of concrete actions towards disarmament. On the very first day when China came into possession of nuclear weapons, in 1964, we declared unilaterally that at no time and under no circumstances would China be the first to use nuclear weapons. We have also undertaken not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon States or nuclear-free zones. We neither advocate nor go in for nuclear proliferation; we do not help other countries develop nuclear weapons. China respects and supports the countries and regions concerned in their endeavour to establish nuclear-free zones or zones of peace on the basis of voluntary agreement to be reached through consultation among themselves. We have signed the additional protocols of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and of the South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty. Furthermore, in recent years we have stopped atmospheric nuclear testing, reduced the size of our armed forces by one million and cut down our military expenditures. We have also shifted some military industrial facilities to civilian production and put some military installations to civilian use or dual use.
Disarmament is an arduous and complicated task. Progress in disarmament requires the good faith of the countries concerned and, more importantly, the persistent efforts of all peace-loving countries and people. On the question of disarmament, which concerns the future of the world and the destiny of mankind, all countries, whether big, small or medium-sized, nuclear or non-nuclear, should have an equal say, and each has a positive role to play. Europe experienced the holocaust of two world wars and is now a place of direct confrontation between the two major military blocs. East and West European countries are particularly concerned about disarmament, which is closely related to their own security, and have played an important role in promoting the United States-Soviet arms control talks. When addressing the question of disarmament, the legitimate rights and interests and reasonable proposals of every country should be fully respected and taken into serious consideration.  Disarmament agreements of any kind should help to enhance the security of every country and region in the world and not to weaken 
Here I should like to refer to the recently concluded International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development, which unanimously adopted the final document through the concerted efforts of all sides. That Conference is of positive significance in heightening the international community's awareness of the close relationship between disarmament and development,
A fair and reasonable settlement of regional conflicts and the elimination of hot-spots are of great importance in easing international tension and safeguarding world peace. Despite the efforts made by the United Nations and by many justice-upholding countries towards this end in the past year, no substantive progress has been made so far. That is essentially because certain countries, in disregard of the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and the basic norms governing international relations, have refused to implement the relevant United Nations resolutions and have persisted in their policies of aggression and expansion. They have continued their occupation of other countries' territories and have kept encroaching upon others' sovereignty and interfering in others' internal affairs. As a result, regional conflicts have been continuing and it is difficult to remove the hot-spots in the world. 
China Is consistently opposed to the threat or use of force In International relations and Is all the more opposed to acts of aggression and Interference against other countries by any country under whatever pretext. It Is our view that the commission of aggression by one country against another Is the most serious international crime, which must in no way be confounded with the Internal problems of the country under aggression. China has always maintained that the five principles of mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful co-existence should be strictly observed by all countries in the world. We are in favour of a fair and reasonable political settlement of any regional conflict, because it is in the fundamental interests of the countries concerned and of world peace.
To achieve a fair and reasonable political settlement of a regional conflict, the primary requirement is to stop aggression and expansion against, and terminate military occupation of, other countries. Foreign troops must immediately and unconditionally withdraw from the territories they occupy, and the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of the countries under aggression must be restored. No country can get away with keeping the gains of aggression and expansion under the pretext of a "political settlement".
To achieve a fair and reasonable political settlement of a regional conflict, it is also necessary for the people of the countries or regions concerned to solve their own problems, free from outside interference, and to observe the principle of genuine self-determination. Disputes between States should be settled by the countries concerned through negotiations, in line with the basic norms governing international relations. Internal disputes of a country should be settled by its own people. To achieve a fair and reasonable political settlement of a regional conflict/ all parties concerned must observe the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and the five principles of peaceful co-existence.
The key to the settlement of the Kampuchean question lies in Viet Nam's cessation of its aggression and the speedy withdrawal of all its troops from Kampuchea. The United Nations General Assembly has adopted many resolutions in this regard. The Association of South-East Asian Nations (AS£AN) and other justice-upholding countries have also made sustained efforts to seek a political settlement of the question. Under the pressure of international public opinion, the Vietnamese authorities have over the year talked a lot about a "political settlement" but have in fact failed to show any sincerity. Their stubborn position of aggression and expansion has remained unchanged. Up till now, they have continued with their military occupation of Kampuchea under various pretexts, in defiance of the relevant United Nations resolutions. Being clearly the aggressor, the Vietnamese authorities bear an unshirkable responsibility on the question of Kampuchea. Yet, they brazenly try to disguise themselves as an outsider, insisting that Kampuchea's "national reconciliation" must come before their troop withdrawal. The kind of "political settlement" they have proposed is, to put it bluntly, designed to make the International community accept the Vietnamese aggression and occupation of Kampuchea as a fait accompli, prop up a Vietnamese-controlled "government" and ensure the Vietnamese vested interests gained through aggression and expansion. This is of course unacceptable to the coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea, the ASEAN countries and all justice-upholding countries and people.
China seeks no self-interest in Kampuchea. Our principled position on the Kampuchean question is to safeguard the norms governing international relations,
oppose aggression and uphold justice. We consider it essential to include in
 

earnest the relevant resolutions of the previous sessions of the United Nations General Assembly, we support Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the ASEAN countries and the United Nations Secretary-General in their efforts to seek a just and reasonable settlement of the Kampuchean question. The eight-point proposal on a political settlement of the Kampuchean question put forward by the coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea headed by Prince Norodom Sihanouk is fair and reasonable. It has won extensive sympathy and support from the international community and should serve as the basis for the settlement of the Kampuchean question. We are confident that provided Viet Nam withdraws all its troops from Kampuchea under international supervision, the Kampuchean people, led by the prestigious, great patriot Prince Norodom Sihanouk, will solve their internal problems through consultation free from outside interference, effect true national reconciliation and choose their new government through United Nations-supervised free elections, so that Kampuchea will become an independent, peaceful, neutral and non-aligned country. This will be in the interest of peace and stability in that region and in the rest of South-East Asia. Once the parties concerned reach agreement on a settlement of the Kampuchean question, China will be ready to join other countries in a relevant international guarantee.
The "cease-fire" declared by the Kabul regime has not put an end to the war in Afghanistan. As a matter of fact, the encirclement and suppression of the resistance movement, the killing of innocent civilians and incursions into Pakistan have been going on all the same. As long as the foreign aggressors do not	.
withdraw, the war of resistance to aggression will not stop. It is clear that "guarantee first, troop withdrawal next" or "reconciliation first, troop withdrawal afterwards" are nothing but excuses for putting off the withdrawal of troops from Afghanistan. If the Soviet Union really wants a political settlement, it should
comply with the relevant resolutions of successive sessions of the United Nations
 
General Assembly and withdraw all its troops from there as soon as possible. This is the key to the settlement of the Afghan Question and the only way to heal the "bleeding wound". We support Pakistan and other countries concerned and the United Nations in their efforts for a fair and reasonable settlement of the Afghan question. It is our hope that Afghanistan will regain its status as an independent, sovereign, neutral and non-aligned country at an early state.
The convening of an international conference on the Middle East question under the auspices of the United Nations is a feasible way to seek a peaceful settlement of the said question. The Chinese Government supports the United Nations Secretary-General's efforts towards this end. We hold that the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), recognized internationally as the legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, has the tight to participate in the conference on an equal footing with other members. China is always opposed to the Israeli policy of aggression and expansion and firmly supports the just struggle of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples to recover the occupied territories and restore their national rights. We sincerely hope that the Arab countries and the PLO will remove their differences through friendly consultations, close their ranks and co-ordinate their actions in a common endeavour towards an early, just and comprehensive settlement of the Middle East question.
At present, the situation in the Gulf is becoming more turbulent, with sharp confrontation in the region. The Chinese Government has expressed grave concern over this. We have all along taken a position of neutrality and of promoting reconciliation between Iran and Iraq and have urged them to bury the hatchet as soon as possible, engage in peaceful reconstruction and strive for further development rather than wearing themselves out in the war. Security Council resolution 598 (1987)" adopted unanimously by the Security Council through concerted efforts by all the members reflects the strong desire of the international community for e speedy end to the Iran-Iraq conflict and has provided a good basis for a peaceful settlement of the conflict. We appreciate the valuable contributions made by the Secretary-General of the United Nations to the implementation of this resolution and support him in his continued endeavours to ensure this. China has made and will continue to make efforts to promote comprehensive implementation of the resolution. With the desire to see an early end to the sanguinary conflict and the restoration of peace stability and prosperity In the Gulf region, the Chinese Government once again calls upon Iran and Iraq to stop immediately all their military actions and to implement Security Council resolution 598 (1987) in real earnest, in co-operation with the Security Council and the Secretary-General, so as to seek a just, reasonable and comprehensive settlement of the Iran-Iraq dispute. The Chinese Government also calls on the parties concerned to exercise restraint and ensure free and safe passage in the international waterways in the Gulf. It further calls on the big Powers to stop their military involvement in the Gulf so as to avoid escalation of the conflict, leaving the littoral countries of the Gulf to solve the Gulf problems themselves through consultations.
Over the past year there has been an ever-surging movement in South Africa and Namibia, with a steady growth of the struggle against the foreign rule and for national liberation and independence. The South African racist regime, though more and more isolated, la clinging obstinately to its apartheid system and brutally suppressing the South African people. It has kept Namibia under its illegal occupation and wilfully harassed its neighbours, trying hard to delay and Obstruct settlement of the problem of southern Africa. The Chinese Government strongly condemns the perverse acts of the South African authorities. We will, as always, firmly support the just struggle of the peoples of South Africa, Namibia and the rest of southern Africa. We call on the international community, and particularly countries that have influence with South Africa, to support the struggle of the peoples in southern Africa and, through further pressure and effective sanctions, force the South African authorities to abandon their policies of apartheid and of destabilizing the neighbouring countries and implement Security Council resolution 435 (1978) unconditionally, thus paving the way for the early independence of Namibia.
Recently, an important step forward has at last been taken in the peace process in Central America after repeated setbacks. The document entitled "Process for the establishment of firm and lasting peace in Central America", signed more than a month ago at a summit meeting of five Central American States, is of positive significance in easing the tension and turbulence in the region. That document gives expression to the desire of the Central American States for peace and is a result of the peace mediation of the Contadora and Lima groups. We sincerely hope that all the parties concerned will respect the hard-won achievements of the meeting so as to facilitate the smooth implementation of that accord and bring about peace and stability in Central America at an early date without interference from outside.
Tension on the Korean peninsula can be eased only through reduced military confrontation and increased contacts and dialogue between the north and the south of Korea. The Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea has recently put forward successive proposals, such as phased disarmament by both the north and the south, withdrawal of United States troops and tripartite talks by the north and south of Korea and the United States at the Foreign Minister level. Those proposals are constructive and reasonable and we hope that they will receive a favourable response from the parties concerned.
The present world economic situation is yet another major issue about which the international community is deeply concerned. Over the past year economic growth in developed countries has remained slow and the economic friction among them has been exacerbated. The developing countries are faced with unprecedented serious difficulties owing to their worsening external economic environment. The prices of many of their primary products have remained at the lowest level since the end of the Second World War, while the export of their manufactured goods has been hindered by ever-increasing trade protectionism. The export earnings of the developing countries have plummeted, while the inflow of funds has dropped drastically. The debts of developing countries, which exceeded $US 1 trillion last year, are weighing more and more heavily on them. Under the circumstances, their economic growth on the whole remains very slow and their difficulties are mounting, although they have made strenuous efforts to achieve economic readjustments or reforms. In the case of the least developed countries, there are even more difficulties.
The world economy is an integral whole. The North and the South need each other and are interdependent. The economic stagnation and growing poverty of developing countries are bound to affect the world economy as a whole and, naturally, the economic growth of the developed countries. Those that benefit the world will benefit from the world. The developed countries should do their best to improve the world economic environment and help developing countries overcome their economic difficulties. To this end, we wish to put forward the following propositions.
First, the developed countries should adopt measures to stabilize the prices of primary products and provide financial assistance to the developing countries for diversifying their export commodities so as to help stabilize and increase their export earnings. 
Secondly, the developed countries should honour their commitment to reduce and stop protectionist trade practices. They should also expand the treatment granted to the developing countries under the Generalized System of Preferences. The interests of the developing countries should be taken fully into account in the new round of multilateral trade negotiations.
Thirdly, the developed countries should try to fulfil as early as possible the official development assistance quotas set by the United Nations and provide more funds to the developing countries in other forms. International financial bodies should also make efforts to provide funds to the developing countries on favourable terms in the light of their actual conditions.
Fourthly, debtor and creditor nations, international financial institutions and commercial banks should share the responsibility for the solution of the debt problem and agree upon practical measures through continued dialogue so as to reduce as much as possible the debt burdens of the developing countries.
Fifthly, special preferential treatment should be given to the least developed countries in respect of trade, funds, assistance and debt, and effective measures should be adopted to implement the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990, approved unanimously by the special session of the United Nations General Assembly last year.
During the Seventh United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) held not long ago there were extensive discussions on such questions as the development of resources, commodities, world trade and the least developed countries, thereby creating favourable conditions for the furtherance of the North-south dialogue. We hope that at the current session the General Assembly will make new progress on this basis in its deliberations on the Questions concerned. We hold that the developed and developing countries should continue and step up dialogue and work together to establish a new type of North-South relationship, a just and rational relationship based on equality and mutual benefit, so as to strengthen international co-operation and revitalize the world economy.
China is marching forward along the road of building a socialist society with Chinese characteristics. Now, stability and unity prevail throughout the country. Reform and the open policy are being implemented steadfastly. The Chinese economic registers a sustained and steady growth, and the people's living standards keep improving. Of course, we are fully aware that China's productive forces are cooperatively weak and its economic relatively backward. China is still at the Initial stage of socialism. During this fairly long historical period, our main: task is vigorously to expand the productive forces so that China will gradually lift itself out of poverty, backwardness and underdevelopment. To this end, we must persist in reform and opening up at home and to the outside world, work hard to develop a planned commodity economy and continue to expand our economic and technological exchange and co-operation with other countries in the world, leading to a dynamic and rapid development of the productive forces. The forthcoming thirteenth National Congress of the Communist Party of China will review the historic changes that have taken place in China in the past nine years, reaffirm a series of fundamental principles and policies that have proved effective and give a theoretical exposition of reform and the open policy. The Congress will draw up new plans aimed at accelerating and deepening the economic structural reform, and work out a blueprint for political structural reform with a view to promoting the cause of socialist modernization.
Like reform and the open policy, China's independent foreign policy of peace is also our fundamental State policy which will remain unchanged for a long time. By pursuing this policy, China aims at both securing a lasting international environment of peace for our socialist modernization drive, and fulfilling its responsibilities and obligations for world peace and development in tune with international developments. The policy is in keeping with the fundamental interests of the people both of China and of the world as a whole. By persisting in reform and the open policy as well as in the independent foreign policy of peace, China will develop faster and contribute more to mankind.
As the most important global organization of our time, the United Nations is playing an important role in maintaining peace, promoting development and strengthening co-operation. We are glad to see that such a role is being further strengthened. At its last session, the United Nations General Assembly adopted - through efforts on various sides - the resolution on the strengthening of administrative and financial efficiency of the United Nations. At present, the United Nations is at a critical juncture of its reform. We support this world body in its efforts to introduce necessary and rational reforms so as further to improve its efficacy and give better expression to the purposes of the Charter. The United Nations is the Organization of all the countries in the world, and it needs the support of all its Member States. It is our hope that the big Power directly responsible for the current financial difficulties will fulfil its obligations as provided for by the Charter. As a permanent member of the Security Council, China will, as always, strictly abide by the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and discharge its obligations in real earnest. We are ready, together with other Member States, to make our contributions to further strengthening of the role of the United Nations in its many areas of endeavour.
﻿
Mr. President, I offer you sincere congratulations on having been elected to your high office and wish you luck and success in carrying out your responsible task. At the same time I extend my thanks to Foreign Minister Choudhury for his circumspect and successful guidance of the forty-first session of the General Assembly, which ended a few days ago.
I also take the opportunity cordially to thank the Secretary-General for his untiring endeavours on behalf and in the interest of our Organization. His latest report gives us confidence and a perspective for the future. As in the past, he can count on our unqualified support. The principal task of the United Nations is to maintain and safeguard peace. We begin this session of the General Assembly with hopeful signs of new thinking in West-East relations and in the field of disarmament. Yet the world is still filled with war: war between countries, in which people suffer and die; man waging war on man, for where human rights are violated war is being conducted against man; global terrorism is waging war against order in every form; deadly diseases are waging war on life; mankind is waging war on nature; and what is the hunger and poverty suffered by many nations but the outcome of war on human dignity through man's failure in North and South? 
In the final analysis, it is always man who threatens man. Our children cannot be blamed for the state of the world, but it is they who suffer most. They expect us to give them a world free from war, free from expulsion, free from fear, free from hunger and disease. Parents all over the world love their children. But ate we in the United Nations really doing enough to protect the rights and the future of our children? We want to leave our children a better world, a world in which human dignity and social justice are guaranteed, in which peace prevails and in which the natural foundations of life are protected and cultivated.
But, above all, we must fight against the war inside us as well as that outside us. Peace begins within ourselves; it begins in the mind, with respect for our neighbour and awareness of our responsibility for that neighbour and for all who will come after us.
War strategies must be superseded by peace strategies. We want peace in a comprehensive sense. If we fail in our task, none of us will survive. Hence, the crucial task today is to ensure the survival of mankind. Mankind has become a community in pursuit of survival. No one can steal away from our common fate. A nuclear war would destroy us all.
Contaminated rivers, seas and soil, desertification, dying forests - especially tropical forests - and the widening hole in the ozone layer are all problems that affect and concern us all.
A few weeks ago the world population passed the 5 billion mark. If the present demographic trend continues the world community will number more than 6 billion by the turn of the century. Our children will live to see that day. If we do not act the world's problems will pass beyond our control solely as the result of population growth. Now is the time to set the right course. This is the responsibility of every civilization, every religion, every ideology and every political and social system.
The call must be; fight the wars that threaten mankind from all sides. The peace we need is more than the elimination of military conflicts. It implies common responsibility, solidarity and respect for our neighbours. Peace implies making our world human. It implies respecting our natural environment. It implies securing freedom, life and the survival of mankind.
Many people live in poverty, exposed to hunger, ignorance and disease. The prospects for the third world depress us all. Commodity prices are falling. This means that developing countries must continuously increase production, and this in turn reduces prices still further.
In the industrial countries, however, demand is on the wane because markets for certain commodities are satiated and other commodities are increasingly being replaced by new materials. The disintegration of commodity prices is not a temporary market fluctuation  it is a long-term trend. For most developing countries, however, commodities are still the principal - indeed, in many cases, the only - source of income. Thus their one-sided dependence on commodity exports must be reduced. We must help them to turn their raw materials into manufactures and semi-manufactures of their own. But the diversification of an economy takes time. Until that point is reached, ways and means must be sought of improving existing arrangements, as in the case of the European Community's Community model for off-setting shortfalls in export earnings.
Last year the indebtedness of the third world rose by 9 per cent, to l trillion. In 1986 over 30 per cent, and in some cases nearly 50 per cent of the income of 22 sub-Saharan countries was mortgaged for debt service. The debt problem threatens to explode. It is a threat to the economic, social and political future of many heavily indebted countries, but it also poses a threat to donors. It threatens to undermine the will of North and South to co-operate with one another.
All those concerned, whether in the public or the private sector, need to increase their efforts. Every country should be treated according to its special circumstances. But the general principle must be to make debt-servicing reasonably proportionate to a country's productive capacity. It is in the true interest of donors to seek in their negotiations with debtors to solutions that will provide a perspective for the future. Hopelessness will crush the best will in the world.
Since 1978 the Federal Republic of Germany has remitted 4,2 billion marks of the debt owed it by the poorest countries. I appeal to all donor countries to follow suit, and I appeal to the socialist countries of the North also to provide adequate development aid, at long last.
Proceeding from future-oriented reform programmes and financed by new loans on easy terms, the economies of the debtor countries must be put back on a course of growth. But diversification and investment in growth sectors will be helpful to developing countries only if the industrialized world opens its markets wide to their manufactures and semi-manufactures and adapts its own economic structure to such new conditions. We are prepared to make that adjustment.
To restrict the role of the developing countries in the world economy to that of mere suppliers of raw materials and energy would be to deprive them of their prospects for the future. The industrial countries must eliminate import 

restrictions and other barriers to trade. They must stop subsidizing branches of industry that no longer pay their way.
They must also reduce agricultural surpluses. The adjustments necessary in the industrial countries are difficult and painful but that can be no reason to keep putting them off. At any rate, exports of weapons are not the solution to these problems. On the contrary, they Increase tensions and the danger of war, and they squander resources that are needed for works of peace. Weapon exports facilitate neither the necessary structural change in the industrial countries nor the process of economic recovery in the developing countries.
At its seventh session, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) underscored the special significance of peaceful international trade for development. The final act of that Conference indicates the strategies that need to be pursued with regard to finance and indebtedness and trade and commodities, and with regard to the problems of the land-locked developing countries. Now is the time for action.
The industrial countries are undergoing a technological revolution, a revolution that will completely change society. At the moment we have but little idea of the repercussions it will have on the developing countries. Whatever happens, it must not be allowed to divide the world for ever into rich and poor. We cannot allow the great human dream that has inspired all nations, the dream of one just, peaceful and free world, to be outstripped by technological development. On the contrary, science and technology must be the powerhouse for the development of mankind. Only modern science and technology are capable of solving the world's problems of food supply, health, education and energy. Genetic engineering, modern medical research, state-of-the-art information technologies and new forms of energy must be pooled to this end.
AIDS (acquired immune-deficiency syndrome) is a challenge to the whole of mankind. It threatens all nations. My Government is pleased to note that the gravity of this problem is increasingly recognized by Governments and by international organizations.
Advanced technology not only provides opportunities; it also entails risks. Chernobyl has demonstrated to the world that the safety of nuclear power stations is the common responsibility of all countries producing nuclear energy. A progressive human society cannot regard nuclear energy as the ultimate solution to the world's energy problems.
The task of eliminating the political, social and moral risks inherent in high technology and science is common to the whole human race.
Genetic engineering can secure adequate food supplies for many billions of people, but it can also be abused to violate the dignity of man if it is used solely as a means of manipulating man, if it encroaches upon each person's individuality. The United Nations is the forum where the best brains in our countries can establish common ethical standards with which to measure the consequences of technological development.
The earth's atmosphere and its high seas are the common property of mankind. They have to be preserved so that the human species can survive. But, like the world's climate, they too are being jeopardized. The Brundtland report has presented a plan for development that is both lasting and environmentally compatible, and it must be taken seriously. The world must be made more acutely aware of these issues and interactions. This is a matter for the United Nations. We should soon consider proclaiming a year of global environmental protection. We should also consider proclaiming the 199Os a decade for the environment to provide the necessary stimulus worldwide.
Everywhere we face problems which we can only solve together or not at all. We have long since entered an age of global domestic policy in which each one of us is dependent upon everyone else. Thus, the importance of the United Nations grows from year to year. It is our common duty to preserve and develop the world Organization. The gap between the concept of the United Nations and its present indateriali2ation in a world of nation-States is still considerable. We must all learn to find global answers to global problems. The United Nations offers a wide range of instruments for this purpose. The more determined our efforts to reform the world Organization, the more effectively will be able to use those instruments. I wish at this juncture to thank the Secretary-General for his far-sighted approach to this problem.
Many forms of co-operation can also develop in a smaller framework. Here in lies the special significance of regional organizations. The European Community has shown the world the kind of dynamism for peace that can emanate from regional organizations. For centuries the nation-States of Europe fought one another in wars, which also spread beyond their continent to other parts of the world. Today, war among the 12 members of the European Community is impossible; it is inconceivable.
That is the first and most important task of a regional organization: to make sure that war in its region will be impossible. The more nation-States become integrated the better their chances of achieving that aim. That is why my Government strongly supports all efforts to establish peace in crisis areas originating in the region itself. 
We welcome the signing of the Arias Plan by five Central American countries as a step towards peace and stability in Central America and encourage them on that road. The result of the Guatemala conference is a sign of hope. We give our unqualified support to the nations of Central America in their efforts to secure social justice, to ensure the application of the principles of democracy, to secure independence and to foster peace and co-operation. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany is helping the cause of world peace by encouraging co-operation between the European Community and the regional organizations in Central and South America, Asia, the Middle East and Africa.
The countries of one region can best preserve and develop their cultural identity through joint efforts. The wealth inherent in cultural diversity is the purest source of energy for man's task of safeguarding peace. All nations on earth are, without distinction, civilized nations. Their cultural contribution is indispensable for the creation of a single global society based on justice, peace and freedom. We are serving the cause of peace if we preserve and protect the unmistakable identities of these civilizations. Nations that respect the cultural achievements of other nations cannot be stirred up against one another. Cultural arrogance has time and again been the root cause of catastrophes.
Thus the North-South dialogue, too, needs a cultural dimension. Only if nations start from the basis of their individual culture and cultural exchanges and partnerships with others can they develop the national consciousness that will help solve mankind's common problems.
Regional organizations in the third world are the best way to ensure that their members are not drawn into the West-East confrontation. This is also the great mission of the Non-Aligned Movement, which is a growing factor of stability in the world. Genuine non-alignment offers third-world countries in particular a great opportunity to preserve their identity and consolidate their Independence.
We are all aware of the magnitude of the world's problems. This being so, we know we cannot solve political, social, religious and ideological differences in one gigantic leap. These differences exist and we have to live with them. But that should not stop us, notwithstanding all the differences of principle and ideology, from doing what we can to safeguard world peace now.
There is a growing awareness of this. The seventh session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), like last year's special session of the General Assembly on Africa, has given encouraging signs that North and South are capable of disregarding positions of principle and concentrating on what is necessary and feasible at the present time.
We must now take this opportunity to move forward. Security Council resolution 598 (1987) is an encouraging sign of common responsibility for global peace. The special significance of that resolution lies in its unanimous adoption. It can serve as an example for the settlement of other regional conflicts as well.
We strongly support resolution 598 (1987) and the Secretary-General's efforts to establish peace on its basis. That resolution affords Iraq and Iran an opportunity to embark on the road of peace. With Iraq having stated its approval, I urgently appeal to Iran to implement the resolution fully.
War has been going on in Afghanistan, too, for nearly eight years now. We expect the Soviet Union to withdraw its forces from that country and put an end to the suffering of the Afghan people. No one apart from the afflicted people of Afghanistan should gain advantage from the Soviet withdrawal. Consequently, the conditions for the genuine independence and non-alignment of the new Afghanistan must be established now.
We also call for the withdrawal of foreign troops from Kampuchea so that this country may exercise its right to self-determination. The new, fundamental developments between West and East with their far-reading consequences for world peace have only become possible through both sides opting for co-operation. The clearest manifestation of that willingness are the negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union aimed at the global elimination of their intermediate-range nuclear missiles. For the first time, agreements are being made between West and East which not only limit but actually remove arms. This marks a turning-point in history.
We Germans greatly encouraged this development and we welcome the result - this great agreement - with relief. It enhances security and stability in Europe. My Government has viewed its role in this process not merely as that of an interested spectator. We have played an active part in achieving this success as a country aware of its responsibility for peace. Through our advocacy of the "double-zero solution" we have paved the way for the world-wide elimination of intermediate-range missiles.
I endorse the statement Chancellor Kohl made on this subject on 26 August 1987 that, by the time the American and Soviet intermediate-range nuclear forces have been removed as agreed, the German Pershing la systems will also have been phased out.
This agreement is still a long way from completely solving the problem of nuclear disarmament, but it represents the first, and thus the crucial, step towards the great objective to which the nuclear Powers committed themselves before the world in the nuclear-test-ban Treaty.
A process has been set in motion which must be made irreversible. Further steps must, and will, follow. We deem it essential that the United States and the Soviet Union should now concentrate on a drastic reduction of all strategic offensive weapons and in so doing also consider the further application of the Treaty on anti-ballistic missiles (ABM).
In the Western Alliance we will move ahead with the preparations for negotiations on nuclear missiles with a range of less than 500 kilometres. We will vigorously pursue the negotiations on conventional stability in Europe. The statements issued by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the Warsaw Pact afford a good basis for such negotiations. A convention globally banning chemical weapons is overdue. That convention must now be concluded  We cannot permit an ever larger number of countries to manufacture or produce these ghastly weapons of destruction. The best protection against their proliferation is their global elimination and their global prohibition. 
In our efforts to achieve that aim, we are not facing an insurmountable wall. New thinking that stems from the knowledge that we can only survive with one another, not against one another, governs oar actions more and more· Ho nation can have a greater interest in the success of all these negotiations than that of the Germans, for most weapon systems are concentrated in their country - on both sides of the dividing line - so they would be the first to be threatened with extinction·
The agreement on intermediate-range nuclear force© will provide the spark the effects of which will be carried well beyond the confines of arms control. Both sides will draw from that agreement the energy and the confidence to extend their co-operation to all fields where such co-operation is currently possible. That will be a major step towards the political objective of Atlantic defensive community, which is to establish solid structures for peace in Europe through co-operation between West and East in all areas and on the basis of a reliable defence capability.
The fact that we can cherish this hope today in the result of the discernment and the constructive approach of both sides that had already become clear at the summit meeting of the United States and the Soviet Union in Reykjavik. There, the two super-Powers showed that they are conscious of their responsibility for mankind's survival· in this they deserve the support of all peace-loving people. We must not stray from this path. ·The signposts to a better future are not the prejudices and enemy-images of yesterday but the will of nations, the will of every individual, to live in peace and dignity. Only in that manner shall we fulfil our responsibility for the future of mankind.
The era that was dominated by hegemonic aspirations, the era in which the world risked being pulled into the vortex of a never-ending arms race, is drawing to a close. This process cannot be stopped} it is paving the way to a better world. In such a· world there can no longer be any room for the old enemy-images. If we dismantle our weapons we must also dismantle those enemy-images. On a global scale and in Europe we must create reliable systems for maintaining security on a co-operative basis, as well as mechanisms for the early detection and management of crises. The Federal Republic of Germany will assist in this task in the North Atlantic alliance and in the European Community. We shall do everything in our power to promote the process of European union and to strengthen our alliance, the aim of which is to prevent war.
Our desire to achieve the union of the twelve European democracies, our desire for co-operation with our Eastern neighbours, is a manifestation of the policy of the Federal Republic of Germany for peace in Europe. We are aware of our responsibility  we shall use all our energy and every opportunity in working for a better Europe, a Europe based on peace.
The position of the twelve members of the European Community of international issues and on the Community's internal development was presented by the Danish Foreign Minister two days ago. The Single European Act, which entered into force on 1 July this year, is significant for the international community. The Twelve wish, as is stated in the preamble to the Act, to make together "their own contribution to the preservation of international peace and security in accordance with the undertaking entered into by them within the framework of the United Nations Charter".
To that end we intend to establish a common Community foreign policy. 
The completion of the European internal market, scheduled for 1992, will greatly increase the Community's strength. Significant steps towards a common monetary policy and towards the aim of converging the economic and financial policies of its members will have to follow, as will steps towards the creation of a technological community. That is the road to European union. To our neighbours in the East we extend the hand of wide-ranging co-operation - envisaged in the Final Act of the Helsinki Conference on Security
and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) as the course towards the establishment of a peaceful order in Europe. At the CSCE follow-up conference in Vienna we are not merely seeking progress in matters of security: we are also seeking progress on the realization of human rights, on humanitarian issues, on economic exchanges, on the exchange of science and technology, on the exchange of information and culture. West and East can give each other a great deal through co-operation through confrontation they can deprive themselves of progress entirely - they can lose everything. Through co-operation we seek to build confidence, to serve mutual interests and, in a positive sense, to create dependencies that will make peace and co-operation irreversible.
We do not want to bleed one another to death through the arms race, nor do we want to cripple anyone economically. The political and military division of Europe is bad enough. We must not divide Europe economically and technologically when there are already gulfs to be filled and walls to be climbed. Our aim is to help achieve genuine progress in all fields. If the Soviet Union opens up to the world it will find a reliable and constructive partner in the Federal Republic of Germany. The Treaty of Moscow affords a basis for such co-operation as well as the necessary perspective. We shall have recourse to that Treaty, aware of the central importance of German-Soviet relations, which have an impact on the situation in the whole of Europe beyond their bilateral relationship.
If, after decades of confrontation, it were possible today to reach a turning point in the East-West relationship it would be a mistake of historic dimensions if we were to let the opportunity pass. All must shoulder their responsibility. Twelve years after the signing of the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) we can declare: a process has been set in motion leading to a peaceful order in Europe. My country has made substantial contributions towards this goal through its accession to the European Community and the Western defensive alliance and through the unprecedented Franco-German partnership.
We have cleared the way for a new West-East relationship by means of the Treaty of Moscow; the Treaty of Warsaw, which established the basis for a new beginning with the Polish People's Republic in the awareness of the special quality of the German-Polish relationship following the vicissitudes of their history; and also through the treaty with Czechoslovakia and the Basic Treaty on Relations with the German Democratic Republic.
Not only is there no feasible alternative, there is no responsible alternative to this process. We always perceive Europe as a whole; we want to improve the situation in the whole of Europe. We realize that the wheel of history can never be turned back, only forward.
Part of this perspective for Europe's future is the relationship between the Federal Republic of Germany and the other German State, the German Democratic Republic. Both States are firmly integrated in their respective alliances. But precisely this fact makes it possible for them to campaign in their alliances for co-operation throughout Europe. The differences in their two value-systems are fundamental. Nevertheless the two German States are agreed: never again must war originate on German soil, only peace.
There is still disagreement between the two German states as to the future of the German nation. The Federal Republic of Germany remains committed to its aim of working for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will regain its unity through free self-determination.
The visit to the Federal Republic of Germany by Mr. Erich Honaker, Chairman of the Council of State of the German Democratic Republic, demonstrated the intention of both German States to render a major contribution to stability in Europe by improving the quality of their relations and through their efforts to promote disarmament. Through these efforts we are also serving the welfare and interests of the people.
Mr. Honaker's visit revealed not only fundamental differences but also a willingness to co-operate with one another. We Germans, too, must live with the disparities that characterize the world, and above all Europe, even though they affect us more than other nations. But these disparities must not prevent us Members of this great world Organization from meeting our responsibility for peace and the survival of mankind.
Common international responsibility also means a common responsibility to combat terrorism, to combat racism and to prevent violations of human rights. Today, now, this must be the great common denominator for all nations who have committed themselves to the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. The community of nations' are becoming increasingly aware that terrorism is a threat not only to political enemies but also to one's own country. We can confront terrorism only if its perpetrators are unable to find refuge anywhere in the world. But we shall be able to rid ourselves of terrorism for good only if we also remove its causes, and there are many.
The Middle East crisis, for instance, may keep on spawning violence. Consequently, peace must at long last be established in Lebanon on the basis of freedom, sovereignty and territorial integrity. The Middle East conflict, as we have seen in the course of past years, cannot be settled by force, only by negotiation. We therefore advocate an international conference on the Middle East, which must proceed from Israel's right to exist within recognized and secure borders and from the right of self-determination of the Palestinian people.
If terrorism is inimical to any order, racism is the most terrible deprecation of human dignity. A regime that rules in the name of race must be opposed by the conscience of the world in the name of humanity. The Western democracies are a community oriented to common values and based on equal dignity for all. In view of this, we condemn the violation and mockery of human rights in the Republic of South Africa. We call upon the South African Government to create at last the conditions that will enable black and white to meet at the conference table and commence the dialogue that is so urgently needed. Apartheid must be totally eradicated; it is not capable of reform.
The state of emergency must be lifted, the political prisoners, first among them Nelson Mandela, must be released unconditionally and the banned organizations of the black majority must be allowed to operate again. If this is done, there is still hope that the violence that is bound to keep on producing yet more violence can be stopped. With regard to Namibia, we demand the application, at long last, of resolution 435 (1978), without any ifs and buts.
We condemn violations of human rights wherever they occur. A particularly horrific aberration of State authority is torture. It is not an instrument with which to fight one's political opponents. Least of all it is a means of administering justice. It is the most abhorrent and barbaric manifestation of injustice. By means of the United Nations Convention against torture, the world has taken a big step forward in the development of its political culture. 

By virtue of its Charter, by virtue of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the human rights covenants and its human rights institutions, the United Nations is a citadel and a bulwark of human rights. The exercise of civil, economic and social human rights is essential in the construction of a better world. A high commissioner for human rights and a court of human rights would be able to protect and promote these rights.
Only on human tights and the right of self-determination of nations can the universal house of peace be built. They are its foundations. That is why my country reaffirms to everyone before this world Assembly its pledge to respect every nation's right, to self-determination and to defend human rights all over the globe.
And with the same earnestness we pledge ourselves, by dint of our policy of peace at home and abroad aimed at developing peaceful relations with our neighbours and all nations on earth and at making peace with nature, to safeguard life on this planet and the survival of mankind for this and all future generations.
Only when there is life is there freedom and human dignity. To preserve it must be the aim of our Organization. 
﻿It is a great honour for me to address the General Assembly. Mr. President, I am pleased to extend to you France's congratulations on your election, which is testimony to the confidence all delegations have in you. We are convinced that under your presidency the work of the Assembly will be pursued with authority and efficiency. I wish you every success and assure you of our full co-operation.
In the time that has elapsed since the last session of the General Assembly the international situation has been marked by three principal characteristics.
First, there has been a disturbing lack of progress in resolving regional conflicts. Not only has none been resolved - either the situation is still blocked, as in southern Africa and Cambodia, or progress that had been announced, as in Afghanistan, or broached in outline, as in the Middle East with the proposal for a conference, has failed to be translated into action - but, even worse, in some instances the situation has deteriorated. That is the case with the conflict between Iraq and Iran, which, beyond the serious confrontations it periodically produces, threatens to spread to the whole of a strategic region whose equilibrium is Important for the entire world. 
The second characteristic is the persistence of major economic and financial problems. In this respect too the period has not produced much to give rise to much satisfaction. The issue of indebtedness, despite some adjustments that have been introduced, continues to compromise the situation in a good many third-world States. Instability in the prices of many raw materials has continued to disrupt both International trade and, even more serious, the courageous efforts of countries whose fate is closely linked to the prices of those products. In these conditions, the development of those States continues to be handicapped, with demographic pressures still a factor even as the legitimate aspirations of the populations concerned grow. 
The third characteristic that currently has centre place in international attention is the opening in American-Soviet relations. Along with the concerns and disappointments that I have just mentioned, 1987 will probably be marked as the year in which East-West relations were given renewed impetus. Each of us is naturally aware of the prospects that have been opened up, both in respect of an agreement on dismantling American and Soviet medium-range missiles, which new appears close, and in developing contacts among the peoples of Europe's divided continent, as witnessed - and you, Mr. President, are more aware of this than anyone - by Mr. Honecker's visit to the Federal Republic of Germany. In this same context is the work of the third meeting of the follow-up Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, which will be able, we hope, to complete its work in Vienna between now and December with balanced results, including gains in the area of human rights and contacts among individuals.
However positive, the improvement in relations between Washington and Moscow remains for the time being confined within precise limits: United States-Soviet talks on disarmament have yet to focus on reducing the huge strategic arsenals of the Soviet union and the United States, They have centred above all on Europe.
Given the world situation as it now stands, three important questions have to be asked; How far can United States-Soviet talks go towards improving the climate between East and West? Can the change in East-West relations affect regional crises? Will we be more capable of grappling with ways to resolve the economic and financial problems confronting the world?
France believes that the international community must meet these three challenges: by encouraging progress but also by reaffirming the conditions for genuine detente between East and West) by bringing about conditions conducive to the search for solutions to regional crises by the countries concerned by bringing 
imagination and courage into play to devise new ways to help resolve the problems of indebtedness and development.
A world of greater stability and interdependence must also be a safer world. France is well aware of the stakes, such as the ramifications of the present normalization of relations between the Soviet Union and the United States. We hope that this will not result in decreased security for other countries, especially in Europe. France has followed very attentively the preparation of the treaty to eliminate American and Soviet intermediate-range missiles. It has welcomed, as was fitting, the decisions by the Soviet Union to remove the obstacles that country had placed on the road to an agreement, whether concerning the link between the various aspects of the bilateral negotiations in Geneva, the claim to take into account British and French independent nuclear forces, or the request to maintain a number of SS-20s facing Asia.
Nevertheless, we must continue to keep our vision clear. More disarmament does not automatically mean greater security. We cannot, in particular, disregard the threats to Europe that come from the substantial imbalance in conventional and chemical weapons.
This is why as early as 1978 France took the initiative for a conference on disarmament in Europe and welcomes the gains made a year ago in Stockholm. Together with its partners in the Atlantic Alliance and in the context of the multilateral process of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, it will spare no effort to enable the second phase of the Conference, which, we hope, will begin in 198-8, to advance towards greater stability in conventional arms on our continent. 
For this reason also, we attach the utmost importance to the Geneva negotiations to ban completely the manufacture of chemical weapons in the world and to destroy existing stockpiles. But until there is progress towards the destruction of those stockpiles known to be the largest, it is advisable to maintain the option of a minimum stock for security. Western Europe cannot be disarmed in the area of chemical weapons 10 years before the Soviet Union itself completes the verified destruction of its stockpiles.
With the proposed elimination of medium-range nuclear forces we should not lose sight of the fact that Europe will continue to be subject, without limitation at this stage, to the threat of a far more considerable number of intercontinental systems, which are also capable of reaching targets on our side of the Atlantic. France, therefore, hopes that the United States and the Soviet Union, without neglecting those aspects related to defensive systems and the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, will at long last return to the teal priority of arms control, namely, the strategic systems of the two countries.
In this spirit, France welcomed the goal of a 50 per cent reduction in Soviet and American strategic arsenals that was set at Reykjavik last year. Admittedly, halving these arsenals merely brings the Americans and Soviets back to the level prevailing at the end of the preceding decade when SALT II was signed. Nevertheless, this would clearly be a step in the right direction and would establish, as a real priority, not the illusory quest for denuclearization but the gradual and verified reduction of the excessively huge central arsenals. There is virtually no other serious alternative and it seems scarcely reasonable to envision the complete elimination of nuclear weapons within the foreseeable future.
France will not decline to participate, when the occasion arises, in multilateral negotiations on nuclear disarmament. Such talks, however, would be justified only as a later phase of a process of nuclear-arms reduction in which the two super-Powers would already have made very substantial progress. The President of the French Republic, speaking here in September 1983, enumerated the conditions for his country's participation. I would like to repeat those conditions: Soviet and American arsenals must be reduced to a level at which the disparity between their arsenals and those of other nuclear Powers changes in nature  the defensive systems that could destabilize the current bases of deterrence must not be strengthened  the imbalance in conventional weapons must be eliminated  and the elimination of the chemical threat must become a fact.
Until such time as these conditions are met, France will not agree to its forces being taken into account, directly or indirectly, in negotiations to which it is not a party. As the Prime Minister, Mr. Jacques Chirac, indicated from this rostrum last years
"As long as French security rests on nuclear deterrence, the first requirement for my country is to maintain the credibility of its strategic forces at the necessary level. For that reason, France has naturally declined to go along with any form of planned obsolescence of its forces while other Powers retain a huge excess nuclear capacity. It will accept neither a quantitative nor a qualitative freeze on its arsenals nor will it halt its nuclear tests. That arsenal does not exceed the level considered" indispensable for our security and our independence. The nuclear tests are being carried out in unquestionably safe conditions ..." (A/41/PV. 8, p. 71). These have been acknowledged as such by independent experts from Pacific countries whose concerns for the environment we understand and share.
In the area of information, France is prepared to take a new step. After welcoming several Heads of State or Government from the region to the test site on Mururoa this year, it now invites the leaders of the Andean countries bordering the Pacific. Other States regularly carry out far more tests than France does, and have been doing so for a longer period. None, we believe, has so far offered such guarantees. The Improved climate of East-West relations has had no effect to date on the principal regional conflicts. Recognizing this fact, the international community must increase its attention and its effort, in particular to bring about conditions favourable to the search for appropriate solutions by the parties directly concerned. Yet we must make a distinction among the different types of crises confronting the world.
In some cases, the situation continues to be stalemated. This Is true of southern Africa. With Its sense of community with all of Africa, and especially with countries close to It because of history, language and exceptional human ties, France believes that new impetus can and should be given to the reduction of tensions, the resumption of dialogue and the restoration of peace in southern Africa. Prance has already taken action along these lines, for example regarding the unprecedented exchange of prisoners that recently took place following a French initiative and after the many contacts France had over a period of months with various States in the region. We hope that this exchange will be followed without delay by new developments as envisioned. The official visit to Paris at this time by the President of Angola, and the visit next week by the President of Mozambique, both of whom played a key role in effecting the exchange, will make it possible to assess the prospects that have been opened up.
But there can be no return to peace In the region in the absence of dialogue in South Africa itself among all the components of South African society that have together built that country. The release of political prisoners and the renunciation of violence and of preconditions are the prerequisites for this necessary dialogue. Its purpose can be none other than the dismantling of apartheid. The French Government whole-heartedly condemns the system of apartheid, which is intolerable. It has consistently supported, particularly within the European Community, he Implementation of restrictive measures designed to make the South African Government begin such a dialogue.
Somewhat different Is the conflict in Western Sahara; although no visible progress has been observed. It does perhaps offer more promising prospects for a solution, given the mediation attempts under way. The combined efforts of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the President of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and friendly Arab leaders should at last lead to a settlement within the framework of the right to self-determination of the populations concerned. No country would welcome more whole-heartedly than France a solution that brings closer together the countries of North Africa with which it maintains truly privileged relations.
At the other end of the Sahara, the conflict between Chad and Libya has gone through a dramatic change over the past few months, but the final outcome has yet to be determined. Combining determination, courage and audacity, the Chadian army succeeded, under the authority of President Hissein Habre, in liberating from foreign occupation almost all the provinces in the north. There remains the dispute over the Aouzou Strip. Clearly, this dispute, with which the OAU and its ad hoc committee have been seized, will find a lasting solution in the present context only when it has been settled according to law. France, which brought Chad to independence and thus bequeathed to it its borders, considers this territory to belong to Chad. It is ready once again to communicate the documents in its possession to bodies that so request. For the rest, true to its commitments,
Prance will keep the purely defensive and deterrent military arrangements it now has there for as long as it believes necessary.
In Cambodia, despite the efforts of the ASEAN countries, the situation remains deadlocked. Nothing, however, warrants the foreign occupation which, by its continuation, has increasingly assumed overtones of colonization. Viet Nam should  understand the deadlock in which it now finds itself. It must try to find, together with its neighbours and with help from all, particularly Prince Sihanouk, whom Prance is pleased to be welcoming again, the paths towards a political solution. For the people of Prance, who are linked to the Khmer people by an old and ever-present friendship, such a solution can only be the restoration of a Cambodia that is free from all foreign occupation and free to determine its destiny.
There are other situations in which stated intentions have unfortunately not been translated into concrete actions. It is therefore incumbent on the international community to redouble its efforts and its firmness.
Covering Afghanistan, certain Soviet statements led to the assumption that the new team of leaders in Moscow had perhaps understood that the invasion, followed by the occupation, of this independent non-aligned country, which was not at all hostile to the Soviet Union, was a grave mistake. It is a fact that eight years of fiercely waged war have not shaken the determined resistance of a courageous people. Their unyielding determination, the sweeping condemnation of the aggressor by the international community and the resolute support for the cause of Afghanistan, and also for Pakistan, which has generously welcomed on its soil 3 million refugees forced into exile, should convince the Soviet Union that it cannot rely on time to impose a solution by force. While the conditions for a settlement have already been largely defined, thanks to the efforts of the Secretary-General and his special envoy, Mr. Cordovez, the fact remains that the Geneva talks on a timetable for the withdrawal of Soviet troops have still not achieved their objective. If the Soviet leaders sincerely wish to embark upon the path to a negotiated solution, they should act accordingly and, in order to end promptly this conflict of another age, fully accept the right of the Afghan people freely to determine its future. That is what France and almost all the countries represented here expect of them. To a considerable extent the evolution of the international climate will depend on this.
In the Middle East, after years of deadlock, the Israeli-Arab conflict recently showed renewed and hopeful signs of progress towards a comprehensive settlement in the revised framework of an international conference which would bring together the parties to the conflict and the permanent members of the Security Council. Since the beginning. Prance has been favourable to such a project, in which it hopes to take an active part. To our mind, such a conference should serve for reflection and advice, without imposing itself on or taking the part of the parties themselves. It should serve to sanction and enrich the dialogue which, thanks to the bold initiatives of certain Arab and Israeli leaders, has begun to take hold. The movement towards peace, unfortunately, appears to be at a standstill at this time. It is essential for its momentum to be restored, naturally on the initiative of the parties directly concerned, but also with the encouragement of the international community as a whole, and particularly States that have special responsibilities and therefore special duties. After 40 years of confrontation, it is more than time to ensure Israel's right to live in peace within secure and recognized borders, and that of the Palestinian people to choose its future by means of self-determination, with all that that implies.
At the centre of this conflict, against its wishes, Lebanon, a torn and ravaged country, is paying an ever heavier tribute to the crises of the region on which it has no influence. To the tragedy of war are now added the effects of an unprecedented economic crisis. Prance has decided to continue its presence in Lebanon in spite of the risks and dangers. It continues to be a part of the United Nations Force which, despite its shortcomings, embodies the commitment of the international community to Lebanon's sovereignty and territorial integrity. The entire world should now mobilize and make an exceptional effort on behalf of all the populations of Lebanon without exception. France, for its part, has Increased its aid again this year. It calls on everyone to contribute to the special fund set up by the recent summit of French-speaking countries. Lebanon, however, will find peace only in the reconciliation of the Lebanese themselves and the establishment of normal relations with the countries of the region. This is the position which we have consistently conveyed to each of Lebanon's leaders and each of the neighbouring States.
Lastly, one crisis, far from abating, seems likely to spread to an entire region. The devastating war between Iraq and Iran has been going on for seven years. In terms of the number of victims and ferocity of the fighting, this war must already be counted among the deadliest of this century. Forms of warfare have been resorted to that are particularly to be condemned, such as the use of chemical weapons and sending to the front children who are barely in their adolescence, today the fighting directly threatens other countries and seriously impinges on the principles of the freedom and safety of navigation endorsed by the international community. 
France, along with the majority of States represented here, calls for an end to a conflict that can be dealt with only in its entirety. Over and above the cruel suffering of the two peoples, France is particularly sensitive to the concerns of riparian States of the Gulf and intends to demonstrate in concrete terms its commitment to freedom of navigation. Some of our ships are present in the region where they are ensuring the protection of our interests. But we are deliberately maintaining this action within specific limits and have declined to participate in any multinational actions that could give the situation the overtones of an East-West confrontation.
With a tenacity to which I should like to pay a tribute, the Secretary-General nine months ago called on the Security Council to try new efforts. After close consultations among the five permanent members of the Council and a constructive debate among all the members, these efforts led, on 20 July, at a meeting at which I had the honour of presiding, to the unanimous adoption of resolution 598 (1987). This balanced resolution should be implemented in its entirety, starting with the decision on the cease-fire it imposes.
Two months have since elapsed. The Secretary-General has been to Tehran and Baghdad. It appears that one of the two belligerents has confirmed its acceptance of the resolution in its entirety while the other seeks to impose its own reading of the text and its own conditions. The authority of the Security Council, which has acted under Chapter VII of the Charter, and the authority of our Organization as a whole are at stake. Great firmness is called for because, as our Prime Minister, Mr. Jacques Chirac, emphasized a year ago from this rostrum the stubborn pursuit of this absurd war, beyond the suffering it imposes on the two peoples, threatens to shatter the equilibrium of a region of strategic importance for the whole world. 
Other regional crises in addition to those I have just mentioned remain unresolved and continue to retain our full attention. In Cyprus, a de facto situation, which France does not recognize, persists despite the efforts of the Secretary-General, who is in the best position to help bring forth a solution. In the Korean peninsula, where a remarkable process of democratization is under way in the south, we hope that direct contacts between Seoul and Pyong Yang will be resumed at an early date and that the Korean people as a whole will at last he represented in our Organization.
I should like finally to mention the situation in Central America, of which Costa Rica's President has just underlined the hopeful aspects. After more than four years of persevering effort at the initiative of the Contadora Group, the Presidents of the five countries of the isthmus have reached an overall agreement. Admittedly, no one supposes that the road ahead is without obstacles.
Nevertheless, an important step forward was made with the summit in Guatemala. The Central American countries themselves have demonstrated their determination to break the cycle of confrontation and settle their disputes themselves. The hopes occasioned by that meeting should be sustained. The commitments made should, by involving all the interested parties, make it possible to extend democracy to the whole region and lay the foundations for a lasting peace.
It is obvious that the improvement in East-West relations does not, of itself, imply a solution to regional crises. Solutions can result only from the efforts of the countries directly concerned and action by the international community to bring about conditions conducive to the success of those efforts, Europeans, who in the past have been torn by fratricidal wars and are today resolutely committed to building a common future, know this well. France, for its part, is ready to contribute to any regional attempt to settle conflicts and to act in a way that may allow Europe to contribute.  The serious economic and financial problems besetting the international community reveal the extent to which all too often selfish, short-term responses still prevail over awareness of the necessary Interdependence and shared interests. In this respect the European experiment is showing the way.
The European Community is growing stronger. Its enlargement in January 1986 to include Spain and Portugal has enhanced the Mediterranean dimension of the Community. The Single European Act, in effect since July 1987, has opened up new areas for action, while setting for the Community a key objective; the completion in 1992 of a huge internal market. Since its establishment nine years ago the European monetary system has become a pole of stability in an international monetary system in crisis. Technological Europe, lastly, has distinguished itself by achievements that at times go beyond the Twelve, as in the case of Ariane and Eureka.
Encompassing 320 million Europeans and open to the world, the Community is determined to acquire both a political and a security dimension enabling Europe to regain its rightful place.
Like its partners, France is convinced that this movement towards Europe's unity would lose its significance and thereby its force, if it led Europe to turn inwards on itself. The Twelve have demonstrated their firmness in the face of rising protectionism and continue to favour the development of foreign trade. The world's leading exporter, the Community is also one of the most open markets. The majority of its imports are exempt from all customs duties or levies, the exemption being applicable to 90 per cent of the products from the developing countries. The Lomé Convention, which governs the privileged relations with African, Caribbean and Pacific countries, has established an exemplary form of North-South co-operation. The system of generalized preferences offers other countries important guarantees with respect to the flow of their products to the Community's markets. Finally, Europe has concluded association and co-operation agreements with regional organizations and numerous States, particularly Mediterranean States.
We are now prepared to go further, and accordingly the Twelve are entering on a new round of trade talks. These will include, as everyone knows, the sensitive area of agriculture. The Community, including France, are prepared to address seriously the imbalances of world agricultural markets, but we cannot be asked to call into question the principles and achievements of the common agricultural policy. The new round of trade negotiations that I have just mentioned offers an opportunity for considerable trade liberalization. World economic expansion is based on the further development of international trade, which should largely benefit the poorest countries, with each country or group of States doing its share.
There has been a greater awareness over the past year that the disorder in the international monetary system since the end of the 1960s has undoubtedly been one of the causes of the mediocre performance of the world economy. France has worked consistently for greater stability in exchange rates and the reduction of interest rates. In this respect 1987 has been characterized by changes in the right direction. The Louvre agreement, concluded in Paris last February and confirmed by the Venice summit, comprises, as we had hoped, specific objectives for the stabilization of exchange rates of the principal currencies and the convergence of economic policies. Such agreements have produced encouraging initial results, but clearly everyone realizes that much remains to be done to ensure a stable international monetary order.
We have long advocated concerted action in the area of commodities. Prices for these commodities continue to be unstable and low. Apart from sound market organization, diversifying the economies of the producer countries is a necessity. One of the headings of the Common Fund meets this objective. France hopes that this agreement will enter into force at an early date. 0f all the evils troubling the world economy, the most serious and the most fraught with danger is, of course, the issue of third world indebtedness. For some States the situation has become critical. Prance is aware of the difficulties they are encountering in this respect, especially in Africa; it is familiar with the adjustments and restructuring many of them have courageously undertaken, and the painful consequences that can result for the populations. These States should benefit most particularly from the international community's support, and the conclusions of the special session of the General Assembly devoted to the African continent should not be allowed to remain a dead letter.
France has made proposals regarding debt that would extend the grace period and time-frame for repayment in the case of the poorest countries. These recommendations have since begun to be implemented by the Paris Club. Financial flows to the developing nations should be substantially increased. All lenders should contribute, and the participation of banks is more necessary than ever, especially in Latin America. The multilateral institutions should also step up their efforts to help the third world. It is, therefore, indispensable for the resources of the World Bank to be enlarged and for the discussions on tripling the resources of the Structural Adjustment Facility to be completed before year's end so that concessional loans to the poorest countries can be speedily increased.
Increasing official development assistance remains an imperative need. In the case of Prance, it has been decided to raise aid for development to 0.54 per cent of the gross national product in 1988. We are continuing to move closer to the target of 0.7 per cent of the gross national product for development assistance. Our effort will be directed as a matter of priority to the poorest nations, whose situation should be examined anew by the international community. Accordingly we have offered to host the next conference of the least developed countries in Paris in 1990. Without consultation and dialogue control of the international economic situation will not be attained. For this reason we welcome the results of the recent United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), at which the European Community made a substantial contribution, as my colleague from Denmark, current President of the Twelve, has recalled. That Conference revealed the existence of a general resolve to address the third world's problems realistically, in a spirit of openness and generosity. 
Efforts to come up with solutions to the problem of underdevelopment and, by the same token, to improve the material situation of the majority of human beings, cannot be separated from the international community's struggle to ensure greater respect for human rights in the world.
Human rights transcend East and West, North and South. At issue is the dignity of each man. It is inadmissible to say that one can look at the human person differently depending on place or circumstances, or to think that liberty may have several faces or that certain fundamental rights should have priority over others. France will never be silent so long as human rights ate trampled underfoot, whether it be in South Africa or Cambodia, Afghanistan or Chile. It will always be on the side of those who want democracy to live despite threats, whether in the case, today, of the Philippines or Haiti.
Precisely because Prance wishes to be above reproach on this score, it recently organized a vote on self-determination in New Caledonia. The New Caledonian population made a clear and indisputable choice, in conditions that were calm and beyond dispute, in favour of the territory remaining within the French Republic. In the spirit of open-mindedness that has always been its hallmark, the French Government is proposing, after broad consultations with all Caledonians, a statute for broad autonomy that should be acceptable to all.
Among attacks on individual rights, one of the most odious is terrorism because it systematically targets innocent people and resorts to the most cowardly actions - from a bomb thrown to kill in a place of worship or in a department store, to the taking of hostages, accompanied by blackmail for their lives, thereby submitting the victims to interminable torture and their families to unbearable anguish. Experience has shown dramatically that no State, however powerful, no person, however well protected, is safe from this scourge. No struggle, however legitimate, can Justify resorting to such crimes which constitute, along with the intolerance and fanaticism that feed them, an ongoing threat to the entire international community.
The measures that must be taken at the national level to prevent, fight and punish terrorism cannot be totally effective unless they are backed by a more concrete co-operation among States. The efforts against this outrage should be accompanied by unequivocal condemnation, no encouragement or complicity, even passive, should be tolerated. France urges all countries of the world to pursue this fight unsparingly, unceasingly, with absolute resolve, until this leprosy of our age is completely tooted out.
In conclusion, whether we are talking about East-West relations, the settlement of crises or responses to the major issues of our time, much still remains to be done. Were the international community, out of weariness or discouragement in the face of constantly new obstacles, to give up in one or another area, all our efforts would be reduced to nothing.
These are the responsibilities of the United Nations. It is easy to highlight the shortcomings, the defects, the red tape of the United Nations. There is nothing surprising about this since these deficiencies are our own and pertain to each and every one of us.
First we must adapt our Organization to the changes taking place in the world and undertake the necessary reforms while preserving the indispensable balances. We should be distrustful of reforms that would undermine the foundations of the system put in place in San Francisco it has proved itself irreplaceable. Real reforms should have as their objective a better Implementation of the Chatter and a better functioning of the machinery. This is why we believe the prompt implementation of the conclusions of the Group of 18 is desirable, and we are hoping for a settlement of the financial problem weighing over the life of our Organization and its specialized agencies. This is also why we, together with all the French-speaking nations recently represented at the Quebec Summit, are asking for the strict application of the regulations regarding the use of languages, especially French.
With regard to what has been done, as well as what remains to be done, we know that the Organization has been and will be able to rely on the man who is at one and the same time its soul and its principal officer, the Secretary-General. I should like to express again to Mr. Perez de Cuellar the French Government's high regard and appreciation for the remarkable services he renders the international community with a skill, talent and courage that has earned him the esteem and the constant support of all of us.
This mission, more than any other, is performed in the service of peace. Over-used and often misused, the word "peace" must remain the expression of our greatest ambition and, at the same time, the expression of the greatest reason. Our highest priority, of course, is to put an end to conflicts: solutions imposed by force will never be as enduring as a settlement freely negotiated and consented to. Efforts to bring about peace must also include organizing an effective and controlled disarmament that ensures our security. Working for peace, lastly, means addressing the causes of conflicts and bringing about the conditions that lessen tension. Security, disarmament and development, as was shown by the recent United Nations Conference devoted to this relationship, remain Interdependent,
Hence the reasonable ambition which is ours: namely, a genuine peace that la not dissociated from the reduction of inequalities in the world, nor from aid to development and co-operation.
Here again, we find the central role o£ the United Nations, together with all the specialized agencies of the United Nations family, in ensuring that the Immense wealth engendered by modern technology should benefit not a few peoples but the greatest possible number. There, transcending quarrels often Inherited from centuries past, lies the true challenge of our age. 
﻿
Mr. President, let me first extend to you my congratulations on assuming the presidency of the General Assembly, and at the same time express my country's warm appreciation to the outgoing President, and representative of a fellow Commonwealth country, the Foreign Minister of Bangladesh.
The General Assembly meets this year at a moment of great hope for the world, yet also at a moment of grave and mounting danger: hope because, after years of effort, an historic arms agreement between the United States and the Soviet Union is within sight; and grave and mounting danger because the conflict between Iran and Iraq poses daily a more serious threat to wider peace and security.
In the Gulf two proud, independent countries, themselves both founding Members of the United Nations, have been mauling each other relentlessly for seven years. That is almost twice as long as the First World War. We have before our eyes the image of hundreds of thousands of corpses, young people blown up, gunned down or gassed to death, civilians on both sides mercilessly bombed. The combatants have moreover extended this senseless destruction and loss of life into the international waters of the Gulf. Only two days ago another British vessel, the Gentle Breeze was attacked with loss of innocent life. This was a disgraceful and unprovoked act of aggression against an unarmed vessel, the sixth attack on a British ship in the Gulf.
Ships have sailed this great seaway for centuries. It is an international thoroughfare; no State may dictate who uses it. As it has done throughout its long history, the United Kingdom will continue to champion freedom of navigation. Individual States that take action to uphold that freedom are entitled to support from the entire community of nations. Yet today, and for many months now, freedom of navigation in these waters is threatened - threatened by indiscriminate attacks on unarmed vessels, by harassment of innocent merchant shipping and, most reckless of all, by the laying of random mines. The world saw another example on Monday, as Iran sowed mines in the path of a convoy in international waters. The response of the United States to that insane act was fully justified, and it should be supported by all those who wish to bring this conflict to an end, for the stability of the entire region is menaced by this escalating threat to peace.
The challenge to this institution and all it stands for could not be more direct. The blunt truth is that the way in which the United Nations handles the conflict between Iran and Iraq must have a decisive effect upon its reputation in the eyes of all the peoples whom we represent.
If the United Nations is to rise to this challenge, to help end this grotesque slaughter, then we must strive for and maintain a degree of unity that has hardly ever been achieved before. Other international groupings can give a powerful lead, by condemning the conflict and mobilizing all their energies in the cause of Peace. That is why we value the mounting weight of support from the Organization of African Unity, the Arab League, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the Organization of the Islamic Conference. In the same sense, the twelve members of the European Community are giving their United backing.
All this shows how deeply the world cares about ending the Gulf conflict. But caring is not enough. The Security Council has a particular responsibility to act. That responsibility has been unanimously accepted by the Council, and that unanimity has been built on the collective determination of the five permanent members. Each permanent member has resisted the temptation to put its national interest before the cause of peace - and must continue to do so, for there is an overriding need for the five to continue working together, as the motor of action by the whole Security Council. 
No one has understood and emphasized that need more than the Secretary—General himself. So it was particularly fitting that he personally should have undertaken the difficult and delicate mission recently entrusted to him by the Security Council· For this, as for all his service in the cause of peace, he deserves our warm thanks and admiration.
As a result, we now know the views of the Iraqi and Iranian Governments on resolution 598 (1987). That resolution, legally binding, demanded that both Iran and Iraq should cease fire. It paid due attention to the legitimate concerns and grievances of both Iran and Iraq. And, rightly, it provided that in the absence of compliance the measures necessary for enforcement would be put in place, The Security Council's determination to ensure compliance must remain firm. What we now have to decide is whether the Security Council should move without further ado to an arms embargo.
After Iran's deeds and words this week, can anyone still believe that it intends to comply with the resolution? Monday's two unprovoked attacks, with missile and mine, show Iran's true intentions. So do the words of its President from this rostrum yesterday. He described the Security Council as "a paper factory for issuing worthless and ineffective orders". He invited the world to conclude that "the only option left is to use violence' (A/42/PV.6, p. 57).
The United Kingdom therefore thinks it essential now to start work on the further measures foreseen in resolution 598 (1987). The first step should be an arms embargo, to prevent the flow of arms to those wishing to ignore the United Nations and to prolong the conflict. For action is needed - action to show that the Security Council is neither worthless nor ineffective, that it will uphold its authority. We in Britain will not hesitate to take the steps at home which we judge necessary. I can announce today that we have decided to close down the operations of the Iranian military procurement offices in London. For us, the cynical attack on the "Gentle Breeze" was the last straw. The United Nations as a whole should learn the same lesson from what Iran has said and done this week.
The Gulf conflict is the most imminent danger. But it is not the only threat to world peace. The Arab-Israel dispute has already dragged on for decades. But the present deadlock is no solution, no panacea. Far from it: It is highly unstable. In the occupied territories, misery and repression persist. In Israel itself, the Palestinian population is rapidly expanding. Already two generations of Arabs and Israelis have lived out their lives under the shadow of war and insecurity. Yet the basis for the settlement that must one day be reached is plain to see: Israel's right to a secure existence; and the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination.
Virtually the whole world now accepts the idea of an international conference under United Nations auspices. The United Kingdom is convinced of the need for it. An international conference will provide a framework for negotiations. It will not be a trick or a trap. It will not impose solutions, nor have the right to veto agreements reached between the parties. It need not be feared by any man of goodwill. Nor can the international community ignore Lebanon, where the United Nations Interim Force needs our full support. The Lebanese must be left to tackle their problems free from outside interference. All foreign forces should withdraw, and Lebanon's international borders must be respected. 

There are far too many innocent victims of all these conflicts. They include those who have been taken hostage, some of whom, alas, are citizens of my own country. We have some experience of defending ourselves against terrorism. Our position is clear and quite unshakeable. We will do no deals with terrorists. That is the only policy that makes sense. Every sordid deal by a Government, every ransom paid, makes another terrorist act worthwhile and increases the threat to all out citizens.
I say to those who are holding Britons hostage; we shall never submit to your blackmail. You will gain nothing. You will only bring your cause into disrepute. Set the hostages free. I urge all those with Influence over those holding hostages to say the same. And I urge this whole Assembly, on behalf of the hostages of every nation, to send the same plain and urgent message.
Another problem cries out for a United response from the International community; southern Africa - never off the agenda of this Organization, and tightly so. For although South Africa may not be the only example of racial Intolerance in this world, it is unique in the Institutionalised domination of other races by the white population. Apartheid is morally repugnant, indefensible, inhuman. But it is indeed more than that; it is also suicidal for those who practise it. All the lessons of history tell us that. Apartheid breeds discontent, violence and revolution. We understand the seething discontent of the black population, who can fall to be moved by the thought that a whole generation  as come of age while Nelson Mandela has remained behind bars?
And yet a prosperous, stable and just South Africa cannot be built by violence that is the way to ruin, despair and death. Those who rule South Africa must change course before it is too late. There are signs that some of them realize that, but reforms so far have been too slow and too limited. The time bomb is in place and the clock is ticking; it must be defused before it is too late.
We all share one common aim: the elimination of apartheid as quickly as possible. What can the world do to encourage South Africa in the right direction? The answer cannot lie in further measures which would serve only to unite the whites against the world, to slow the process of change, to prolong apartheid, and to blight the lives of the very people we wish to help. Yet we must maintain the moral pressure on the rulers of South Africa. They must not be allowed to put their faith in the status quo. We must convince them that peace and security can be achieved only through genuine dialogue with the leaders of the other races, and by comprehensive reform. We are working to that end.
Of course, apartheid afflicts not only those who live in South Africa; it also destabilizes South Africa's neighbours. The United Kingdom is taking a lead in helping the front-line States: for some of them we are giving practical help in training and equipping their military forces to ensure the security of their transport links; for others we have given extensive aid to develop alternative transport systems and to pay for training and equipment. Our aid to the States of the Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference (SADCC) over the last five years totals more than $1 billion. Few if any of the States represented here today can match that record.
South Africa is by far the world's worst example of racial intolerance. But very few areas of the world are free from quarrels founded on differences of race, religion or language. Such quarrels need not be insoluble. The European Community is one of the most successful examples in history of making shared values and aspirations rise from the ashes of war and division. Yesterday's speech by the Foreign Minister of Denmark, which now holds the presidency, was eloquent testimony to our progress towards "ever closer union". In Sri Lanka there are hopeful signs that ethnic conflicts might be ended. The agreement between President Jayawardene and Mr. Gandhi is a bold step forward. The deplorable terrorist attack on the Sri Lanka President last month underlined the dangers besetting those who work for an agreement of this kind. They displayed great courage. Everyone must now work for its continuing success.
Likewise in Cyprus we support the Secretary-General's efforts to bring the two sides towards a settlement. The United Kingdom knows that difficult decisions are needed. We call on both sides to show the necessary courage.
And, in Korea, the United Kingdom notes with close interest the recent moves to restart dialogue between North and South. We support moves to reduce the tensions in that divided peninsula. We hope that the Korean people may soon be represented here. All these political problems demand the urgent attention of the United Nations. So do those in the economic field, which directly affect so many Member States.
One economic burden, one which has featured prominently in many speeches from this rostrum, is the cycle of debt. Here Britain has recently put forward an initiative to help the poorest countries of sub-Saharan Africa, which are striving to set their economies on a sustainable basis for development. This means converting aid loans into grants, rescheduling official loans with longer grace periods, and reducing interest rates on official loans. Already in this region we have written off aid debts to the tune of £244 million.
Yet despite all our efforts, glut and famine still disfigure the world. In the industrial countries we subsidize our farmers to produce food nobody wants and sell it below the cost of production. In developing countries, the subsidy, if there is one, goes to the consumer, and price control deprives the farmer of the incentive to produce more. So he leaves the land to find work in the city - and his Government has to buy from abroad the food he would have produced. The cost to the world and the waste are enormous.
The huge and urgent task of agricultural reform is to recreate market incentives and progressively to eliminate protectionist measures around the world. Food must be on the agenda whenever nations gather for discussion. It will be much on our minds at next month's important meeting of Commonwealth Heads of Government in Vancouver, to which Britain much looks forward.	.In Europe in the last 40 years we have shown that the divisions of history can be healed by wholly peaceful means, by political co-operation and by economic integration. Military force, as we Europeans know to our cost, seldom brings a lasting solution to anything) it can be only a last resort when everything else has failed.
That is just as true in Central America. Here, too, long-term security can only be assured by a peaceful settlement reached with the free consent of all its peoples, democratically expressed. That is why we welcomed the agreement signed by the five Central American Presidents in Guatemala in August. We wish it every success.
It is true too in the South Atlantic. We shall continue to look for ways of restoring more normal relations with Argentina while upholding the Falkland Islanders' rights to self-determination.
This universal truth applies to Asia as well, and nowhere more than in Afghanistan. During eight years of Soviet occupation, tens of thousands have been killed and 5 million refugees have been driven to leave their country. That is a bitter indictment of Soviet polices and a grave burden for Pakistan, which has shouldered it nobly. 
But the Soviet Union of today is not the Soviet Union which invaded Afghanistan. Since he took over the reins of power, Mr. Gorbachev has made a remarkable effort to reform, to restructure, to let in light and air from the outside. We have publicly applauded this, and we wish him well. We believe that a more prosperous and efficient Soviet Union will be easier for the world to live with and for its own citizens to live in.
I believe that Mr. Gorbachev knows that he needs a stable international environment to carry out his programme of reform. I detect a genuine wish to find a way to end the war in Afghanistan and to bring Soviet soldiers back from the rocky valleys where so many of them have fallen. Of course that is not an easy task. But the Soviet leaders must make the necessary leap of Imagination if glasnost and perestroika are to have the effect that they should on Soviet foreign, as well as domestic, policy.
The Soviet Union can reasonably seek to avoid instability or threats to its security on its borders. But it must accept that only when a government emerges in Afghanistan that truly commands the confidence and trust of the Afghan people, only then will Afghanistan be stable. The Soviet Union must grasp the nettle: it must withdraw its troops and let the Afghan people decide their own future.
So yet again we meet in the shadow of numerous conflicts. But the gloom is not unbroken. The arms control agreement announced last week by the United States and Soviet Foreign Ministers has lit a beacon of hope for all those who see in greater co-operation and mutual trust between the super-Powers the key to a less troubled world, for the hope must be that an intermediate-nuclear-force (INF) treaty, once concluded, will have benefits extending beyond the agreement itself. It has always been clear that arms control cannot on its own carry the weight of placing and keeping East-West relations on an even keel. Indeed, recent years have shown how difficult it is to make progress in arms negotiations if relations between East and West are generally sour.
But these things do cut both ways. An INF agreement which, for the first time ever, bites into the nuclear arsenals of each side, which, for the first time ever, provides for stringent verification - such an agreement should significantly increase the mutual confidence without which any significant progress in East-West relations is unattainable.
We have not suddenly arrived at some promised land, but an INF agreement will give a shot of adrenalin to the often lethargic and lumbering process of arms control. The next priorities are a 50 per cent cut in the strategic arsenals of the super-Powers, a world-wide ban on chemical weapons, the removal of imbalances in conventional weapons from the Atlantic to the Orals. They are complex and difficult and will test to the utmost the skill, patience and determination of both sides' negotiators.
But an INF agreement will begin to erode the thick ice-cap of mistrust that has accumulated over the years. Of course the melting process will itself release dangerous ice blocks and floes around which we shall all have to navigate with care.
The key is greater trust. If we can see the Soviet Union making a genuine effort to co-operate in solving the world's regional tensions; if we can see them putting the solution of such tensions before the pursuit of national interest; if we can see a more just, free and humane society developing in the Soviet Union, then I think we shall see greater trust between East and West.
I am not unhopeful. The co-operation between the Five on Security Council resolution 598 (1987) may be a sign of better things to come; and the· last year has seen real progress on human rights in the Soviet Union. But there is still a long way to go. For our part we have worked intensively to build up the East-West dialogue. The visit to Moscow by the British Prime Minister and myself in March was an occasion for unusually deep and valuable exchanges. They will continue.
At the beginning of this statement I spoke of a moment of hope. The INF agreement and the impending summit between President Reagan and Mr. Gorbachev are indeed reason for hope. I think it will be the prayer of every one of us here that' that still faint shaft of light will grow and will drive the shadows of fear and distrust ever backward until they ate finally eliminated from this world.
In opening the first General Assembly session in London, Clement Attlee, then British Prime Minister, described the simple truth behind the formation of the United Nations; "The realization by all nations that without co-operation for peace there can be no security for any nation".
That is still the most basic truth. That is why we are here.
﻿Mr. President, your election to the presidency of the United Nations General Assembly at its forty-second session attests to your personal eminence and distinction and our confidence in the guidance and leadership you will provide to our deliberations. We are particularly happy since you come from a country with which India has warm and fraternal relations. We congratulate you on your election and look forward to working together with you.
Allow me also to pay a tribute to our esteemed friend and neighbour from Bangladesh, Foreign Minister Humayun Rasheed Choudhury, for the effective manner in which he conducted the proceedings of our last session.
We greet also our distinguished Secretary-General, and wish him well in the discharge of his many exacting responsibilities.
The year 1987 has special significance for us in India. Four decades ago our people won freedom from colonial bondage through a unique non-violent struggle. Independent India took its rightful place in the comity of nations. We have sought to strengthen the foundations of new India by keeping what is best from our own tradition and by assimilating what is admirable from other civilizations. The fundamental concepts of tolerance, non-violence and equality have conditioned our Weltanschauung. Tolerance and non-violence are embedded in our policy of peaceful coexistence and the principles of Panchshila. Equality lies at the root of our belief in democracy and in the sovereign equality of all nations, a principle that is embodied in the Charter of the United Nations.
Even before our independence, the people of India reposed great faith in this Organization. We were present at its creation. The founder of modern India, our first Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, proclaimed that India's attitude towards the United Nations was one of wholehearted co-operation, and of unreserved adherence, both in letter and spirit, to its Charter, It was in this spirit that he promised that India would; "participate fully in its varied activities and endeavour to assume that role in its Councils to which her geographical position, population and contribution towards peaceful progress entitled her."
In our own way, we have endeavoured to fulfil this promise. Though the Organization has had many ups and downs in its short but chequered history, our commitment to it has never wavered. We ate happy that it has been resilient enough to withstand the attempts to retreat from multilateralism and the financial and budgetary pressures brought to bear upon the Organization.
My delegation welcomes the significant understanding between the United States and the USSR to eliminate in termediate-1ange nuclear forces. Even though these forces constitute only a very small fraction of the world's nuclear arsenals, we see the significance of the understanding in the prospects it has opened up for more wide-ranging agreements, which could eventually lead to meaningful nuclear disarmament.
This understanding vividly demonstrates that, given political will, disarmament measures can become a reality. It is imperative that this momentum towards peace and disarmament be sustained. While the primary responsibility for nuclear disarmament rests with the United States and the Soviet Union, a decision by other nuclear-weapon Powers to eliminate nuclear weapons would be an important contribution to the promotion of peace.
Not long ago, on 22 May 1987, Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi joined with leaders of Argentina, Greece, Mexico, Sweden and Tanzania in emphasizing that: "For too long, fear and mistrust have prevented progress in disarmament. Arms and fears feed on each other. Now is the time to break this vicious circle and lay the foundation for a more secure world". (A/42/319, Annex). It may perhaps be premature to believe that the "vicious circle" is broken·, but it has perhaps been dented and we hope that the momentum will not be lost.
A historic event in this continuing struggle to save humanity from a nuclear holocaust was the signing of the Delhi Declaration on principles for a nuclear-weapon-free and non-violent world, in New Delhi last November. Its importance lies in the fact that a major nuclear-weapon Power, the USSR, joined with a major non-aligned country, India, to announce 10 principles that could pave the way to a nuclear-weapon-free civilization. We are happy that a beginning has been made by the super-Powers towards translating at least some of the principles of the Delhi Declaration into concrete action.
The international arms race and its deleterious effect on the world economy was the focus of a conference earlier this month. The International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development threw into stark relief the deplorable dilemma of massive global expenditure on arms, on the one hand, and the non-availability of resources for meeting the basic needs of a large portion of the world's population, on the other. An overwhelming majority of nations took part in it. I had the privilege of presiding over that Conference, which reaffirmed, at the political level for the first time, the relationship between disarmament and development. It is important that follow-up steps be taken quickly so that the conclusions of that Conference may be translated into action. May we now hope that those who stayed away from those discussions will participate in this effort. 
I now turn my attention to southern Africa, where the struggle for freedom and equality continues to this day. The racist regime in Pretoria violates every norm of civilized conduct. Its policy of apartheid is an affront to the conscience of mankind. The Pretoria regime remains in illegal occupation of Namibia and continues to carry out acts of aggression against the front-line States. It is thus the root cause of tension, instability and conflict in the region, endangering international peace and security. It has rejected every initiative for a peaceful resolution of the problems of the region. 
In the face of the intransigence of the racist regime, the only peaceful course before the international community is to impose comprehensive mandatory sanctions against South Africa·, the alternative is violent upheaval. We reiterate our full support for the freedom struggle of the people of Namibia, under the leadership of the South West Africa People's Organization. The only basis for a peaceful settlement of the Namibian question lies in Security Council resolution 435 (1978), without bringing in any linkages.
The non-aligned countries, at their summit meeting in Harare last year, decided to set up the Africa Fund, with the object of assisting the front-line States and national liberation movements in southern Africa against the depredations of the racist regime. India is privileged to have been chosen to chair the fund, which has become operational with wide support from the international community. Those of us who believe in the moral need to work for the peaceful resolution of the problems of southern Africa have a duty to support and contribute to the fund.
On 29 July President Jayawardene of Sri Lanka and Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi signed a historic agreement which has brought peace and tranquillity to Sri Lanka after four years. We had throughout stressed the importance and the necessity of a political settlement to the ethnic conflict that had plagued Sri Lanka since 1983. I should like to pay tribute to the President of Sri Lanka for signing this agreement, which is a manifestation of the fact that non-aligned countries can resolve their problems without outside interference. Bearing in mind the recent history of the conflict, there are inevitably minor hitches and problems, but they are not insurmountable. Given the existing understanding and goodwill between the two countries they will be resolved sooner rather than later.
The situation in West Asia is gravely worrying. The core problem is the question of Palestine. The people of Palestine are still denied their inalienable human rights, including the right to establish an independent state in their homeland. We support the struggle of the Palestinian people, led by the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO). We urge that an international peace conference on the Middle East be convened at an early date, under the auspices of the United Nations and with the participation of all the parties concerned, including the PLO.
The continuing hostilities between Iran and Iraq concern us greatly. We have close historical ties with both countries. Our heartfelt desire is to see those two nations live in peace. The conflict between two important members of the Non-Aligned Movement, taking place as it does in a region which is in our immediate neighbourhood, has consistently engaged our attention. The United Nations has been deeply involved in seeking ways and means to end the war. The Security Council adopted unanimously resolution 598 (1987) and the Secretary-General has been engaged in important consultations relating to its implementation. We commend and support these continuing efforts in the hope that they will bring about a	'
negotiated, mutually acceptable settlement of this tragic conflict.
India supports the efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special Representative to secure an early and peaceful solution to the situation in Afghanistan. The military presence of great Powers in the Indian Ocean is ominous. Such presence has unfortunately intensified in recent months. The heightened military, presence of outside Powers is in conflict with the 1971 Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace. It demonstrates vividly that the main objective behind the 1971 Declaration is as valid today as it was when the Declaration was made.   What is more, it shows the futility of efforts to dilute the thrust of the primacy in the objective of the Declaration, which is to tackle the external threat in the Indian Ocean. In that context we believe that for the proposed international conference on the Indian Ocean to achieve meaningful results it will be necessary to ensure that all big Powers having a military presence in the Indian Ocean participate.
I come new to another neighbouring region of ours with which we have very close historical and cultural links. As we have always advocated in conflict situations, the south-east Asian question can be resolved only through political dialogue. The legitimate interests and concerns of the countries in the region must be taken into account. We are encouraged by the fact that all countries in the region want a peaceful solution and are engaged in finding a formula for a regional dialogue. We have seen possibilities of common areas of understanding emerge following the recent meeting of the Foreign Ministers of Indonesia and Viet Nam I have myself recently visited all the countries belonging to the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the Indo-China States. We believe that such contacts must be strengthened and more widely established among the countries of the region.
The Korean peninsula continues to remain divided. We support the desire of its people for peaceful reunification. There have been encouraging developments in Central America. Following the invaluable work of the Contadora and Support Groups the Central American States have taken a regional initiative of great importance. We warmly welcome the Guatemala accord and the subsequent follow-up action. We trust that all parties, both within and outside the region, will co-operate fully to ensure the success of this regional initiative, which offers the prospect of peace, progress and stability in Central America.
We reaffirm once again our solidarity with the people of Cyprus, whose country remains divided with part of it under foreign occupation. We reaffirm our support for the unity, territorial integrity, sovereignty, independence and non-alignment of Cyprus, a country with which we have traditionally had close and friendly relations. We support the efforts of the Secretary-General to bring about a satisfactory resolution of this issue.
The events in Fiji have been deeply distressing. It is particularly tragic that at a time when the political parties representing the people of Fiji had come to an agreement which could have taken the country on the path of national reconciliation the armed forces have dealt a severe blow to that process, by seizing power for a second time. Attempts to deprive citizens of the country of their legitimate rights merely on the basis of their racial origin are against all tenets of democracy and human rights and are contrary to the United Nations Charter. What is happening in Fiji has distinct and unacceptable racial overtones. This development is reprehensible. We believe that the path to peace and prosperity in Fiji lies in the restoration of democracy and the rule of law.
This year India achieved the unique distinction of becoming the first registered pioneer investor under the United Nations regime of the oceans with the allotment of a deep sea-bed mine site in the Central Indian Ocean. An equivalent mine site has been reserved for international exploration and exploitation. We believe that this historic event has set in motion the international regime of deep sea-bed mining and has strengthened the rule of international law. 
I now turn to the world economy, which continues to be in a state of deep disarray. The rates of growth of even developed countries are historically very low. All future projections indicate even lower rates of growth for those countries. The per capita incomes of many developing countries have dropped to levels lower than they were a decade ago. Commodity prices in real terms have collapsed to their lowest levels in 50 years. Despite the launching of the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations, the proliferation of protectionist measures continues unabated. Interest rates continue to be high in real terms. International liquidity has suffered a sharp contraction in relation both to the volume of trade and to the needs of developing countries. The pattern of trade balance is extremely skewed, with unsustainable surpluses in some countries and deficits in others, and exchange rates continue to show wide fluctuations. It is now widely recognized that the world economy faces a structural crisis which cannot be overcome within the framework of the system instituted after the Second World War. There is therefore an urgent need for evolving co-operative strategies informed by the explicit recognition of increasing global interdependence. We require concerted and comprehensive policy measures in the interrelated areas of money, finance, debt, trade, resource flows and development. The current crisis of the world economic system can be overcome only if we work towards a new international economic order.
In the area of international trade, the highest priority must be given to the preservation and strengthening of an open multilateral trading system, and particularly to translating into practice the oft-repeated commitments on standstill and rollback. It is important to ensure that the Uruguay round of negotiations leads to the emergence of a truly international trade regime conducive to growth and development, with a clear recognition of the needs of developing countries. Multilaterlism and non-discrimination must form the basis for the sustained expansion of trade.
In the area of commodities, we reaffirmed at the seventh session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) the continued validity of the integrated Programme for Commodities. We trust that with the new ratifications the Common Fund will become operational before the end of 19B7. We also hope that the new round of consultations on commodities not covered by existing agreements and arrangements will be initiated soon.
The flows of financial resources from developed to developing countries should be increased substantially and the resources of international financial institutions should be augmented so as to enable them to play a leading role in development finance. We are disappointed that the eighth replenishment of the International Development Association is no larger in real terms than the sixth replenishment. We are however encouraged by the recent move towards reaching agreement on a general capital increase of the World Bank.
The external debt crisis is one of the most serious problems afflicting the developing countries today. The solution to the debt crisis has to be equitable, flexible and development-oriented, based on the concept of shared responsibility and political dialogue. For the success of such a strategy, the promotion of parallel objectives - such as increased access to markets for exports of developing countries, lower interest rates, strengthened and stabilized commodity prices, more stable exchange rates and more vigorous growth-oriented macro-economic policies in major developed countries - is indispensable.
In the light of the generally dismal state of the international economic dialogue, the recent seventh session of UNCTAD must be viewed as a modest success. In at least some areas progress was achieved. Viewed against the background in which the Conference was held, its major significance lies in the reaffirmation of the validity and mandate of UNCTAD.
The report of the World Commission on Environment and Development is a major contribution to the subject. We are glad to note that the Chairman of the Commission, Prime Minister Brundtland, in her address to UNCTAD VII, sought to allay apprehensions that environmental concerns could be used for imposing additional conditionality in the lending policies of international financial institutions. The Brundtland report clearly demonstrates the importance and urgency of tackling environmental issues on a global level. If we seriously want to attach high priority to this objective, the international community must find additional resources for sound environmental measures. Any diversion of existing resources from growth-focused to environment-focused disbursement will be counter-productive. Poverty pollutes. Any slowing down of development can only aggravate environmental problems in developing countries.
We meet here each year in the month of September to deliberate on what ails mankind. Does looking back on the past nine months fill us with hope or despair? This is a time for stocktaking, self-criticism and introspection. The international horizon presents a dark and sinister picture. Here and there an all too brief break in the clouds is visible; otherwise we seem to be looking at clouds that have no silver lining.
Some weeks ago the world population exceeded the 5 billion mark - a sobering event. The drain on sources of energy is unabated. The affluent are burning their candles at both ends and in the middle too, while the less fortunate are deprived of the basic necessities of life. The daily onslaught on the environment continues. The economic scene is not cheering. Terrorists and fanatics disturb the peace and repose of nations.
The United Nations does not offer salvation, but it has paved, it can pave, the way, create the atmosphere, provide the venue and propose the agenda for peace. As somebody has said, while it cannot, perhaps, negotiate for the world, the United Nations can help the world to negotiate.
﻿
Permit me, Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the General Assembly.
I wish to take this opportunity to express our support for the relentless efforts of the emissary of peace and goodwill, the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar.
In a world grown cynical of the super-Powers increased arms competition and fearful of the technologies it has unleashed, the people of Israel appreciate the readiness of the United States and the Soviet Union to begin a process of nuclear disarmament. This is not just a technical accord. It is a political dictum: no longer can we find military answers to political problems. What is necessary are political answers to the military menace. The world remains divided. While on the global level the parties seem to edge slowly towards accommodation, on the regional level passion still endure.
Today, threatening mines in international waterways are symbols not of the modernity of warfare but of its persistence. In our region, mines of extremism lurk just beneath the surface; they may explode when least expected.
Thus, we support the attempt to introduce a durable cease-fire in the Persian Gulf. In the vicinity of the world's most significant source of oil, two flames send dark clouds that obscure the horizon: the flame of fundamentalism launched to overpower moderation, and the flame of belligerency, residue of the Arab-Israeli dispute, seemingly calm, yet hardly extinguished. Each flame may reinforce the other.
Never before was the menace of extremism so perilous; never before were the moderate forces of the Middle East, on both aides, closer to an understanding than today.
Both Arabs and Israelis can be at peace with themselves only if they reach peace with each other.
Fundamentalism threatens moderation. Belligerency requires resources that can help contain extremism.
Arabs are troubled by the thrust of fundamentalism as they struggle with an impossibly expensive arms race and the need to address the just expectations of a rapidly growing population. Israelis are troubled by a demography wrought by war and the need to sustain a defence posture of "the few against the many". That is the heavy toll of the region's flames. They can be further fuelled; they can also be put out. Our actions today can either unleash forces of yet untold destruction, or they can launch us on a course of a new promise. Israel is celebrating its fortieth anniversary; four decades studded by hostility and war. From the memories of the Holocaust we have had to build a new life, as tragic biographies merged into a history of hope. We have returned to the birthplace of our faith, to the cradle of our biblical values. The language of the Prophets now echoes with the joy of children in the mountains and valleys where it began. Deserts were turned into gardens, human talent into industries. No emergency has delayed the growth of the democratic spirit; no war has prevented the construction of a just society and a modern economy.
The historical analogy is inspiring: For 40 years our people wandered in the desert before Moses brought them to the promised land. Today again, after 40 years in the wilderness of belligerency, we stand at the gates of a new promise to our children and to the children of our neighbours: to live in understanding despite the differences; to determine their own fate without interference by armed forces triggered by hate.
Can we offer them a Middle East where the intellectual challenge is man's conquest of nature, free of man's conquest of man? In brief, can we bring peace?
We remember the last words of Moses before he parted from his people at the gates of the promised land. We admitted his inability to provide them with adequate clothing and fresh bread, and he offered them the right of choice;
"I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing: therefore, choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live". (Deuteronomy, 30:19)
I speak with a sense of urgency, as the coming few months may be crucial.
During this brief period we may begin negotiations on one of the most important issues of our day, or miss the ark of hope. This brief period may produce the long-sought-after breakthrough or be absorbed by political paralysis. 
Confidence that was built carefully, almost tacitly, among several parties in the area may evaporate. A coalition for peace held together by fragile links may fall apart with uncertain likelihood of revival.
Present crises - in the Persian Gulf or Lebanon - may take unexpected turns; disillusionment with the absence of progress may produce new coalitions of hostility. Thus, in the absence of a vibrant peace process, the political skies may become capricious again, bringing drought to a thirsty region.
Against these prospects of uncertainty stands the unprecedented if vulnerable reality whereby relevant parties to the conflict see a way to begin negotiations. Indeed, two years ago both Arabs and Israelis announced from this podium support for the current initiative for peace. Moreover, since then further progress has been made.
We have rekindled our peace with Egypt and intensified the dialogue with its leaders and its people. We have found President Mubarak to be a builder of a better life for his people and of bridges for comprehensive peace in the region.
At the cedar groves of the mountains of Ifrane, we met courageous leadership; King Hassan of Morocco calling for peace, aloud, and clearly.
Across the Jordan River, rich in history and poor in water, we hear the echo of the voice of King Hussein, an experienced leader who wishes, like us, to bring our peoples out of the darkness of old hostility into the new greenhouses of peace, security and development.
In the West Bank and Gaza, we notice an unannounced change. Many Palestinians seem to have concluded that violence leads nowhere, that dialogue should not be postponed. There is a real readiness to negotiate in a joint Jordanian-Palestinian delegation to solve a problem that all of us need, and would like, to solve; the Palestinian problem. 
We have all matured politically with the repeated failure of attempts to produce peace plans for our region. We have realized that none can be acceptable as a pre-condition of negotiation, for it is the object of negotiation to produce solutions that are otherwise unattainable. Hence, over the past three years efforts have focused on the most promising plan; to begin negotiations without pre-planning their outcome.
Five months ago those efforts crystallized and found expression in a document worked out with the support of American emissaries, whose tireless and creative efforts should be credited with much of what has been accomplished. That document reflected a meeting of minds, Arab and Jewish, on the basis of eight principles.
First, the goal is peace and direct negotiations are the way to reach it. Second, an international conference is the door to direct negotiations. Once convened it should lead immediately to face-to-face bilateral negotiations. Third, the conference would not impose a settlement or veto agreements reached bilaterally. Fourth, those who would attend the conference must accept Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and renounce terrorism and violence. Fifth, negotiations would be aimed at solving the Palestinian problem in all its aspects. This would be done in negotiations between the Jordanian-Palestinian delegation and the Israeli delegation. Sixth, negotiations would be conducted independently in three bilateral-geographic committees: a Jordanian-Palestinian delegation and an Israeli delegation in one·, a Syrian and an Israeli delegation in another·, and a Lebanese and an Israeli delegation in the third. All delegations, as well as an Egyptian one, would be invited to participate in a fourth, multilateral, committee. Seventh, whereas the bilateral committees would be engaged in solving the conflicts of the past, the multilateral committee would deal with the charting of opportunities for the region's future. Eighth, the five permanent members of the Security Council would serve as the matchmakers, entrusted with bringing the parties together and legitimising the process whereby the parties would negotiate freely and directly, without uninvited - and occasionally divided - external involvement. This would not be a ceremonial role but an essential one in facilitating negotiations.
Israel is United in its search for peace, in our desire to negotiate directly with our neighbours. We differ over how best to move the process forward. The idea of an international conference raises opposition in some Israeli quarters, while others see it as a real opening. The Israeli Cabinet is divided on the issue and has yet to make a decision. Much depends on the nature of the conference. Unless the permanent members of the Security Council respect the current consensus, rather than insisting on their old preferences, the international conference may remain just a slogan.
We call upon the Soviet Union to credit us with the same good faith in our efforts towards peace as we credit it within its readiness to make glasnost a way of life. The Soviet Union is not our enemy. It must be aware of our historical and family attachment to our brethren living in its land. We appeal to the new leadership in Moscow to allow the Jewish people to express their identity freely and to reunite with their destiny in the land of their ancestors.
We call upon the People's Republic of China, a great country that we respect, not to be timid or one-sided in its support for negotiations.
To both Moscow and Beijing we say candidly that diplomatic relations are not the prize for peace but a channel for communication. Those wishing to participate in bringing peace cannot confine their relations to one side in the rivalry alone.
I should like to address myself to the Palestinian people. The time for recrimination and blame is past. They have brought only violence and terror. Now is the time to turn from violence to dialogue and to travel jointly towards a different destiny. There, your children, like ours, will live in self-respect, exercise self-expression and enjoy freedom and peace. We, who have experienced domination by others, do not wish to dominate others. We, who sought justice and security, do not wish to deny them to others.
For the past 40 years our ancient region has become - not by choice - a testing ground for the technology of war. Thousands of human lives, Arab and Jewish, have been tragically lost and billions of dollars have been spent to no avail.
We are unable to change the past but we can design a future in which our region will be able to develop into a testing ground for mobilizing science and technology, to offer a new source of growth; a future in which peace attracts economic investment; a future in which resources saved by restraining the arms race are invested in basic and higher education.
It is this vision of an alternative future that has given birth to the suggestion that in the wake of the opening of political negotiations an economic conference, without political strings attached, should take place. Such a conference, composed of those having a stake in regional stability and the capacity to contribute to it, could offer a most Imaginative plan for regional development.
To those who preach indecision, to those who take shelter in the illusion of a tranquil status quo, we say: this is our moment of choice; decisions of today will determine the fate of our people for decades to come. Our choice is between hatred and dialogue, suspicion and hope. Our choice is between investment in an arms race and investment in the well-being of our people, of our children. Our choice is between extremism and moderation, between fundamentalism and reason. It is our choice to prevent the next war.
It is up to us to make the months to come a time for reason.
I welcome the forthcoming visit of Secretary Shultz to our region as an opportunity to negotiate on the remaining obstacles. I am convinced that there are no conflicts for which there is no hope for solution, only people who have best hope in their search for solutions. I am convinced that the real conflict in the Middle East today is not between Jew and Moslem·, Arab and Israeli; Palestinian and Zionist. The conflict is between "past-oriented" leadership and "future-oriented" leadership; between those resigned to the fatalism of belligerency and those determined to alter this fate. For the future of our children, for a better tomorrow, we must all stand up to the preachers of war.
To the advocates of destruction, United we have to say there are no holy wars, only holy human lives.
On the very first day of our independence I learned from my mentor, David Ben-Gurion, who said this time and again, that peace is the highest degree of security·, and that the moral call is the highest degree of wisdom. I shall remember it forever.
﻿To the representatives of the countries of the world - greetings. Bring to us from your home countries the gifts we can all share, your words of wisdom and your love. I am very happy that we have all arrived here at this gathering of world leaders. 
On behalf of New Zealand I add my congratulations, sir, to those of the many speakers who have preceded me on your election as President of the forty-second regular session of the General Assembly.
Seven weeks ago the New Zealand Labour Government was re-elected with an increased majority. The Government was greatly encouraged by that demonstration of support from the people of our country for the policies we have pursued at home and overseas. My address today provides an opportunity for me to reaffirm the commitment of the New Zealand Government and people to the United Nations. That commitment comes from 42 years of membership of the Organization, from active participation in its work and from New Zealand's firm adherence to its ideals.
In this spirit of steadfast support for the United Nations I am happy to be able to announce here that the New Zealand Government has recently reviewed its capacity to contribute to United Nations peace-keeping operations. As a result, we have decided to notify the Secretary-General of our willingness to expand our practical contribution to that most important part of the United Nations work. We have participated in United Nations peace-keeping operations in the past. At present, we provide personnel for the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) and we contribute financially to the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) and the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). In future, we anticipate giving favourable consideration to requests from the Secretary-General for future involvement of New Zealand forces in peace-keeping for the United Nations. In our case, that would probably, for example, take the form of specialist teams from the New Zealand armed forces. Our broad purpose in making this commitment is to demonstrate active, practical support ; for the United Nations role of strengthening and monitoring international peace and security. 
Fundamentally the job of the United Nations is to preserve peace. That was why it was founded 42 years ago. That is why it remains so important in the world today· And in today's world that means that this Organization must address clearly and critically the overriding threat to international peace and security posed by the global arms race, and in particular the nuclear-arms race.
New Zealand's first priority in this Assembly is to work for the achievement of urgent reductions in nuclear weapons. The ultimate goal must be a world rid of nuclear weapons; a world in which no country can claim to have to rely on nuclear weapons as the guarantor of its security.
New Zealand has been greatly encouraged by recent developments in relations between the two super-Powers. Along with all other nations we welcomed their decision to agree in principle to scrap an entire class of nuclear weapons - the intermediate-range nuclear forces (INF) stationed in Europe and Asia. If that agreement in principle is followed, as it must be, by a treaty giving legal force to the political commitments made in Washington, it will mark a turning-point in the arms race. The INF agreement will be the first ever nuclear-arms reduction treaty. It will be testimony to the conviction that security can be maintained with fewer, not more, armaments, and that an increasing number of weapons is not necessary to preserve the peace.
An INF agreement will be a welcome first step. But it is only a first step. It must be followed by measures to bring about deep reductions in strategic nuclear weapons, and by measures to prevent an arms race in outer space. Moreover, if progress is to be made on those two fronts, it will be necessary to address as a matter of priority the perceived imbalance in conventional forces and thus to achieve a balance of such forces at significantly reduced levels.
President Reagan and General Secretary Gorbachev have themselves pointed the way. At Reykjavik last year they showed that there is no disagreement on the goals that must be achieved: a 50-per-cent reduction in strategic nuclear arsenals and, ultimately, the complete elimination o£ nuclear weapons. We urge them not to turn away from those objectives, not to turn away from the vision we saw from Reykjavik of a world without nuclear weapons. That vision will not be realized this year, perhaps not even this century. Yet it is an objective in the achievement of which every country in the Assembly has a direct and vital interest.
The immediate challenge is to find ways of working towards that goal while at the same time maintaining the security of every State and region.
New Zealand has long held that concluding a comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty is one important way to do that. In the resolutions that we, together with Australia and a number of other countries, have put before the Assembly, we have urged the international community to seize on the central means of putting a brake on the nuclear-arms race. While we have welcomed, therefore, the recent agreement between the United States and the Soviet Union to begin stage-by stage negotiations on nuclear testing, we would nevertheless still urge the participants to see that those negotiations are more closely linked to the objective the Assembly has reiterated for so many years - an end to all nuclear testing by all States in all environments for all time. 
We will again be putting a resolution on nuclear testing before the First Committee of the Assembly. We will be calling on the Conference on Disarmament to break the impasse which has strangled effective multilateral consideration of this issue for the past five years.
Another issue which the multilateral disarmament process has so far failed to address adequately is the prevention of an arms race in outer space. Three years ago my Prime Minister David Lange noted from this rostrum the disquieting indications that the military competition between the two super-Powers might be moving into the new environment of outer space. Developments since that time have done little to allay our concern. New Zealand is unequivocally opposed to the extension of the arms race into outer space. We will be following closely the deliberations at the Conference on Disarmament on this subject next year and at the third special session of this Assembly on disarmament, where it can be expected to receive considerable attention.
However, there have been some notable achievements this year. Progress has been made at the Geneva negotiations on a convention to eliminate chemical weapons - some of the most barbaric instruments of war, the use of which we unequivocally condemn. We look forward to the early completion of that most urgent work. In addition, the successful conclusion o£ the International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development, which I was privileged to address just over a month ago, should have restored some faith in multilateralism. The consensus achieved at that Conference is all the more significant when considered against the pessimism that marked its preparatory process. It should encourage us as we prepare for the third special session on disarmament next year. 
As a smaller nation with little power to influence the great nuclear-weapon States, We simply make a plea, an impassioned plea, to our brothers and sisters that have that power. We are now at a historic turning-point in the modern era. Having gone steadily forward in preparation for defence or conflict since men first formed groups and alliances, we have come to the brink. We, most of us, want to turn back. But there are still abroad fears that those whom we have not learned to knew or to trust will keep pressing ahead, that to proceed with disarming will undermine our own security. Learning to trust each other enough, learning to tone down the rhetoric we use against each other/ is now fundamental to the steps we need to take to enable this small, delicate planet and its people to survive.
That is why my country is so determined to see progress towards disarmament. The stakes are enormous. While the arms race continues in its nuclear and conventional dimensions, the security of each of us is at risk. New Zealanders do not expect others to act while we do nothing ourselves. Equally, we do not tell others how to resolve the particular security imperatives of their region as they seek to give substance to the principles of the Charter and to the international community's desire for a safer, less militarised world.
At home my Government has enacted legislation to ensure that New Zealand remains nuclear free. With our partners in the South Pacific Forum we have made a contribution to the security of our region through the adoption and entry into force of the South Pacific Nuclear-Free-Zone Treaty. That Treaty reinforces the non-proliferation undertakings already given by nearly all Forum countries through our adherence to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. It gives expression to the unanimous desire of all the independent and self-governing States of our region that our part of the world should not be used as a testing ground for nuclear weapons or a dumping ground for nuclear waste. For the zone established by the Treaty to be truly effective, however, we rely on the nuclear-weapon States to commit themselves unreservedly to respecting its provisions. It is our earnest hope that all five nuclear—weapon States will demonstrate respect for the wishes of South Pacific States by adhering to the protocols to the Treaty. It is our particular hope that France will demonstrate its understanding of the sensitivities of our region, the region in which it seeks to be a partner, by putting an end to its nuclear-testing programme in the South Pacific.
The control and reduction of armaments may help to maintain international security. It is the use of arms that destroys it. The Charter accordingly imposes an obligation on all States to settle their differences by negotiation and not to go to war. In the Security Council the Charter created the means by which the United Nations could uphold the rule of law and work for the peaceful settlement of disputes and the ending of conflict. The Council's record is far from unblemished we believe that its performance could be improved if its members could co-operate to settle disputes before the parties turn to conflict and its decisions might be less often disregarded or defied if the policies and actions of the great Powers showed greater respect for the laws they enjoin others to follow.
New Zealand welcomes the rare unanimous decision by the Security Council to seek an end to the war between Iran and Iraq. We regret only that the conflict was allowed to continue for seven years before the Council intervened to fulfil the role assigned to it by the Charter. The Secretary-General may be assured of our full support in his patient efforts, on behalf of the Council and with the trust of both parties, to settle the conflict in accordance with resolution 598 (1987). It is to his office, too, that we look for assistance in ending the aggression against the peoples of Afghanistan and Kampuchea, which has continued year after year regardless of the wishes and condemnation of the General Assembly. Political settlements in both countries and the withdrawal of foreign forces from them are long overdue. In Korea, the armed confrontation still continues after more than three decades. The absence of Korean representation is a major gap in the universality of the United Nations. New Zealand shares the widespread view that the two Koreas should be admitted as Members of the United Nations as soon as possible and should pursue their negotiations towards reconciliation and, if possible, national reunification.
Pew situations have preoccupied the United Nations longer than the South African Government's racist practices, its illegal occupation of Namibia and its policies of destabilization in the region. Like those of the Commonwealth Group which last year sought to initiate a dialogue between the Government and genuine representatives of the black community, mediation efforts by the United Nations have come to nothing. The South African Government equates justice with white supremacy and right with the forces at its disposal. Its armies have marched in territories of neighbouring States. Its police have detained both black leaders and children looking for something better than education for a life of subjection. For our part we have given effect to the measures against South Africa recommended by the Commonwealth to impress on the authorities in Pretoria the urgency of dismantling apartheid. But, sadly, I have to say that, in the absence of effective action by more countries or a firm response to the threat by the Security Council, I see little prospect that the South African Government will depart from its determination not to reject apartheid, but to tinker with it, at its own pace and in its own time.
Apartheid is a most brutal manifestation of racism and disregard of human rights. It is not, however, the only such manifestation. We all know too well the many abuses of human rights that occur in various countries represented in this body. The United Nations has done much valuable work in codifying universal standards of respect for human rights. We must ensure that this work continues and that the standards already set are fully respected.
Abuses of human rights are a direct attack on the integrity of the individual. Terrorism strikes at the integrity of the community. It kills the innocent and cruelly disrupts the normal operations of society. It is also a threat to world peace. An important task at this session will be to build on the achievement of resolution 40/61 and thereby encourage the adoption of practical measures to deal with international terrorism. Another item of importance to New Zealand is that on Antarctica, an issue that has been on the Assembly's agenda since 1983. New Zealand is firmly committed to maintaining the Antarctic Treaty which has preserved the peace and stability of the region to our south over the past 27 years. We hope that the Assembly's deliberations on Antarctica at this session will bring further understanding and support for the Treaty, which any Member of the Organization is free to join.
Events in Fiji show that the South Pacific is not immune from turmoil or change. For New Zealand - a close friend and neighbour - these events have been a matter of very great sadness. Since the time of the first coup New Zealand has steadfastly supported the efforts of Fiji's Governor-General to return the country to parliamentary rule·, we continue to regard him as the legitimate source of authority in Fiji. It follows that New Zealand does not recognize the legality of Colonel Rabuka's self-declared republic. Even at this late stage we hope that the people of Fiji will pull back and insist that their leaders find a just political solution which takes account of the interests of all. New Zealand trusts that the Governor-General will hold fast to the principles of legitimacy which have guided him thus far. We very much hope that no constitution will be adopted that would make Fiji Indians second class citizens in their own country. We want to see Fiji regain its rightful position in the Pacific region and on the wider world stage. Like all its neighbours New Zealand wants to see Fiji strengthened by a reassertion of its traditions of tolerance and good sense, playing an active part in the peaceful development of the South Pacific. Failure to achieve a solution would be a major set-back, not only for Fiji but for the entire South Pacific region.
Fiji's crisis is a recent development. We have, however, been concerned for some time at the dangers inherent in the situation in our closest neighbour New Caledonia if the natural progress of that Territory to self-determination is frustrated. At the initiative of the countries of the South Pacific Forum, the General Assembly last year resolved that New Caledonia was a Non-Self-Governing Territory within the meaning of the United Nations Charter. Forum countries sought to have New Caledonia re-inscribed on the list of Non-Self-Governing Territories because of their wish to see a more constructive approach by the administering Power. Present policies serve to exacerbate divisions within the Territory and appear likely to frustrate movement towards independence.
My Government believes that France has a continuing role to play in the South Pacific region. But that will require a far-sighted approach to resolving the problems of New Caledonia and a sensitivity to the views and feelings of the peoples of the region. We have watched with genuine regret what has appeared to us to be a policy that does not take sufficient account of long-term concerns and solutions, bringing with it the prospect of more confrontation and division within New Caledonia.
Since last year's vote, France has promoted a referendum in New Caledonia, an exercise which in our view has not helped the political process there and about which, as we know from the debate which surrounded the passage of the referendum legislation through the French Parliament earlier this year, there are considerable doubts in France itself. A referendum which did not offer the full range of choices prescribed by United Nations practices and guidelines is deficient. It cannot be regarded as a free choice when the administering Power is committed to promoting one particular choice and the forces of government are directed to that end. A process of preparation during which options were not fully presented and were not adequately explained is a further serious deficiency. A period of preparation in which there was only circumscribed dialogue within the Territory and throughout which there was a strong military presence, is no atmosphere for free and impartial consideration of New Caledonia's long-term future. In short, a political consultation that forced a substantial sector of the community to repudiate the very process, is inherently flawed. It is not a valid act of s el f -determination.
I appeal to the French Government to resume contact with all interested parties in New Caledonia, to accept the offer of dialogue which the South Pacific Forum has made and to involve the United Nations in the political process that is to take place in New Caledonia.
Elsewhere in the South Pacific the United Nations has played a valuable role in the decolonization process as Non-Self-Governing Territories have moved to self-government or to independence in accordance with United Nations principles and practices. For this reason my Government urges strong support for the moderate, principled and constructive resolution on New Caledonia which will be taken up in the Fourth Committee at this session of the Assembly.
For the most part the decolonization process in the Pacific has been peaceful and has laid the basis for good regional co-operation. That tradition has been continued this year with the proclamation of the Compacts of Free Association of ' the Marshall Islands and the Federated States of Micronesia. New Zealand welcomes them as new members of the South Pacific Forum. We look forward to increasing contacts with the Micronesian Governments in the years to come and to the fulfilment of the United Nations role in the Trust Territory of the Pacific.
Political security must be reinforced by economic security. Not only in the South Pacific, but throughout the world, the effect of low commodity prices is having a serious effect. Growth in developing countries is expected to average only 4 per cent in 1987, half the average of the 1960s and 1970s. Hardest hit is the agricultural sector which, in low-income developing countries, employs 70 to 80 per cent of the population.
Yet the undisciplined nature of world agricultural trade means that countries with a comparative advantage in agriculture have to compete for markets with subsidized exports that distort prices. The twin spectres of surpluses and starvation are an economic and moral outrage that cannot be allowed to continue  a contradiction which we must find ways to remove.
At its seventh session, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development noted that while many countries, developed and developing, are adjusting their economies, much remained to be done to reduce or eliminate "growth retarding distortions and rigidities". The positive forward-thinking spirit that marked that session should guide us in our efforts towards the elimination of trade-distorting measures. Crucial to these efforts are the negotiations currently under way in the Uruguay round. If we really believe in having a healthy international economy, contributing to world peace, we must ensure that these negotiations succeed.
As we work to improve the functioning of the system of international relations we must also work to improve the functioning of the institution that underpins so much of the system. Last year's financial crisis made clear that we, the membership, had failed to ensure that this Organization remained responsive to changing demands and circumstances. The financial crisis itself was precipitated by a failure on the part of some of the Members to fulfil their Charter commitments. It served to highlight, however, a more long-standing failure of the collective membership and of the institution to ensure the continuing revitalization of the Organization.	.
Every institution, no matter how noble its goals, needs to undertake from time to time a thorough-going reappraisal of its structures and procedures. In recognition of this need, for instance, my Government is in the process of carrying out a far-reaching reform of the functioning of government in New Zealand. The United Nations is no different. It needs to change with the times.
From the work of the past year a number of studies and reforms are under way. They must be pursued to their conclusion. The financial crisis may have abated to a degree: the need for change has not. One of the areas to which my Government will pay particular attention is the review of management of the United Nations development effort to be undertaken by the Economic and Social Council over the next year. The United Nations and its agencies have a unique role to play in development assistance, particularly in areas such as the establishment of development planning mechanisms and negotiations by Governments with trans national corporations. But such assistance must be appropriate and effective. The special needs of the isolated island developing nations of the South Pacific are often inadequately met by structures and rules which have been set up to cover large continental recipients in other regions. Any decisions taken on the spot in the South Pacific by a more coherent United Nations presence would reflect more truly the South Pacific realities than decisions taken in places such as Geneva, New York or Bangkok. 
I offer those remarks not as the representative of a country that is critical of or disenchanted with the United Nations. Quite the reverse: as 1 said at the beginning, the New Zealand Government and people are firm supporters of the United Nations. We shall remain so. But we would be bad friends of the Organization if we failed to encourage it to change where change is necessary. The process of change is under way. Let us keep up the momentum, and let us get the balance right. I end as I began, drawing on the wisdom of the Maori people of New Zealand. There is a Maori saying which goes,
"A warrior who works hard at growing food will not fail".
That expresses in a nutshell what this Organization is all about. We must be firm in our resolve to retain the peace, but must look also to improving the lot of all our peoples. Getting the balance right is an international imperative.
﻿
The Soviet delegation has instructed me Sir, to congratulate you on your election to the honourable post of President of the forty-second session of the General Assembly of the United Nations.
One of the rules of procedure of this Organization reserves a minute for prayer or meditation. Each session of the United Nations General Assembly is an occasion for reflection on the future of the world. Today the world is on the threshold of great changes and our thoughts are about that. For the first time in history, the idea of nuclear disarmament is close to the beginning of fulfilment. It is not a new idea. What is new is that this is proving to be possible. Only yesterday, all we could see ahead of us was a blank wall: today we can see far ahead.
Two thousand warheads are but a small part of nuclear arsenals, but that is a big enough part forbids disappearance to give to the world a new vision. The agreement on these weapons is only a small part of what has happened. Something much more important has taken place; the Soviet Union and the United states have finally spoken together the first word in a nuclear-free vocabulary. When that word becomes deed, the world will also gain new knowledge. It will become convinced that nuclear weapons and security are not synonymous and that security becomes stronger when those weapons disappear.
For the present, that principle is being established in a specific case, but it is already being established in practice. The whole question now is whether we shall be able, proceeding from the same logical premise, to abandon the entire nuclear arsenal rather than just a part of it, to scrap all weapons of mass destruction.
The Soviet Union is convinced that we shall be able to do so. The launching pad is small but it provides a boost to a great undertaking. The recent agreement may be followed by an accord on the reduction by as much as one half of strategic weapons - provided, of course, that the Treaty limiting anti-ballistic missile system is preserved.
Today there is an increasingly realistic prospect of a convention on the prohibition and complete destruction of chemical weapons. We can expect a productive development of the parallel process of reduction of conventional weapons based on the concept of sufficiency. There is a possibility of making headway because we have bold ideas and willingness to remove the remaining obstacles.
An affirmative answer to the question of whether it is possible to scrap nuclear arsenals will become a reality if the international community once again helps us.
There is no need to compete here for the palm of victory, which does not go well with the olive branch of peace. I could describe how the Soviet Union has worked towards the global double zero, but let others claim the credit if they wish. For that matter, if we have to compete in something it should be only in nuclear disarmament. What is important for us is that what was sought has now been achieved and the outcome is not at variance with the will of the majority.
We are moved by the enthusiasm with which the world has welcomed the agreement. It convinces us once again that we are on the right track. Listening to the voices of approval and solidarity, which drown the morose and solitary voice of the nuclear profiteers, your Soviet colleague, without sharing the euphoria and yet without curbing the optimism  keenly feel that today all of us here are truly United nations - United not merely by formal membership in this Organization but by a common destiny and a shared objective. We thank you for this wonderful feeling. It should be treasured and carried further. Thank you for the atmosphere of unity of thought, co-operation and support which alone could have produced an agreement.
In this sense the agreement is yours. And the fact that it belongs to everyone is, as we see it, the best guarantee of its implementation.
"We were born to live together. And our community is like an arch which holds up precisely because Its stones prevent each other from falling ..." One is amazed by the ability of human thought to establish the supreme ethical law for all times. "We were born to live together", so wrote Seneca to Lucillius many years ago in his Epistles, but it is only today that this idea is being understood as the imperative of our time.
Today, Lenin's Decree of Peace is perceived as a message of supreme morality addressed to our time. The repudiation of secret treaties, open and public conduct of International affairs, the immediate withdrawal from the war and the rejection of War as a method of resolving conflicts reflected, even as far back as 1917, a common need, which has now become the will of the entire International community.
A long and difficult road must be traversed for human thought to become action, but it does happen sooner or later. When, in Washington, we were discussing the techniques of the destruction of nuclear warheads we were suddenly struck by the fact that only a year ago this had seemed something well beyond our grasp. Our American partners can confirm this. It is hard to find words to express this. Let us just say that the past gives a powerful impetus to the present, and the present gives guarantees to the future.
"The reality and the guarantees of a secure world" is the title of Mikhail Gorbachev's article published before this session began, and it conveys the gist of our thinking today.
A secure world is possible. It Is possible because anything else is too dangerous. The possibility of a secure world is commensurate with the need for it This is the reality. As for guarantees, we see them in a comprehensive system of security. It is the natural task of the United Nations to give inspiration to and take the lead in building such a system.
This, reduced to a concise formula, is the logic of that article, which develops the doctrine of a secure world. It stems from the history of our country and is the fruit of political thinking that honestly analyses the entire preceding period.
In this context I would venture to remind the Assembly that its forty-second session coincides with the eve of the seventieth anniversary of the Great October Socialist Revolution. This is our celebration and we are not imposing it on anyone. The feelings aroused by the birthday of our State are ours. Nevertheless, I would venture to share with representatives my thoughts on some of the international implications of that date.
I do not think that it can be disputed that the October Revolution was one of the major events of this century and has had a tremendous impact on the destinies of peoples, not only those of the former Russian Empire. We think that the process of renovation which is under way in our country is more than just a strictly domestic affair of the Soviet Union, It is impossible to describe as purely the concern of the Soviet Union its desire to do away with one of the products of the cold war, which is the splitting of the world into hostile alliances.
All this, naturally, is also part of the objectives of perestroika - our process of change - while glasnost - openness - and dialogue are, as logically, its instruments, in both domestic and foreign policies. Between these two there exists a direct and open relationship and one cannot be implemented without the other. This, and this alone, allows me, when speaking about the seventieth anniversary of our revolution, to invite you all to take thought together.
If we have a concept of a world revolution, which is most closely linked with the process of revolutionary change in our country, we make no secret of it. It is this: organizing the entire human community on the basis of recognizing peace as the supreme value of existence, human life, freedom and dignity as a general yardstick, and peaceful coexistence as a universal principle of relations among States. This concept, proclaimed in the Political Report to the 27th Congress of our Communist Party, has been substantiated by a series of practical steps taken by the Soviet Union,
Perestroika has also heralded major changes in international affairs. It should not be obstructed. But, of course, unlike the position in 1917 or 1918, in 1987 no external action could halt our revolution. Today we live in different times, and it is a different country. And that could be one of the greatest achievements of the October Revolution. The price of this was enormous. It was set by the foreign intervention and the civil war; the ruined economy and the economic blockade; terror and the attempts to subvert the foundations of our multinational State; Nazi aggression and the cold war, which was imposed on us; nuclear blackmail and constant attempts at political diktat. Not a single day passed without our having to pay the highest price.
Unlike many other revolutions, the October Revolution was almost bloodless. Unlike many others, its architects never Intended to build their temple on blood; they never thought, as had many before them, that cruelty, violence and fear were the best glue for cementing their ideal.
It was the policies of conspiracy, terror and intervention against Soviet Russia that made it shut and lock its doors and cut itself off from a hostile world. 

In order to survive it was necessary to do the maximum within the historically minimum space of time. A chronic lack of time and unending pressure on all fronts also helped create the conditions which resulted in innocent victims and irreparable losses. We are saying this for all to hear: there is not and there cannot be any justification for that. We do more than just say it. As heirs to both victories and defeats, achievements and mistakes, we are doing our utmost to consolidate the victories and to prevent even the slightest possibility of the errors being repeated In either domestic or in foreign policies. 
This is a distinctive feature of our perestroika, its dominant trend, any indicator of the vigour and health of our society, a guarantee of Its future, of its profound internal democratism, openness and integrity. And there is no need to engage in linguistic research to try to provide listeners with an English equivalent of the word glasnost. One might go astray in a foreign language, as has indeed already happened with the same speaker, who claimed that there is no word meaning "freedom" in the Russian language. It is generally dangerous to play with words in this forum in which by no means everyone is ready to applaud insults summarily flung at entire countries and peoples. Freedom does indeed serve peace - but it is not the freedom that is interpreted as licence to interfere in the affairs of others and to finance counter-revolution as a most profitable business.
As for our perestroika, no one should be a prey to illusions. We shall not turn aside from the main road or borrow from others their norms and rules of democracy. We thank them for their advice, but we shall conduct perestroika according to our own design, on our own socialist basis. Allow us to determine for ourselves what the Soviet Union is going to be and that will be what the Soviet people want it to be.
Those who want to support us will also support the project of rebuilding international relations on a broad democratic basis. They will support the concept of a nuclear-free world and all actions to resolve the knottiest issues of world politics. For here the interests of most members of the community fully coincide.
This rostrum is not a pulpit for preaching "free enterprise". This Hall is not a schoolroom or a university auditorium in which one can teach lessons in rhetoric or lecture the international community on the manners of "good political behaviour". it is even less worthy to adopt the tone of pastoral admonition and tell the Organization that "sometimes it has strayed" and "it is time for it to come home". One can say, however, that this rostrum and this Hall are the very place where new political thinking should be expressed.
However much the world is split by confrontation and hatred, it is United in facing the need to preserve itself and to perpetuate mankind.
Prom this objective reality there emerges another guiding light for new political thinking; in our time, the correlation between the national interest and the interest of all mankind has changed. It has changed in the sense that truly national interests cannot be opposed to common interests.
If, on the pretext that something is contrary to the interests of national security or to considerations of national prestige, one rejects everything that is born of the political thinking of the systems or governments that one does not like, then, sooner or later, this will boomerang on the genuine national interests of one's own people and State.
New political thinking must put an end to that. New political thinking will put an end to it if it is put into action. And there is no doubt that it will be, for action, unity of concept and implementation, of thought and its realization, of word and deed, are crucial conditions for the existence of mankind.
New political thinking will inevitably make its way, for it is nourished by some remarkable elements: by the accumulation of progressive political experience  by strictly scientific analysis, evaluation and forecasting of contemporary realities} and, ultimately, by the freedom of new political thinking from national narrow-mindedness that provokes animosity towards countries, groups of countries or social political systems.
In this regard, let me say that the policy of hostility towards socialism is now bankrupt, both in theory and in practice. The very fact of the establishment of the United Nations contained the embryo of the new political thinking. Even at that time its principles were embodied in the articles of the United Nations Charter  which is undoubtedly one of the greatest statutory instruments of all time and of all nations.
The fact that our Organization has been functioning for over 40 years now is testimony to the triumph of mankind's common interests over narrow-minded nationalism and great-Power attitudes. In fact, all the post-war decades have been nothing but the history of the struggle between outdated political concepts and the new political thinking that was born in the agony of war.
When life on earth depends on one's ability to destroy it 20 times over, there is something wrong either with oneself and one's trust in such a guarantee of life, or with the very idea of deterrence. Most likely, it is both. New political thinking exposes the absurdity of the idea of safeguarding anyone's security with nuclear weapons.
However, a question immediately arises: Is it possible to ensure peace by other methods and, indeed, do such methods exist at all? New political thinking answers: Yes. And here again I should like to focus on a comprehensive system of international security.
As emerges clearly from Mikhail Gorbachev's statements, we envision its formation as a multilinear process extending over time and implemented through collective efforts. In essence, its objective is that peace should be ensured exclusively by the United Nations and its Security Council on the basis of strict observance of the principles and provisions of its Charter. I anticipate a question here: If that is your objective, then what is the meaning of your proposal? After all, the Charter of the United Nations already exists and the universal organization for peace is functioning.
Let me remind the Assembly that the United Nations was established for a world free of nuclear weapons and that its Charter was, naturally, designed to solve the problems of such a world.
Nuclear weapons gave rise to a different reality which, in the final analysis, made it impossible to use the United Nations fully as the principal mechanism for the maintenance of peace and security. It so happened that the nuclear tumour limited the scope of, and the possibilities for applying the Charter. Now the prospect of militarization of outer space threatens to erode its principles even further. There should however be no question of adapting the Charter to the realities of the nuclear and space age or, still less, of wrecking it. The Charter is a great document, which even today contains all the necessary provisions to enable mankind to live and solve its problems without war.
However, even the Charter cannot do the impossible. No organization, no set of rules, no code of behaviour can save the world in the few minutes between the launching of a missile and a nuclear holocaust. If and when the implementation of the "Star Wars" programme begins, the "shagreen leather" of that time interval will shrink even further. And yet that programme has been touted here once again as a way "to ensure a safer world".
This is not so. And here I will refer to a person whose statements have been quoted so readily by the President of the United States - even the day before yesterday. That person is academician Andrei Sakharov, who said:
"My opinion as regards this programme is different from that of the Reagan Administration... it is also wrong to assert that the existence of the SDI programme has made the Soviet Union negotiate on disarmament. To the contrary, the SDI programme impedes the negotiations."
If we are to believe an academician in one area, why should we not believe him in another, in which he is really a qualified expert and a professional?
Leave the ocean of space to peaceful vessels, so that future generations - our children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren - will not have to build space minesweeper s.
Excluding the nuclear and space component from the security equation is the only path towards real security. We regard a comprehensive system of security as a kind of interim programme for reasserting the role of the United Nations and its Charter as the primary instruments for peace.
What, then, are the practical aspects of a comprehensive system? Throughout the past year the sponsors of the resolution on this question have held consultations with Members of the United Nations and discussed their proposal in international forums. As a result many things have now become clearer, our ideas have become more concrete, and an atmosphere of teamwork has arisen. The system is taking precise shape in all its four aspects: politico-military, economic, environmental and humanitarian.
In the politico-military area, it comprises the obligation of Governments not to be the first to use nuclear weapons or any force or threat of force making military doctrines exclusively defensive in nature) making public data regarding defence expenditures and calendars of exercises and manoeuvres) the adoption by all of the principle of non-offensive defence} and instituting a reliable system of verification.
We are convinced that a comprehensive system of security will also provide the key to the settlement of situations of regional conflict. That may be one of the roost difficult tasks of today.
In this connection I shall venture to make a brief digression to address some ideas presented here the other day. I am referring to the statement made here by the President of the United States the day before yesterday. I am not going to relish engaging in polemics with him. The emotions aroused by the agreement we have reached, ray status as a guest and respect for seniority restrain  e from taking up, point by point, allegations and arguments that are groundless in the extreme. But since the President mentioned the human heart - claiming, as it were, a monopoly on having a heart while denying it to others - I should like to say the following.
It is heartless to declare regions and continents zones of special interest for the so-called free world out of which it pumps into its own economy resources belonging to other peoples. It is heartless to recruit and arm mercenaries, to proclaim them freedom fighters, and to pay millions of dollars for the murders committed by them. It is heartless to put into the hands of bandits weapons they use to shoot down civilian aircraft. The human heart is an extremely sensitive organ, and it shudders at such treatment.
Those who have not suffered have no compassion for anyone, we know what war on our own territory means. Therefore it is not for the sake of rhetorical effect that we declare our support for the efforts of the United Nations.
It plays an extremely important peace-making role in Afghanistan, where the mission of the Personal Representative of the United Nations Secretary-General organically combines with the policy of national reconciliation. It is now becoming increasingly clear that the Afghans themselves are able to decide the future of their own country and indeed are doing so. This new encouraging trend is in keeping with our sincere desire to withdraw Soviet forces from Afghanistan as soon as possible, and in this we are meeting with the full understanding of the Afghan leadership.
In Central America, the States of the region themselves have made impressive headway towards a long-awaited peace. Their success is shared by members of the Contadora Group and the Support Group and by all Latin American countries.
Dialogue between the countries of Indo-China and the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) has revealed promising elements. The policy of national reconciliation is also beginning to work in Kampuchea.
Real possibilities exist for the settlement of the Korean problem. The yearning of the Korean people for an easing of tension in the peninsula and the withdrawal of foreign troops and nuclear weapons cannot but evoke sympathy.
The United Nations has a detailed plan for giving effect to the resolution on the granting of independence to the Namibian people. Its implementation would also constitute a major step towards a settlement of the situation in southern Africa. A consensus is emerging in favour of convening a conference on the Middle East problem. In Cyprus, our Organization and its Secretary-General have also been taking vigorous action and refusing to retreat in the face of obstacles.
Here is our view of the situation in the Persian Gulf. It has become critically dangerous and might get out of control. We are not at all pleased that the development of events - which we warned was quite possible from the very outset - shows that we were right. The greater the military presence, the higher the probability of yet another conflict and the involvement in it of a State not belonging to the region. This is a source of great anxiety to us; it also strengthens our resolve to act in a sober and carefully considered manner and leads us once again to emphasize the question of removing the danger of a massive military presence.
In the circumstances, it is extremely important to preserve the unity in the Security Council. That is not an end in itself, but a prerequisite for implementing resolution 598 (1987) . In their individual actions, each member of the Council must abide by the resolution's requirements and not violate them.
The safety of navigation in the Gulf can and must be ensured by the entire world community, on whose behalf the United Nations will be acting. If necessary, appropriate and sufficient forces should be made effectively available to it, and the Soviet Union would agree to such a decision.
It is necessary to secure, concurrently and immediately, a cease-fire between Iran and Iraq and to work for the fulfilment of the Secretary-General's mission with respect to an impartial body to investigate the question of responsibility for the conflict. The Security Council should receive a report within a clearly established time-frame. This would also make it possible painlessly to withdraw foreign naval and other armed forces from the Persian Gulf.
It is very important now, in our view, to keep our composure and render every assistance to the Secretary-General and the Security Council.
In the economic field, a comprehensive system of security seeks to promote co-operation that would be free of confrontation and would cover the entire system of co-ordinates of international economic relations. A failure to resolve issues in this area is fraught with an explosive potential which, if detonated, would spell catastrophe for mankind. The picture of prosperity painted here the day before yesterday fades in the harsh light of reality, it is hard to imagine a "march of democracy" in the developing countries saddled as they are with a trillion-dollar debt. It is Impossible to talk seriously of equal opportunities when a new, technological, variety of colonialism is at work.
It is imperative to act.
We believe that the international community could reach agreement to reduce interest payments on bank credits, institute further benefits for the least developed countries, limit the annual debt-service payments of each developing country to a fixed portion of its annual export earnings, accept export products of debtor nations as payment for their debts and remove protectionist barriers to their imports, and refrain from charging additional interest for loan-payment rescheduling and debt refinancing.
These, of course, are only suggestions for discussion, but even now consideration could be given to devising a programme of Immediate action to ease the debt burden of the developing world.
Over the long term it is also necessary to restructure the entire international monetary system. And, of course, nothing would be more conducive to the economic development of nations than the most far-reaching programme of disarmament.
We are familiar also with a different viewpoint which does not acknowledge the relationship between disarmament and development. There are some who explain poverty by the inability of people to work and build their own lives. This is but another form of outright racism. No people is without talent or incapable of creating material and spiritual wealth. It is just a matter of different conditions that either help a people to realize its potential or thwart its efforts to do so. The elimination of economic discrimination creates favourable conditions for people to prosper economically and spiritually.
The environmental aspect of the proposed concept reflects the evolution of thinking about the relationship between man and nature. The achievement of mankind's environmental security is as imperative as the threat of an ecological disaster facing it is real. Today we must realize that the protection of the environment must be ensured on a world-wide basis. Confrontation narrows the scope for concerted action, while co-operation can expand it. Our concept provides for a set of measures in this area.
The human dimension is the primary yardstick for a comprehensive system of security. Nations can and must co-operate in establishing the best international conditions for safeguarding the fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual everywhere, democratising internal conditions and building trust and harmony on that basis.
We should together begin to devise a broad range of practical steps in the humanitarian area, promote co-operation in eradicating apartheid, racism, chauvinism, nationalism and discrimination on those bases, deal jointly with the problems of national minorities and refugees, and safeguard the rights of emigrants.
We submit that for States and nations trust begins at home and that to a large extent it is based on the unity of words and deeds and in complete accord between political declarations and actual positions. Our domestic and foreign policy is and will continue to be guided by that principle, and we reserve our right to demand the same of all other Governments/ our partners. The political, social, economic and cultural rights of the individual should be safeguarded on the basis of generally accepted international instruments. That is the way it should be everywhere.
The countries that have put forward this proposal do not claim a certificate of copyright. The system of security grows out of what has already been accomplished in the process of the peaceful coexistence of nations in the post-War years. It grows out of the activities of the United Nations, It is rooted in a broad legal foundation and the treaties which restrain the arms race. It is rooted in the negotiations on the central problems of our time and the codification of human rights standards/ in regional security-building processes and in the Non-Aligned Movement.
As a logical result of the development of mankind's common culture in this century, that system promises to become in the future a framework for the collective application of the creative efforts of all countries and peoples. Today, when 2/000 weapons can be removed from the face of the earth/ when a historic breakthrough has been achieved in a 42-year-long trend/ such a system reflects what we believe to be a genuine, irreversible process; a product of will and perseverance. For we are indeed born to live together and we shall stand together if we become an arch in which we support each other.
Our Assembly session provides the best occasion for reflecting on this. Its time should not be taken up with confrontation and hostility, I tell you frankly that the world is tired of that. There have been too many quotations intended to prove that you are dealing with the spawn of Hell. That is simply not serious or well founded. There have been too many accusations that detract front the dignity of nations. It is time for us to proceed to earnest dialogue; time to get down to business.
In these moments, as we stand face to face with the past and the present, we are keenly aware that when this pause for reflection is over we shall once again have to act, and again act.
﻿Let me first welcome the Secretary-General back from his pilgrimage for peace in the Middle East. Hundreds of thousands have already fallen in the bloody conflict between Iran and Iraq. All men and women of goodwill pray that the carnage can soon be stopped, and we pray that the Secretary-General proves to be not only a pilgrim but also the architect of a lasting peace between those two nations. Mr. Secretary-General, the United States supports you, and may God guide you in your labours ahead.
Like the Secretary-General, all of us here today are on a kind of pilgrimage. We come from every continent, every race and most religions to this great Hall of hope where, in the name of peace, we practise diplomacy. Now diplomacy, of course, is a subtle and nuance craft - so much so that it is said that when one of the most wily diplomats of the nineteenth century passed away, other diplomats asked, on reports of his death, "What do you suppose the old fox meant by that?"
But true statesmanship requires not merely skill but something greater, something we call vision, a grasp of the present and of the possibilities of the future. I have come here today to map out for you my own vision of the world's future - one, I believe, that, in its essential elements, is shared by all Americans. And I hope those who see things differently will not mind if I say that we in the United States believe that the place to look first for the shape of the future is not in continental masses and sea lanes, although geography is obviously, of great importance. Neither is it in national reserves of blood and iron or on the other hand, of money and industrial capacity, although military and economic strength are also, of course, crucial. We begin with something that is far simpler and yet far more profound - the human heart.
All over the world today, the yearnings of the human heart are redirecting in course of international affairs, putting the lie to the myth of materialism and historical determinism. We have only to open our eyes to see the simple aspirations of ordinary people writ large on the record of our times.
Last year in the Philippines, ordinary people rekindled the spirit of democracy and restored the electoral process. Some said they had performed a miracle, and, if so, a similar miracle - a transition to democracy - is taking place in the Republic of Korea. Haiti, too, is making a transition. Some despair when these new young democracies face conflicts or challenges, but growing pains are normal in democracies. The United States had them - as has every other democracy on earth.
In Latin America, too, one can hear the voices of freedom echo from the pea з and across the plains. It is the song of ordinary people marching, not in uniforms and not in military file, but, rather, one by one in simple, everyday working clothes - marching to the polls. Ten years ago, only a third of the people in La in America and the Caribbean lived in democracies or in countries that were turning to democracy. Today over 90 per cent do.
But this world-wide movement to democracy is not the only way in which simple, ordinary people are leading us in this room - we who are said to be the makers of history - leading us Into the future. Around the world, new businesses, new economic growth, new technologies are emerging from the workshops of ordinary people with extraordinary dreams.
Here in the United States  entrepreneurial energy - reinvigorated when we cut taxes and regulations - have fuelled the current economic expansion. According to scholars at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, three quarters of the more than 13.5 million new jobs that we have created in this country since the beginning of our expansion rate from businesses with fewer than 100 employees - businesses started by ordinary people who dared to take a chance. And many of our new high technologies were first developed in the garages of fledgling entrepreneurs. Yet America is not the only or perhaps even the best example of the dynamism and dreams that the freeing of markets set free.
In India and China, freer markets for farmers have led to an explosion in production. In Africa. Governments are rethinking their policies, and where they ate allowing greater economic freedom to farmers, crop production has improved. Meanwhile, in the newly industrialized countries of the Pacific Rim, free markets in services and manufacturing as well as agriculture have led to a soaring of growth and standards of living. The nations of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), Japan, Korea and Taiwan have created the true economic miracle of   the last two decades, and in each of them much of the magic came from ordinary people who succeeded as entrepreneurs.
In Latin America, this same lesson of free markets, greater opportunity and growth is being studied and acted on. President Sarney of Brazil spoke for many
others when he said that "Private initiative is the engine of economic Development. In Brazil we have learned that every time the state's penetration in the economy increases, our liberty decreases." Yes, policies that release to flight ordinary people's dreams ate spreading around the world. From Colombia t Turkey to Indonesia, Governments are cutting taxes, reviewing their regulations, and opening opportunities for initiative.
There has been much talk in the halls of this building about the "right to development". But more and more the evidence is clear that development is not itself a right. It is the product of rights: the right to own property; the right to buy and sell freely; the right to contract; the right to be free of excessive taxation and regulation, of burdensome government. There have been studies that determine that countries with low tax rates have greater growth than those with high rates.
We are all familiar with the phenomenon of the "underground economy". The scholar Hernando de Soto and his colleagues have examined the situation of one country - Peru - and described an economy of the poor that bypasses crushing taxation and stifling regulation. This "informal economy", as the researchers all it, is the principal supplier of many goods and services, and often the only ladder for upward mobility. In the capital city it accounts for almost all public transportation and most street markets. And the researchers concluded that, thanks to the informal economy, "The poor can work, travel, and have a roof over their heads". They might have added that, by becoming underground entrepreneurs themselves or by working for them, the poor have become less poor and the nation itself richer.
Those who advocate statist solutions to development should take note - the free market is the other path to development and the one true path. And, unlike many other paths, it leads somewhere. It works.
So this is where I believe we can find the map to the world's future - in the hearts of ordinary people in their hopes for themselves and their children  and in their prayers as they lay themselves and their families to rest each night. These simple people are the giants of the Earth, the true builders of the world and shapers of the centuries to come. And if Indeed they triumph, as I believe they will, we will at last know a world of peace and freedom, opportunity and hope, and, yes, of democracy - a world in which the spirit of mankind at last conquers the old, familiar enemies of famine, disease, tyranny, and war.
This is my vision - America's vision I recognize that some Governments represented in this Hall have other ideas. Some do not believe in democracy or in political, economic, or religious freedom. Some believe in dictatorship - whether by one man, one party, one class, one race, or one vanguard. To those Governments I would only say that the price of oppression is clear. Your economies will fall farther and farther behind. Your people will become more restless. Is it not better to listen to the people's hopes now, rather than their curses later?
And yet, despite our differences, there is one common hope that brought us all to make this common pilgrimage - the hope that mankind will one day beat its swords into the hope of peace. In no place on Earth today is peace more in need of friends than in the Middle East. Its people's yearning for peace is growing. The United States will continue to be an active partner in the efforts of the parties to come together to settle their differences and build a just and lasting peace.
This month marks the beginning of the eighth year of the Iran-Iraq war. Two months ago the Security Council adopted a mandatory resolution demanding a cease-fire, withdrawal, and negotiations to end the war. The United States fully supports implementation of Security Council resolution 598 (1987), as we support the Secretary-General's recent mission. We welcomed Iraq's acceptance of that resolution, and remain disappointed at Iran's unwillingness to accept it.
In that regard, I know that the President of Iran will be addressing representatives tomorrow. I take this opportunity to call upon him clearly and unequivocally to state whether Iran accepts Security Council resolution 598 (1987) or not. If the answer is positive, it would be a welcome step and a major breakthrough. If it is negative, the Council has no choice but rapidly to adopt enforcement measures.
For 40 years the United States has made clear its vital interest in the security of the Persian Gulf and the countries that border it. The oil reserves there are of strategic importance to the economies of the free world. We are committed to maintaining the free flow of this oil and to preventing the domination of the region by any hostile Power.
We do not seek confrontation or trouble with Iran or anyone else. Our objective is now, and has been at every stage, finding a means to end the war with no victor and no vanquished. The Increase in out naval presence in the Gulf does not favour one side or the other. It is a response to heightened tensions and followed consultations with our friends in the region. When the tension diminishes, so will our presence.
The United States is gratified by many recent diplomatic developments - the unanimous adoption of Security Council resolution 598 (1987), the Arab League's statement at its recent meeting in Tunis, and the Secretary-General's visit. Yet problems remain.
The Soviet Union helped in drafting and reaching an agreement on Security Council resolution 598 (1987). But outside the Security Council, the Soviets have acted differently. They called for removal of our navy from the Gulf, where it has been for 40 years. They made the false accusation that somehow the United States - rather than the war itself - is the source of tension in the Gulf. Such statements are not helpful. They divert attention from the challenge facing us all - a just end to the war.
The United States hopes the Soviets will join the other members of the Security Council in vigorously seeking an end to a conflict that should never have begun, should have ended long ago, and has become one of the great tragedies of the post-war era.
Elsewhere in the region, we see the continuing Soviet occupation of Afghanistan. After nearly eight years, a million casualties, nearly 4 million others driven into exile, and more intense fighting than ever, it is time for the Soviet Union to leave.
The Afghan people roust have the right to determine their own future free of foreign coercion. There is no excuse for prolonging a brutal war or propping up a regime whose days are clearly numbered. That regime offers political proposals that pretend compromise, but really would ensure the perpetuation of the regime's power. Those proposals have failed the only significant test: they have been rejected by the Afghan people. Every day the resistance grows in strength. It is an indispensable patty In the quest for a negotiated solution. 
The world community must continue to insist on genuine self-determination prompt and full Soviet withdrawal  and the return of the refugees to their homes in safety and honour. The attempt may be made to pressure a few countries to change their vote this year, but this body# I know, will vote overwhelmingly as every year before, for Afghan independence and freedom.
We have noted General Secretary Gorbachev's statement of readiness to withdraw. In April I asked the Soviet Union to set a date this year when this withdrawal would begin. I repeat that request now, in this forum for peace. I pledge that, once the Soviet Union shows convincingly that it is ready for a genuine political settlement, the United States is ready to be helpful.
Let me add one final note on this matter. Pakistan, in the face of enormous pressure and intimidation, has given sanctuary to Afghan refugees. We salute the courage of Pakistan and the Pakistani people. They deserve strong support from all of us.
Another regional conflict we all know is taking place in Central America - in Nicaragua.
To the Sandinista delegation here today I say: Your people know the true nature of your regime. They have seen their liberties suppressed. They have seen the promises of 1979 go unfulfilled. They have seen their real wages and personal income fall by half - yes, half - since 1979, while your Party elite live lives of privilege and luxury.
This is why, despite a billion dollars in Soviet-bloc aid last year alone, despite the largest and best equipped army in Central America, you face a popular revolution at home. It is why the democratic resistance is able to operate freely deep in your heartland. But this revolution should come as no surprise to you. I' is only the revolution you promised the people, and that you then betrayed.
The goal of United States policy towards Nicaragua is simple. It is the goal of the Nicaraguan people and the freedom fighters as well: it is democracy - real free, pluralistic, constitutional democracy. Understand this: we will not, and the world community will not, accept phoney "democratisation" designed to mask the perpetuation of dictatorship.  In this 200th year of our own Constitution, we know that real democracy depends on the safeguards of an institutional structure that prevents a concentration of power. It is that which makes rights secure. The temporary relaxation of controls - which can later be tightened - is not democratisation. Again, to the Sandinistas, I say: we continue to hope that Nicaragua will become part of the genuine democratic transformation that we have seen throughout Central America in this decade. We applaud the principles embodied in the Guatemala agreement, which links the security of the Central American democracies to democratic reform in Nicaragua. Now is the time for you to shut down the military machine that threatens your neighbours and assaults your own people. You must end your stranglehold on internal political activity. You must hold free and fair national elections. The media must be truly free - not censored or	'
intimidated or crippled by indirect measures such as the denial of newsprint or threats against journalists or their families. Exiles must be allowed to return, to minister, to live, to work, and to organize politically. Then, when persecution of religion has ended and the jails no longer contain political prisoners, national reconciliation and democracy will be possible.
Unless this happens, democratisation will be a fraud. And until it happens, we will press for true democracy by supporting those fighting for it.
Freedom in Nicaragua, or Angola, or Afghanistan, or Cambodia, or Eastern Europe, or South Africa or anyplace else on the globe is not just an internal matter. Some time ago the Czech dissident writer, Vaclav Havel, warned the world that
"respect for human rights is the fundamental condition and the sole genuine guarantee of true peace". And Andrei Sakharov, in his Nobel Lecture, said:  "I am convinced that international confidence, mutual understanding, disarmament, and International security are inconceivable without an open society with freedom of information, freedom of conscience, the right to publish, and the right to travel and choose the country In which one wishes to live."
Freedom serves peace. The quest for peace must serve the cause of freedom. Patient diplomacy can contribute to a world In which both can flourish. We are heartened by new prospects for improvement in East-West and, particularly. United States-Soviet relations.
Last week Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze visited Washington for talks with me and with Secretary of State Shultz. We discussed the full range of issues. Including my long-standing efforts to achieve, for the first time, deep reductions in United States and Soviet nuclear arms. It was six years ago, for example, that I proposed the 2ero option for United States and Soviet longer-range intermediate-range nuclear missiles. I am pleased that we have now agreed in principle to a truly historic treaty that will eliminate an entire class of United States and Soviet nuclear weapons. We have also agreed to intensify our diplomatic efforts in all areas of mutual Interest.
Towards that end Secretary Shultz and the Foreign Minister will meet again, a month from now, in Moscow, and I will meet again with General Secretary Gorbachev later this fall.
We continue to have our differences and probably always will. But that puts a special responsibility on us to find ways - realistic ways - to bring greater stability to our competition and to show the world a constructive example of the value of communication and of the possibility of peaceful solutions to political problems. Here let me add that we seek, through our strategic defence initiative, to find a way to keep the peace through relying on defence - not offence - for deterrence and for eventually rendering ballistic missiles obsolete. The strategic defence Initiative has greatly enhanced the prospects for real arms reduction. It is a crucial part of our efforts to ensure a safer world and a more stable strategic balance.
We will continue to pursue the goal of arms reduction, particularly the goal that the General Secretary and I agreed upon: a 50 per cent reduction in our respective strategic nuclear arms. We will continue to press the Soviets for more constructive conduct in the settling of regional conflicts. We look to the Soviets to honour the Helsinki accords. We look for greater freedom for the Soviet peoples within their country/ more people-to-people exchanges with our country and Soviet recognition in practice of the right of freedom of movement.
We look forward to a time when things we now regard as sources of friction and even danger can become examples of co-operation between ourselves and the Soviet Union. For instance, I have proposed a collaboration to reduce the barriers between East and West in Berlin, and more broadly in Europe as a whole. Let us work together for a Europe in which force or the threat of force, whether in the form of walls or of guns is no longer an obstacle to free choice by individuals and whole nations, I have also called for more openness in the flow of information from the Soviet Union about its military forces, policies and programmes so that our negotiations about arms reduction can proceed with greater confidence.
We hear much about changes in the Soviet Union. We are intensely interested in these changes. We hear the world glasnost which is translated as "openness" in English. Openness is a broad term, it means the free, unfettered flow of information, ideas and people, it means political and intellectual liberty in all forms. We hope, for the sake of the peoples of the USSR, that such changes will come. And we hope, for the sake of peace, that it will include a foreign policy that, respects the freedom and independence of other peoples.
No place should be better suited for discussions of peace than this Hall. The first Secretary-General, Trygve Lie, said of the United Nations:
"With the danger of fire, and in the absence of an organized fire department, it is only common sense for the neighbours to join in setting up their own fire brigades."
Joining together to drown the flames of war - this, together with a universal declaration of human rights, was the founding ideal of the United Nations. It is our continuing challenge to ensure that the United Nations lives up to these hopes.
As the Secretary-General noted some time ago, the risk of anarchy in the world has increased because the fundamental rules of the United Nations Charter have been violated. The General Assembly has repeatedly acknowledged this with regard to the occupation of Afghanistan, The Charter has a concrete practical meaning today because it touches on all the dimensions of human aspiration that I mentioned earlier: the yearning for democracy and freedom, for global peace and for prosperity.
That is why we must protect the Universal Declaration of Human Rights from being debased as it was through the infamous "Zionism is racism" resolution. We cannot permit attempts to control the media and promote censorship under the ruse of a so-called new world information order. We must work against efforts to introduce contentious and non-relevant issues into the work of the specialized and technical agencies where we seek progress on urgent problems, from terrorism to drug trafficking to nuclear proliferation, which threaten us all. Such efforts corrupt the Charter and weaken this Organization.
There have been important administrative and budget reforms. They have helped. The United States is committed to restoring its contribution as reforms progress. But there is still much to do. The United Nations was built on great dreams and great ideals. Sometimes it has strayed. It is time for it to come home. It was Dag Hammarskjold who said:
"The end of all political effort must be the well-being of the individual in a life of safety and freedom."
Should this not be our credo in the years ahead?

I have spoken today of a vision and of the obstacles to its realization. More than a century ago a young Frenchman, Alexis de Tocqueville, visited America.
After that visit he predicted that the two great Powers of the future world would be, on the one hand, the United States, which would be built, as he said, "by the ploughshare"; and, on the other hand, Russia, which would go forward, again as he said, "by the sword". Yet, need it be so? Cannot swords be turned to ploughshares? Can we and all nations not live in peace?
In our obsession with antagonisms of the moment, we often forget how much unites all the members of humanity. Perhaps we need some outside, universal threat to make us recognize this common bond. I occasionally think how quickly our differences worldwide would vanish if we were facing an alien threat from outside this world. And yet, I ask, is not an alien force already among us? What could be more alien to the universal aspirations of our peoples than war and the threat of war?
Two centuries ago, in a hall much smaller than this one, in Philadelphia, Americans met to draft a constitution. In the course of their debates, one of them said that the new Government, if it was to rise high, must be built on the broadest base - the will and consent of the people. And so it was. And so It has been.
My message today is that the dreams of ordinary people reach to astonishing heights. If we diplomatic pilgrims are to achieve equal altitudes, we must build all we do on the full breadth of humanity's will and consent and the full expanse of the human heart.

﻿
In the name of the Chinese delegation, may I begin by warmly congratulating you. Sir, on your election to the presidency of the forty-second session of the General Assembly. I am sure that with your ability, wisdom and experience, you will fulfil this noble mission with distinction. I would also like to take this opportunity to express my appreciation and thanks to your predecessor, Mr. Humayun Choudhury, for his positive contribution to the work of the previous session.
Over the past year, people of the world have made unremitting efforts on various fronts in pursuit of peace and development and achieved new and encouraging results. The third world and many small and medium-sized countries have played an active role in international affairs, exerting an increasingly great influence. This shows that the forces for peace have grown in strength. There have been ever-stronger demands for a halt to the arms race and to aggression and expansion, and for genuine disarmament and an early settlement of regional conflicts. Under the circumstances, the United States and the Soviet Union have kept up their dialogue and there has appeared a somewhat relaxed atmosphere in East-West relations.
However, factors causing international tension and turbulence are still present. The arms race, far from coming to a halt, is extending into outer space and other high technology fields. None of the hot-spots in the world has been removed, and certain regional conflicts even threaten to escalate. The world economic situation remains grim. Many developing countries are faced with increasing difficulties and the North-South contradiction has become more acute than ever. All this cannot but cause grave concern to China and all the other countries which uphold justice and strive for peace and development. In order to join in a common search for effective solutions to those problems, I now wish to set forth the Chinese Government's position and propositions. 
It is the universal demand of the world's people and the consistent stand of the Chinese Government to stop the arms race and to remove regional conflicts. Effective disarmament constitutes an important link in the efforts to ease international tension and to maintain world peace. Since the resumption of the Geneva arms control talks between the United States and the Soviet Union in 1985, we have all along hoped that they would, through serious negotiations, reach agreements conducive to world peace and not detrimental to the rights and interests of other countries. Now there has been progress in their intermediate nuclear forces (INF) talks. The two sides have reached agreement in principle to adopt the global "double-zero option" on long range intermediate nuclear forces and short range intermediate nuclear forces. We hold that dialogue is better than confrontation, and relaxation better than tension. World peace is indivisible, and European security and Asian security are equally important. If the United States and the Soviet Union could formally conclude an INF treaty and implement it by thoroughly destroying all their long-range intermediate nuclear missiles and short-range intermediate nuclear missiles deployed in Europe and Asia, that would be a first step towards nuclear arms reduction and would undoubtedly be welcomed.
Of course, there is still a long way to go and much work to do before genuine disarmament can be realized. Even with the long range intermediate nuclear forces and short range intermediate nuclear forces dismantled, the nuclear weaponry of the United States and the Soviet Union would only be reduced by less than 5 per cent and each would still retain a nuclear force capable of destroying the world several times over. To maintain world peace and security, there should be complete prohibition and thorough destruction of all types of nuclear, space, chemical and biological weapons as well as other weapons of mass destruction, and a substantial reduction of conventional arms. 
The people of all countries long for development in peace. Disarmament is an urgent task, but the disarmament talks have been proceeding very slowly, since the INF talks alone have dragged on for almost six years, negotiations on strategic arms reduction or other disarmament issues will be even more difficult. If things move along at this pace, when could the approximately 50,000 nuclear warheads ever be destroyed completely? When could the above disarmament goals ever be reached? Naturally, the international community strongly hopes that the United States and the Soviet Union will drastically reduce their armaments as soon as possible, and that after reaching an INF agreement they will proceed to conduct earnest negotiations on disarmament in other areas and reach agreements followed by effective implementation. They should not stand still, let alone vie with each other in developing new types of even more sophisticated weapons in the wake of an agreement to dismantle INF missiles.
In order to promote disarmament, the Chinese delegation last year submitted to the General Assembly two draft resolutions on nuclear and conventional disarmament, which were adopted with the broad support of other United Nations Members. The two draft resolutions emphasized that the countries possessing the largest arsenals bear a special responsibility for disarmament and should take the lead in drastically reducing their nuclear and conventional armaments. This is the key to progress in disarmament. In the world today, it is the United States and the Soviet Union that possess the largest nuclear and conventional arsenals, and they alone are capable of launching a world war. if they could take the lead in drastic arms reduction, the threats to world peace would be greatly diminished.
China has not only actively put forward its views and proposals on disarmament, but has also taken a series of concrete actions towards disarmament. On the very first day when China came into possession of nuclear weapons, in 1964, we declared unilaterally that at no time and under no circumstances would China be the first to use nuclear weapons. We have also undertaken not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon States or nuclear-free zones. We neither advocate nor go in for nuclear proliferation; we do not help other countries develop nuclear weapons. China respects and supports the countries and regions concerned in their endeavour to establish nuclear-free zones or zones of peace on the basis of voluntary agreement to be reached through consultation among themselves. We have signed the additional protocols of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and of the South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty. Furthermore, in recent years we have stopped atmospheric nuclear testing, reduced the size of our armed forces by one million and cut down our military expenditures. We have also shifted some military industrial facilities to civilian production and put some military installations to civilian use or dual use.
Disarmament is an arduous and complicated task. Progress in disarmament requires the good faith of the countries concerned and, more importantly, the persistent efforts of all peace-loving countries and people. On the question of disarmament, which concerns the future of the world and the destiny of mankind, all countries, whether big, small or medium-sized, nuclear or non-nuclear, should have an equal say, and each has a positive role to play. Europe experienced the holocaust of two world wars and is now a place of direct confrontation between the two major military blocs. East and West European countries are particularly concerned about disarmament, which is closely related to their own security, and have played an important role in promoting the United States-Soviet arms control talks. When addressing the question of disarmament, the legitimate rights and interests and reasonable proposals of every country should be fully respected and taken into serious consideration.  Disarmament agreements of any kind should help to enhance the security of every country and region in the world and not to weaken 
Here I should like to refer to the recently concluded International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development, which unanimously adopted the final document through the concerted efforts of all sides. That Conference is of positive significance in heightening the international community's awareness of the close relationship between disarmament and development,
A fair and reasonable settlement of regional conflicts and the elimination of hot-spots are of great importance in easing international tension and safeguarding world peace. Despite the efforts made by the United Nations and by many justice-upholding countries towards this end in the past year, no substantive progress has been made so far. That is essentially because certain countries, in disregard of the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and the basic norms governing international relations, have refused to implement the relevant United Nations resolutions and have persisted in their policies of aggression and expansion. They have continued their occupation of other countries' territories and have kept encroaching upon others' sovereignty and interfering in others' internal affairs. As a result, regional conflicts have been continuing and it is difficult to remove the hot-spots in the world. 
China Is consistently opposed to the threat or use of force In International relations and Is all the more opposed to acts of aggression and Interference against other countries by any country under whatever pretext. It Is our view that the commission of aggression by one country against another Is the most serious international crime, which must in no way be confounded with the Internal problems of the country under aggression. China has always maintained that the five principles of mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful co-existence should be strictly observed by all countries in the world. We are in favour of a fair and reasonable political settlement of any regional conflict, because it is in the fundamental interests of the countries concerned and of world peace.
To achieve a fair and reasonable political settlement of a regional conflict, the primary requirement is to stop aggression and expansion against, and terminate military occupation of, other countries. Foreign troops must immediately and unconditionally withdraw from the territories they occupy, and the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of the countries under aggression must be restored. No country can get away with keeping the gains of aggression and expansion under the pretext of a "political settlement".
To achieve a fair and reasonable political settlement of a regional conflict, it is also necessary for the people of the countries or regions concerned to solve their own problems, free from outside interference, and to observe the principle of genuine self-determination. Disputes between States should be settled by the countries concerned through negotiations, in line with the basic norms governing international relations. Internal disputes of a country should be settled by its own people. To achieve a fair and reasonable political settlement of a regional conflict/ all parties concerned must observe the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and the five principles of peaceful co-existence.
The key to the settlement of the Kampuchean question lies in Viet Nam's cessation of its aggression and the speedy withdrawal of all its troops from Kampuchea. The United Nations General Assembly has adopted many resolutions in this regard. The Association of South-East Asian Nations (AS£AN) and other justice-upholding countries have also made sustained efforts to seek a political settlement of the question. Under the pressure of international public opinion, the Vietnamese authorities have over the year talked a lot about a "political settlement" but have in fact failed to show any sincerity. Their stubborn position of aggression and expansion has remained unchanged. Up till now, they have continued with their military occupation of Kampuchea under various pretexts, in defiance of the relevant United Nations resolutions. Being clearly the aggressor, the Vietnamese authorities bear an unshirkable responsibility on the question of Kampuchea. Yet, they brazenly try to disguise themselves as an outsider, insisting that Kampuchea's "national reconciliation" must come before their troop withdrawal. The kind of "political settlement" they have proposed is, to put it bluntly, designed to make the International community accept the Vietnamese aggression and occupation of Kampuchea as a fait accompli, prop up a Vietnamese-controlled "government" and ensure the Vietnamese vested interests gained through aggression and expansion. This is of course unacceptable to the coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea, the ASEAN countries and all justice-upholding countries and people.
China seeks no self-interest in Kampuchea. Our principled position on the Kampuchean question is to safeguard the norms governing international relations,
oppose aggression and uphold justice. We consider it essential to include in
 

earnest the relevant resolutions of the previous sessions of the United Nations General Assembly, we support Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the ASEAN countries and the United Nations Secretary-General in their efforts to seek a just and reasonable settlement of the Kampuchean question. The eight-point proposal on a political settlement of the Kampuchean question put forward by the coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea headed by Prince Norodom Sihanouk is fair and reasonable. It has won extensive sympathy and support from the international community and should serve as the basis for the settlement of the Kampuchean question. We are confident that provided Viet Nam withdraws all its troops from Kampuchea under international supervision, the Kampuchean people, led by the prestigious, great patriot Prince Norodom Sihanouk, will solve their internal problems through consultation free from outside interference, effect true national reconciliation and choose their new government through United Nations-supervised free elections, so that Kampuchea will become an independent, peaceful, neutral and non-aligned country. This will be in the interest of peace and stability in that region and in the rest of South-East Asia. Once the parties concerned reach agreement on a settlement of the Kampuchean question, China will be ready to join other countries in a relevant international guarantee.
The "cease-fire" declared by the Kabul regime has not put an end to the war in Afghanistan. As a matter of fact, the encirclement and suppression of the resistance movement, the killing of innocent civilians and incursions into Pakistan have been going on all the same. As long as the foreign aggressors do not	.
withdraw, the war of resistance to aggression will not stop. It is clear that "guarantee first, troop withdrawal next" or "reconciliation first, troop withdrawal afterwards" are nothing but excuses for putting off the withdrawal of troops from Afghanistan. If the Soviet Union really wants a political settlement, it should
comply with the relevant resolutions of successive sessions of the United Nations
 
General Assembly and withdraw all its troops from there as soon as possible. This is the key to the settlement of the Afghan Question and the only way to heal the "bleeding wound". We support Pakistan and other countries concerned and the United Nations in their efforts for a fair and reasonable settlement of the Afghan question. It is our hope that Afghanistan will regain its status as an independent, sovereign, neutral and non-aligned country at an early state.
The convening of an international conference on the Middle East question under the auspices of the United Nations is a feasible way to seek a peaceful settlement of the said question. The Chinese Government supports the United Nations Secretary-General's efforts towards this end. We hold that the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), recognized internationally as the legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, has the tight to participate in the conference on an equal footing with other members. China is always opposed to the Israeli policy of aggression and expansion and firmly supports the just struggle of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples to recover the occupied territories and restore their national rights. We sincerely hope that the Arab countries and the PLO will remove their differences through friendly consultations, close their ranks and co-ordinate their actions in a common endeavour towards an early, just and comprehensive settlement of the Middle East question.
At present, the situation in the Gulf is becoming more turbulent, with sharp confrontation in the region. The Chinese Government has expressed grave concern over this. We have all along taken a position of neutrality and of promoting reconciliation between Iran and Iraq and have urged them to bury the hatchet as soon as possible, engage in peaceful reconstruction and strive for further development rather than wearing themselves out in the war. Security Council resolution 598 (1987)" adopted unanimously by the Security Council through concerted efforts by all the members reflects the strong desire of the international community for e speedy end to the Iran-Iraq conflict and has provided a good basis for a peaceful settlement of the conflict. We appreciate the valuable contributions made by the Secretary-General of the United Nations to the implementation of this resolution and support him in his continued endeavours to ensure this. China has made and will continue to make efforts to promote comprehensive implementation of the resolution. With the desire to see an early end to the sanguinary conflict and the restoration of peace stability and prosperity In the Gulf region, the Chinese Government once again calls upon Iran and Iraq to stop immediately all their military actions and to implement Security Council resolution 598 (1987) in real earnest, in co-operation with the Security Council and the Secretary-General, so as to seek a just, reasonable and comprehensive settlement of the Iran-Iraq dispute. The Chinese Government also calls on the parties concerned to exercise restraint and ensure free and safe passage in the international waterways in the Gulf. It further calls on the big Powers to stop their military involvement in the Gulf so as to avoid escalation of the conflict, leaving the littoral countries of the Gulf to solve the Gulf problems themselves through consultations.
Over the past year there has been an ever-surging movement in South Africa and Namibia, with a steady growth of the struggle against the foreign rule and for national liberation and independence. The South African racist regime, though more and more isolated, la clinging obstinately to its apartheid system and brutally suppressing the South African people. It has kept Namibia under its illegal occupation and wilfully harassed its neighbours, trying hard to delay and Obstruct settlement of the problem of southern Africa. The Chinese Government strongly condemns the perverse acts of the South African authorities. We will, as always, firmly support the just struggle of the peoples of South Africa, Namibia and the rest of southern Africa. We call on the international community, and particularly countries that have influence with South Africa, to support the struggle of the peoples in southern Africa and, through further pressure and effective sanctions, force the South African authorities to abandon their policies of apartheid and of destabilizing the neighbouring countries and implement Security Council resolution 435 (1978) unconditionally, thus paving the way for the early independence of Namibia.
Recently, an important step forward has at last been taken in the peace process in Central America after repeated setbacks. The document entitled "Process for the establishment of firm and lasting peace in Central America", signed more than a month ago at a summit meeting of five Central American States, is of positive significance in easing the tension and turbulence in the region. That document gives expression to the desire of the Central American States for peace and is a result of the peace mediation of the Contadora and Lima groups. We sincerely hope that all the parties concerned will respect the hard-won achievements of the meeting so as to facilitate the smooth implementation of that accord and bring about peace and stability in Central America at an early date without interference from outside.
Tension on the Korean peninsula can be eased only through reduced military confrontation and increased contacts and dialogue between the north and the south of Korea. The Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea has recently put forward successive proposals, such as phased disarmament by both the north and the south, withdrawal of United States troops and tripartite talks by the north and south of Korea and the United States at the Foreign Minister level. Those proposals are constructive and reasonable and we hope that they will receive a favourable response from the parties concerned.
The present world economic situation is yet another major issue about which the international community is deeply concerned. Over the past year economic growth in developed countries has remained slow and the economic friction among them has been exacerbated. The developing countries are faced with unprecedented serious difficulties owing to their worsening external economic environment. The prices of many of their primary products have remained at the lowest level since the end of the Second World War, while the export of their manufactured goods has been hindered by ever-increasing trade protectionism. The export earnings of the developing countries have plummeted, while the inflow of funds has dropped drastically. The debts of developing countries, which exceeded $US 1 trillion last year, are weighing more and more heavily on them. Under the circumstances, their economic growth on the whole remains very slow and their difficulties are mounting, although they have made strenuous efforts to achieve economic readjustments or reforms. In the case of the least developed countries, there are even more difficulties.
The world economy is an integral whole. The North and the South need each other and are interdependent. The economic stagnation and growing poverty of developing countries are bound to affect the world economy as a whole and, naturally, the economic growth of the developed countries. Those that benefit the world will benefit from the world. The developed countries should do their best to improve the world economic environment and help developing countries overcome their economic difficulties. To this end, we wish to put forward the following propositions.
First, the developed countries should adopt measures to stabilize the prices of primary products and provide financial assistance to the developing countries for diversifying their export commodities so as to help stabilize and increase their export earnings. 
Secondly, the developed countries should honour their commitment to reduce and stop protectionist trade practices. They should also expand the treatment granted to the developing countries under the Generalized System of Preferences. The interests of the developing countries should be taken fully into account in the new round of multilateral trade negotiations.
Thirdly, the developed countries should try to fulfil as early as possible the official development assistance quotas set by the United Nations and provide more funds to the developing countries in other forms. International financial bodies should also make efforts to provide funds to the developing countries on favourable terms in the light of their actual conditions.
Fourthly, debtor and creditor nations, international financial institutions and commercial banks should share the responsibility for the solution of the debt problem and agree upon practical measures through continued dialogue so as to reduce as much as possible the debt burdens of the developing countries.
Fifthly, special preferential treatment should be given to the least developed countries in respect of trade, funds, assistance and debt, and effective measures should be adopted to implement the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990, approved unanimously by the special session of the United Nations General Assembly last year.
During the Seventh United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) held not long ago there were extensive discussions on such questions as the development of resources, commodities, world trade and the least developed countries, thereby creating favourable conditions for the furtherance of the North-south dialogue. We hope that at the current session the General Assembly will make new progress on this basis in its deliberations on the Questions concerned. We hold that the developed and developing countries should continue and step up dialogue and work together to establish a new type of North-South relationship, a just and rational relationship based on equality and mutual benefit, so as to strengthen international co-operation and revitalize the world economy.
China is marching forward along the road of building a socialist society with Chinese characteristics. Now, stability and unity prevail throughout the country. Reform and the open policy are being implemented steadfastly. The Chinese economic registers a sustained and steady growth, and the people's living standards keep improving. Of course, we are fully aware that China's productive forces are cooperatively weak and its economic relatively backward. China is still at the Initial stage of socialism. During this fairly long historical period, our main: task is vigorously to expand the productive forces so that China will gradually lift itself out of poverty, backwardness and underdevelopment. To this end, we must persist in reform and opening up at home and to the outside world, work hard to develop a planned commodity economy and continue to expand our economic and technological exchange and co-operation with other countries in the world, leading to a dynamic and rapid development of the productive forces. The forthcoming thirteenth National Congress of the Communist Party of China will review the historic changes that have taken place in China in the past nine years, reaffirm a series of fundamental principles and policies that have proved effective and give a theoretical exposition of reform and the open policy. The Congress will draw up new plans aimed at accelerating and deepening the economic structural reform, and work out a blueprint for political structural reform with a view to promoting the cause of socialist modernization.
Like reform and the open policy, China's independent foreign policy of peace is also our fundamental State policy which will remain unchanged for a long time. By pursuing this policy, China aims at both securing a lasting international environment of peace for our socialist modernization drive, and fulfilling its responsibilities and obligations for world peace and development in tune with international developments. The policy is in keeping with the fundamental interests of the people both of China and of the world as a whole. By persisting in reform and the open policy as well as in the independent foreign policy of peace, China will develop faster and contribute more to mankind.
As the most important global organization of our time, the United Nations is playing an important role in maintaining peace, promoting development and strengthening co-operation. We are glad to see that such a role is being further strengthened. At its last session, the United Nations General Assembly adopted - through efforts on various sides - the resolution on the strengthening of administrative and financial efficiency of the United Nations. At present, the United Nations is at a critical juncture of its reform. We support this world body in its efforts to introduce necessary and rational reforms so as further to improve its efficacy and give better expression to the purposes of the Charter. The United Nations is the Organization of all the countries in the world, and it needs the support of all its Member States. It is our hope that the big Power directly responsible for the current financial difficulties will fulfil its obligations as provided for by the Charter. As a permanent member of the Security Council, China will, as always, strictly abide by the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and discharge its obligations in real earnest. We are ready, together with other Member States, to make our contributions to further strengthening of the role of the United Nations in its many areas of endeavour.
﻿
Mr. President, I offer you sincere congratulations on having been elected to your high office and wish you luck and success in carrying out your responsible task. At the same time I extend my thanks to Foreign Minister Choudhury for his circumspect and successful guidance of the forty-first session of the General Assembly, which ended a few days ago.
I also take the opportunity cordially to thank the Secretary-General for his untiring endeavours on behalf and in the interest of our Organization. His latest report gives us confidence and a perspective for the future. As in the past, he can count on our unqualified support. The principal task of the United Nations is to maintain and safeguard peace. We begin this session of the General Assembly with hopeful signs of new thinking in West-East relations and in the field of disarmament. Yet the world is still filled with war: war between countries, in which people suffer and die; man waging war on man, for where human rights are violated war is being conducted against man; global terrorism is waging war against order in every form; deadly diseases are waging war on life; mankind is waging war on nature; and what is the hunger and poverty suffered by many nations but the outcome of war on human dignity through man's failure in North and South? 
In the final analysis, it is always man who threatens man. Our children cannot be blamed for the state of the world, but it is they who suffer most. They expect us to give them a world free from war, free from expulsion, free from fear, free from hunger and disease. Parents all over the world love their children. But ate we in the United Nations really doing enough to protect the rights and the future of our children? We want to leave our children a better world, a world in which human dignity and social justice are guaranteed, in which peace prevails and in which the natural foundations of life are protected and cultivated.
But, above all, we must fight against the war inside us as well as that outside us. Peace begins within ourselves; it begins in the mind, with respect for our neighbour and awareness of our responsibility for that neighbour and for all who will come after us.
War strategies must be superseded by peace strategies. We want peace in a comprehensive sense. If we fail in our task, none of us will survive. Hence, the crucial task today is to ensure the survival of mankind. Mankind has become a community in pursuit of survival. No one can steal away from our common fate. A nuclear war would destroy us all.
Contaminated rivers, seas and soil, desertification, dying forests - especially tropical forests - and the widening hole in the ozone layer are all problems that affect and concern us all.
A few weeks ago the world population passed the 5 billion mark. If the present demographic trend continues the world community will number more than 6 billion by the turn of the century. Our children will live to see that day. If we do not act the world's problems will pass beyond our control solely as the result of population growth. Now is the time to set the right course. This is the responsibility of every civilization, every religion, every ideology and every political and social system.
The call must be; fight the wars that threaten mankind from all sides. The peace we need is more than the elimination of military conflicts. It implies common responsibility, solidarity and respect for our neighbours. Peace implies making our world human. It implies respecting our natural environment. It implies securing freedom, life and the survival of mankind.
Many people live in poverty, exposed to hunger, ignorance and disease. The prospects for the third world depress us all. Commodity prices are falling. This means that developing countries must continuously increase production, and this in turn reduces prices still further.
In the industrial countries, however, demand is on the wane because markets for certain commodities are satiated and other commodities are increasingly being replaced by new materials. The disintegration of commodity prices is not a temporary market fluctuation  it is a long-term trend. For most developing countries, however, commodities are still the principal - indeed, in many cases, the only - source of income. Thus their one-sided dependence on commodity exports must be reduced. We must help them to turn their raw materials into manufactures and semi-manufactures of their own. But the diversification of an economy takes time. Until that point is reached, ways and means must be sought of improving existing arrangements, as in the case of the European Community's Community model for off-setting shortfalls in export earnings.
Last year the indebtedness of the third world rose by 9 per cent, to l trillion. In 1986 over 30 per cent, and in some cases nearly 50 per cent of the income of 22 sub-Saharan countries was mortgaged for debt service. The debt problem threatens to explode. It is a threat to the economic, social and political future of many heavily indebted countries, but it also poses a threat to donors. It threatens to undermine the will of North and South to co-operate with one another.
All those concerned, whether in the public or the private sector, need to increase their efforts. Every country should be treated according to its special circumstances. But the general principle must be to make debt-servicing reasonably proportionate to a country's productive capacity. It is in the true interest of donors to seek in their negotiations with debtors to solutions that will provide a perspective for the future. Hopelessness will crush the best will in the world.
Since 1978 the Federal Republic of Germany has remitted 4,2 billion marks of the debt owed it by the poorest countries. I appeal to all donor countries to follow suit, and I appeal to the socialist countries of the North also to provide adequate development aid, at long last.
Proceeding from future-oriented reform programmes and financed by new loans on easy terms, the economies of the debtor countries must be put back on a course of growth. But diversification and investment in growth sectors will be helpful to developing countries only if the industrialized world opens its markets wide to their manufactures and semi-manufactures and adapts its own economic structure to such new conditions. We are prepared to make that adjustment.
To restrict the role of the developing countries in the world economy to that of mere suppliers of raw materials and energy would be to deprive them of their prospects for the future. The industrial countries must eliminate import 

restrictions and other barriers to trade. They must stop subsidizing branches of industry that no longer pay their way.
They must also reduce agricultural surpluses. The adjustments necessary in the industrial countries are difficult and painful but that can be no reason to keep putting them off. At any rate, exports of weapons are not the solution to these problems. On the contrary, they Increase tensions and the danger of war, and they squander resources that are needed for works of peace. Weapon exports facilitate neither the necessary structural change in the industrial countries nor the process of economic recovery in the developing countries.
At its seventh session, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) underscored the special significance of peaceful international trade for development. The final act of that Conference indicates the strategies that need to be pursued with regard to finance and indebtedness and trade and commodities, and with regard to the problems of the land-locked developing countries. Now is the time for action.
The industrial countries are undergoing a technological revolution, a revolution that will completely change society. At the moment we have but little idea of the repercussions it will have on the developing countries. Whatever happens, it must not be allowed to divide the world for ever into rich and poor. We cannot allow the great human dream that has inspired all nations, the dream of one just, peaceful and free world, to be outstripped by technological development. On the contrary, science and technology must be the powerhouse for the development of mankind. Only modern science and technology are capable of solving the world's problems of food supply, health, education and energy. Genetic engineering, modern medical research, state-of-the-art information technologies and new forms of energy must be pooled to this end.
AIDS (acquired immune-deficiency syndrome) is a challenge to the whole of mankind. It threatens all nations. My Government is pleased to note that the gravity of this problem is increasingly recognized by Governments and by international organizations.
Advanced technology not only provides opportunities; it also entails risks. Chernobyl has demonstrated to the world that the safety of nuclear power stations is the common responsibility of all countries producing nuclear energy. A progressive human society cannot regard nuclear energy as the ultimate solution to the world's energy problems.
The task of eliminating the political, social and moral risks inherent in high technology and science is common to the whole human race.
Genetic engineering can secure adequate food supplies for many billions of people, but it can also be abused to violate the dignity of man if it is used solely as a means of manipulating man, if it encroaches upon each person's individuality. The United Nations is the forum where the best brains in our countries can establish common ethical standards with which to measure the consequences of technological development.
The earth's atmosphere and its high seas are the common property of mankind. They have to be preserved so that the human species can survive. But, like the world's climate, they too are being jeopardized. The Brundtland report has presented a plan for development that is both lasting and environmentally compatible, and it must be taken seriously. The world must be made more acutely aware of these issues and interactions. This is a matter for the United Nations. We should soon consider proclaiming a year of global environmental protection. We should also consider proclaiming the 199Os a decade for the environment to provide the necessary stimulus worldwide.
Everywhere we face problems which we can only solve together or not at all. We have long since entered an age of global domestic policy in which each one of us is dependent upon everyone else. Thus, the importance of the United Nations grows from year to year. It is our common duty to preserve and develop the world Organization. The gap between the concept of the United Nations and its present indateriali2ation in a world of nation-States is still considerable. We must all learn to find global answers to global problems. The United Nations offers a wide range of instruments for this purpose. The more determined our efforts to reform the world Organization, the more effectively will be able to use those instruments. I wish at this juncture to thank the Secretary-General for his far-sighted approach to this problem.
Many forms of co-operation can also develop in a smaller framework. Here in lies the special significance of regional organizations. The European Community has shown the world the kind of dynamism for peace that can emanate from regional organizations. For centuries the nation-States of Europe fought one another in wars, which also spread beyond their continent to other parts of the world. Today, war among the 12 members of the European Community is impossible; it is inconceivable.
That is the first and most important task of a regional organization: to make sure that war in its region will be impossible. The more nation-States become integrated the better their chances of achieving that aim. That is why my Government strongly supports all efforts to establish peace in crisis areas originating in the region itself. 
We welcome the signing of the Arias Plan by five Central American countries as a step towards peace and stability in Central America and encourage them on that road. The result of the Guatemala conference is a sign of hope. We give our unqualified support to the nations of Central America in their efforts to secure social justice, to ensure the application of the principles of democracy, to secure independence and to foster peace and co-operation. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany is helping the cause of world peace by encouraging co-operation between the European Community and the regional organizations in Central and South America, Asia, the Middle East and Africa.
The countries of one region can best preserve and develop their cultural identity through joint efforts. The wealth inherent in cultural diversity is the purest source of energy for man's task of safeguarding peace. All nations on earth are, without distinction, civilized nations. Their cultural contribution is indispensable for the creation of a single global society based on justice, peace and freedom. We are serving the cause of peace if we preserve and protect the unmistakable identities of these civilizations. Nations that respect the cultural achievements of other nations cannot be stirred up against one another. Cultural arrogance has time and again been the root cause of catastrophes.
Thus the North-South dialogue, too, needs a cultural dimension. Only if nations start from the basis of their individual culture and cultural exchanges and partnerships with others can they develop the national consciousness that will help solve mankind's common problems.
Regional organizations in the third world are the best way to ensure that their members are not drawn into the West-East confrontation. This is also the great mission of the Non-Aligned Movement, which is a growing factor of stability in the world. Genuine non-alignment offers third-world countries in particular a great opportunity to preserve their identity and consolidate their Independence.
We are all aware of the magnitude of the world's problems. This being so, we know we cannot solve political, social, religious and ideological differences in one gigantic leap. These differences exist and we have to live with them. But that should not stop us, notwithstanding all the differences of principle and ideology, from doing what we can to safeguard world peace now.
There is a growing awareness of this. The seventh session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), like last year's special session of the General Assembly on Africa, has given encouraging signs that North and South are capable of disregarding positions of principle and concentrating on what is necessary and feasible at the present time.
We must now take this opportunity to move forward. Security Council resolution 598 (1987) is an encouraging sign of common responsibility for global peace. The special significance of that resolution lies in its unanimous adoption. It can serve as an example for the settlement of other regional conflicts as well.
We strongly support resolution 598 (1987) and the Secretary-General's efforts to establish peace on its basis. That resolution affords Iraq and Iran an opportunity to embark on the road of peace. With Iraq having stated its approval, I urgently appeal to Iran to implement the resolution fully.
War has been going on in Afghanistan, too, for nearly eight years now. We expect the Soviet Union to withdraw its forces from that country and put an end to the suffering of the Afghan people. No one apart from the afflicted people of Afghanistan should gain advantage from the Soviet withdrawal. Consequently, the conditions for the genuine independence and non-alignment of the new Afghanistan must be established now.
We also call for the withdrawal of foreign troops from Kampuchea so that this country may exercise its right to self-determination. The new, fundamental developments between West and East with their far-reading consequences for world peace have only become possible through both sides opting for co-operation. The clearest manifestation of that willingness are the negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union aimed at the global elimination of their intermediate-range nuclear missiles. For the first time, agreements are being made between West and East which not only limit but actually remove arms. This marks a turning-point in history.
We Germans greatly encouraged this development and we welcome the result - this great agreement - with relief. It enhances security and stability in Europe. My Government has viewed its role in this process not merely as that of an interested spectator. We have played an active part in achieving this success as a country aware of its responsibility for peace. Through our advocacy of the "double-zero solution" we have paved the way for the world-wide elimination of intermediate-range missiles.
I endorse the statement Chancellor Kohl made on this subject on 26 August 1987 that, by the time the American and Soviet intermediate-range nuclear forces have been removed as agreed, the German Pershing la systems will also have been phased out.
This agreement is still a long way from completely solving the problem of nuclear disarmament, but it represents the first, and thus the crucial, step towards the great objective to which the nuclear Powers committed themselves before the world in the nuclear-test-ban Treaty.
A process has been set in motion which must be made irreversible. Further steps must, and will, follow. We deem it essential that the United States and the Soviet Union should now concentrate on a drastic reduction of all strategic offensive weapons and in so doing also consider the further application of the Treaty on anti-ballistic missiles (ABM).
In the Western Alliance we will move ahead with the preparations for negotiations on nuclear missiles with a range of less than 500 kilometres. We will vigorously pursue the negotiations on conventional stability in Europe. The statements issued by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the Warsaw Pact afford a good basis for such negotiations. A convention globally banning chemical weapons is overdue. That convention must now be concluded  We cannot permit an ever larger number of countries to manufacture or produce these ghastly weapons of destruction. The best protection against their proliferation is their global elimination and their global prohibition. 
In our efforts to achieve that aim, we are not facing an insurmountable wall. New thinking that stems from the knowledge that we can only survive with one another, not against one another, governs oar actions more and more· Ho nation can have a greater interest in the success of all these negotiations than that of the Germans, for most weapon systems are concentrated in their country - on both sides of the dividing line - so they would be the first to be threatened with extinction·
The agreement on intermediate-range nuclear force© will provide the spark the effects of which will be carried well beyond the confines of arms control. Both sides will draw from that agreement the energy and the confidence to extend their co-operation to all fields where such co-operation is currently possible. That will be a major step towards the political objective of Atlantic defensive community, which is to establish solid structures for peace in Europe through co-operation between West and East in all areas and on the basis of a reliable defence capability.
The fact that we can cherish this hope today in the result of the discernment and the constructive approach of both sides that had already become clear at the summit meeting of the United States and the Soviet Union in Reykjavik. There, the two super-Powers showed that they are conscious of their responsibility for mankind's survival· in this they deserve the support of all peace-loving people. We must not stray from this path. ·The signposts to a better future are not the prejudices and enemy-images of yesterday but the will of nations, the will of every individual, to live in peace and dignity. Only in that manner shall we fulfil our responsibility for the future of mankind.
The era that was dominated by hegemonic aspirations, the era in which the world risked being pulled into the vortex of a never-ending arms race, is drawing to a close. This process cannot be stopped} it is paving the way to a better world. In such a· world there can no longer be any room for the old enemy-images. If we dismantle our weapons we must also dismantle those enemy-images. On a global scale and in Europe we must create reliable systems for maintaining security on a co-operative basis, as well as mechanisms for the early detection and management of crises. The Federal Republic of Germany will assist in this task in the North Atlantic alliance and in the European Community. We shall do everything in our power to promote the process of European union and to strengthen our alliance, the aim of which is to prevent war.
Our desire to achieve the union of the twelve European democracies, our desire for co-operation with our Eastern neighbours, is a manifestation of the policy of the Federal Republic of Germany for peace in Europe. We are aware of our responsibility  we shall use all our energy and every opportunity in working for a better Europe, a Europe based on peace.
The position of the twelve members of the European Community of international issues and on the Community's internal development was presented by the Danish Foreign Minister two days ago. The Single European Act, which entered into force on 1 July this year, is significant for the international community. The Twelve wish, as is stated in the preamble to the Act, to make together "their own contribution to the preservation of international peace and security in accordance with the undertaking entered into by them within the framework of the United Nations Charter".
To that end we intend to establish a common Community foreign policy. 
The completion of the European internal market, scheduled for 1992, will greatly increase the Community's strength. Significant steps towards a common monetary policy and towards the aim of converging the economic and financial policies of its members will have to follow, as will steps towards the creation of a technological community. That is the road to European union. To our neighbours in the East we extend the hand of wide-ranging co-operation - envisaged in the Final Act of the Helsinki Conference on Security
and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) as the course towards the establishment of a peaceful order in Europe. At the CSCE follow-up conference in Vienna we are not merely seeking progress in matters of security: we are also seeking progress on the realization of human rights, on humanitarian issues, on economic exchanges, on the exchange of science and technology, on the exchange of information and culture. West and East can give each other a great deal through co-operation through confrontation they can deprive themselves of progress entirely - they can lose everything. Through co-operation we seek to build confidence, to serve mutual interests and, in a positive sense, to create dependencies that will make peace and co-operation irreversible.
We do not want to bleed one another to death through the arms race, nor do we want to cripple anyone economically. The political and military division of Europe is bad enough. We must not divide Europe economically and technologically when there are already gulfs to be filled and walls to be climbed. Our aim is to help achieve genuine progress in all fields. If the Soviet Union opens up to the world it will find a reliable and constructive partner in the Federal Republic of Germany. The Treaty of Moscow affords a basis for such co-operation as well as the necessary perspective. We shall have recourse to that Treaty, aware of the central importance of German-Soviet relations, which have an impact on the situation in the whole of Europe beyond their bilateral relationship.
If, after decades of confrontation, it were possible today to reach a turning point in the East-West relationship it would be a mistake of historic dimensions if we were to let the opportunity pass. All must shoulder their responsibility. Twelve years after the signing of the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) we can declare: a process has been set in motion leading to a peaceful order in Europe. My country has made substantial contributions towards this goal through its accession to the European Community and the Western defensive alliance and through the unprecedented Franco-German partnership.
We have cleared the way for a new West-East relationship by means of the Treaty of Moscow; the Treaty of Warsaw, which established the basis for a new beginning with the Polish People's Republic in the awareness of the special quality of the German-Polish relationship following the vicissitudes of their history; and also through the treaty with Czechoslovakia and the Basic Treaty on Relations with the German Democratic Republic.
Not only is there no feasible alternative, there is no responsible alternative to this process. We always perceive Europe as a whole; we want to improve the situation in the whole of Europe. We realize that the wheel of history can never be turned back, only forward.
Part of this perspective for Europe's future is the relationship between the Federal Republic of Germany and the other German State, the German Democratic Republic. Both States are firmly integrated in their respective alliances. But precisely this fact makes it possible for them to campaign in their alliances for co-operation throughout Europe. The differences in their two value-systems are fundamental. Nevertheless the two German States are agreed: never again must war originate on German soil, only peace.
There is still disagreement between the two German states as to the future of the German nation. The Federal Republic of Germany remains committed to its aim of working for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will regain its unity through free self-determination.
The visit to the Federal Republic of Germany by Mr. Erich Honaker, Chairman of the Council of State of the German Democratic Republic, demonstrated the intention of both German States to render a major contribution to stability in Europe by improving the quality of their relations and through their efforts to promote disarmament. Through these efforts we are also serving the welfare and interests of the people.
Mr. Honaker's visit revealed not only fundamental differences but also a willingness to co-operate with one another. We Germans, too, must live with the disparities that characterize the world, and above all Europe, even though they affect us more than other nations. But these disparities must not prevent us Members of this great world Organization from meeting our responsibility for peace and the survival of mankind.
Common international responsibility also means a common responsibility to combat terrorism, to combat racism and to prevent violations of human rights. Today, now, this must be the great common denominator for all nations who have committed themselves to the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. The community of nations' are becoming increasingly aware that terrorism is a threat not only to political enemies but also to one's own country. We can confront terrorism only if its perpetrators are unable to find refuge anywhere in the world. But we shall be able to rid ourselves of terrorism for good only if we also remove its causes, and there are many.
The Middle East crisis, for instance, may keep on spawning violence. Consequently, peace must at long last be established in Lebanon on the basis of freedom, sovereignty and territorial integrity. The Middle East conflict, as we have seen in the course of past years, cannot be settled by force, only by negotiation. We therefore advocate an international conference on the Middle East, which must proceed from Israel's right to exist within recognized and secure borders and from the right of self-determination of the Palestinian people.
If terrorism is inimical to any order, racism is the most terrible deprecation of human dignity. A regime that rules in the name of race must be opposed by the conscience of the world in the name of humanity. The Western democracies are a community oriented to common values and based on equal dignity for all. In view of this, we condemn the violation and mockery of human rights in the Republic of South Africa. We call upon the South African Government to create at last the conditions that will enable black and white to meet at the conference table and commence the dialogue that is so urgently needed. Apartheid must be totally eradicated; it is not capable of reform.
The state of emergency must be lifted, the political prisoners, first among them Nelson Mandela, must be released unconditionally and the banned organizations of the black majority must be allowed to operate again. If this is done, there is still hope that the violence that is bound to keep on producing yet more violence can be stopped. With regard to Namibia, we demand the application, at long last, of resolution 435 (1978), without any ifs and buts.
We condemn violations of human rights wherever they occur. A particularly horrific aberration of State authority is torture. It is not an instrument with which to fight one's political opponents. Least of all it is a means of administering justice. It is the most abhorrent and barbaric manifestation of injustice. By means of the United Nations Convention against torture, the world has taken a big step forward in the development of its political culture. 

By virtue of its Charter, by virtue of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the human rights covenants and its human rights institutions, the United Nations is a citadel and a bulwark of human rights. The exercise of civil, economic and social human rights is essential in the construction of a better world. A high commissioner for human rights and a court of human rights would be able to protect and promote these rights.
Only on human tights and the right of self-determination of nations can the universal house of peace be built. They are its foundations. That is why my country reaffirms to everyone before this world Assembly its pledge to respect every nation's right, to self-determination and to defend human rights all over the globe.
And with the same earnestness we pledge ourselves, by dint of our policy of peace at home and abroad aimed at developing peaceful relations with our neighbours and all nations on earth and at making peace with nature, to safeguard life on this planet and the survival of mankind for this and all future generations.
Only when there is life is there freedom and human dignity. To preserve it must be the aim of our Organization. 
﻿It is a great honour for me to address the General Assembly. Mr. President, I am pleased to extend to you France's congratulations on your election, which is testimony to the confidence all delegations have in you. We are convinced that under your presidency the work of the Assembly will be pursued with authority and efficiency. I wish you every success and assure you of our full co-operation.
In the time that has elapsed since the last session of the General Assembly the international situation has been marked by three principal characteristics.
First, there has been a disturbing lack of progress in resolving regional conflicts. Not only has none been resolved - either the situation is still blocked, as in southern Africa and Cambodia, or progress that had been announced, as in Afghanistan, or broached in outline, as in the Middle East with the proposal for a conference, has failed to be translated into action - but, even worse, in some instances the situation has deteriorated. That is the case with the conflict between Iraq and Iran, which, beyond the serious confrontations it periodically produces, threatens to spread to the whole of a strategic region whose equilibrium is Important for the entire world. 
The second characteristic is the persistence of major economic and financial problems. In this respect too the period has not produced much to give rise to much satisfaction. The issue of indebtedness, despite some adjustments that have been introduced, continues to compromise the situation in a good many third-world States. Instability in the prices of many raw materials has continued to disrupt both International trade and, even more serious, the courageous efforts of countries whose fate is closely linked to the prices of those products. In these conditions, the development of those States continues to be handicapped, with demographic pressures still a factor even as the legitimate aspirations of the populations concerned grow. 
The third characteristic that currently has centre place in international attention is the opening in American-Soviet relations. Along with the concerns and disappointments that I have just mentioned, 1987 will probably be marked as the year in which East-West relations were given renewed impetus. Each of us is naturally aware of the prospects that have been opened up, both in respect of an agreement on dismantling American and Soviet medium-range missiles, which new appears close, and in developing contacts among the peoples of Europe's divided continent, as witnessed - and you, Mr. President, are more aware of this than anyone - by Mr. Honecker's visit to the Federal Republic of Germany. In this same context is the work of the third meeting of the follow-up Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, which will be able, we hope, to complete its work in Vienna between now and December with balanced results, including gains in the area of human rights and contacts among individuals.
However positive, the improvement in relations between Washington and Moscow remains for the time being confined within precise limits: United States-Soviet talks on disarmament have yet to focus on reducing the huge strategic arsenals of the Soviet union and the United States, They have centred above all on Europe.
Given the world situation as it now stands, three important questions have to be asked; How far can United States-Soviet talks go towards improving the climate between East and West? Can the change in East-West relations affect regional crises? Will we be more capable of grappling with ways to resolve the economic and financial problems confronting the world?
France believes that the international community must meet these three challenges: by encouraging progress but also by reaffirming the conditions for genuine detente between East and West) by bringing about conditions conducive to the search for solutions to regional crises by the countries concerned by bringing 
imagination and courage into play to devise new ways to help resolve the problems of indebtedness and development.
A world of greater stability and interdependence must also be a safer world. France is well aware of the stakes, such as the ramifications of the present normalization of relations between the Soviet Union and the United States. We hope that this will not result in decreased security for other countries, especially in Europe. France has followed very attentively the preparation of the treaty to eliminate American and Soviet intermediate-range missiles. It has welcomed, as was fitting, the decisions by the Soviet Union to remove the obstacles that country had placed on the road to an agreement, whether concerning the link between the various aspects of the bilateral negotiations in Geneva, the claim to take into account British and French independent nuclear forces, or the request to maintain a number of SS-20s facing Asia.
Nevertheless, we must continue to keep our vision clear. More disarmament does not automatically mean greater security. We cannot, in particular, disregard the threats to Europe that come from the substantial imbalance in conventional and chemical weapons.
This is why as early as 1978 France took the initiative for a conference on disarmament in Europe and welcomes the gains made a year ago in Stockholm. Together with its partners in the Atlantic Alliance and in the context of the multilateral process of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, it will spare no effort to enable the second phase of the Conference, which, we hope, will begin in 198-8, to advance towards greater stability in conventional arms on our continent. 
For this reason also, we attach the utmost importance to the Geneva negotiations to ban completely the manufacture of chemical weapons in the world and to destroy existing stockpiles. But until there is progress towards the destruction of those stockpiles known to be the largest, it is advisable to maintain the option of a minimum stock for security. Western Europe cannot be disarmed in the area of chemical weapons 10 years before the Soviet Union itself completes the verified destruction of its stockpiles.
With the proposed elimination of medium-range nuclear forces we should not lose sight of the fact that Europe will continue to be subject, without limitation at this stage, to the threat of a far more considerable number of intercontinental systems, which are also capable of reaching targets on our side of the Atlantic. France, therefore, hopes that the United States and the Soviet Union, without neglecting those aspects related to defensive systems and the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, will at long last return to the teal priority of arms control, namely, the strategic systems of the two countries.
In this spirit, France welcomed the goal of a 50 per cent reduction in Soviet and American strategic arsenals that was set at Reykjavik last year. Admittedly, halving these arsenals merely brings the Americans and Soviets back to the level prevailing at the end of the preceding decade when SALT II was signed. Nevertheless, this would clearly be a step in the right direction and would establish, as a real priority, not the illusory quest for denuclearization but the gradual and verified reduction of the excessively huge central arsenals. There is virtually no other serious alternative and it seems scarcely reasonable to envision the complete elimination of nuclear weapons within the foreseeable future.
France will not decline to participate, when the occasion arises, in multilateral negotiations on nuclear disarmament. Such talks, however, would be justified only as a later phase of a process of nuclear-arms reduction in which the two super-Powers would already have made very substantial progress. The President of the French Republic, speaking here in September 1983, enumerated the conditions for his country's participation. I would like to repeat those conditions: Soviet and American arsenals must be reduced to a level at which the disparity between their arsenals and those of other nuclear Powers changes in nature  the defensive systems that could destabilize the current bases of deterrence must not be strengthened  the imbalance in conventional weapons must be eliminated  and the elimination of the chemical threat must become a fact.
Until such time as these conditions are met, France will not agree to its forces being taken into account, directly or indirectly, in negotiations to which it is not a party. As the Prime Minister, Mr. Jacques Chirac, indicated from this rostrum last years
"As long as French security rests on nuclear deterrence, the first requirement for my country is to maintain the credibility of its strategic forces at the necessary level. For that reason, France has naturally declined to go along with any form of planned obsolescence of its forces while other Powers retain a huge excess nuclear capacity. It will accept neither a quantitative nor a qualitative freeze on its arsenals nor will it halt its nuclear tests. That arsenal does not exceed the level considered" indispensable for our security and our independence. The nuclear tests are being carried out in unquestionably safe conditions ..." (A/41/PV. 8, p. 71). These have been acknowledged as such by independent experts from Pacific countries whose concerns for the environment we understand and share.
In the area of information, France is prepared to take a new step. After welcoming several Heads of State or Government from the region to the test site on Mururoa this year, it now invites the leaders of the Andean countries bordering the Pacific. Other States regularly carry out far more tests than France does, and have been doing so for a longer period. None, we believe, has so far offered such guarantees. The Improved climate of East-West relations has had no effect to date on the principal regional conflicts. Recognizing this fact, the international community must increase its attention and its effort, in particular to bring about conditions favourable to the search for appropriate solutions by the parties directly concerned. Yet we must make a distinction among the different types of crises confronting the world.
In some cases, the situation continues to be stalemated. This Is true of southern Africa. With Its sense of community with all of Africa, and especially with countries close to It because of history, language and exceptional human ties, France believes that new impetus can and should be given to the reduction of tensions, the resumption of dialogue and the restoration of peace in southern Africa. Prance has already taken action along these lines, for example regarding the unprecedented exchange of prisoners that recently took place following a French initiative and after the many contacts France had over a period of months with various States in the region. We hope that this exchange will be followed without delay by new developments as envisioned. The official visit to Paris at this time by the President of Angola, and the visit next week by the President of Mozambique, both of whom played a key role in effecting the exchange, will make it possible to assess the prospects that have been opened up.
But there can be no return to peace In the region in the absence of dialogue in South Africa itself among all the components of South African society that have together built that country. The release of political prisoners and the renunciation of violence and of preconditions are the prerequisites for this necessary dialogue. Its purpose can be none other than the dismantling of apartheid. The French Government whole-heartedly condemns the system of apartheid, which is intolerable. It has consistently supported, particularly within the European Community, he Implementation of restrictive measures designed to make the South African Government begin such a dialogue.
Somewhat different Is the conflict in Western Sahara; although no visible progress has been observed. It does perhaps offer more promising prospects for a solution, given the mediation attempts under way. The combined efforts of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the President of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and friendly Arab leaders should at last lead to a settlement within the framework of the right to self-determination of the populations concerned. No country would welcome more whole-heartedly than France a solution that brings closer together the countries of North Africa with which it maintains truly privileged relations.
At the other end of the Sahara, the conflict between Chad and Libya has gone through a dramatic change over the past few months, but the final outcome has yet to be determined. Combining determination, courage and audacity, the Chadian army succeeded, under the authority of President Hissein Habre, in liberating from foreign occupation almost all the provinces in the north. There remains the dispute over the Aouzou Strip. Clearly, this dispute, with which the OAU and its ad hoc committee have been seized, will find a lasting solution in the present context only when it has been settled according to law. France, which brought Chad to independence and thus bequeathed to it its borders, considers this territory to belong to Chad. It is ready once again to communicate the documents in its possession to bodies that so request. For the rest, true to its commitments,
Prance will keep the purely defensive and deterrent military arrangements it now has there for as long as it believes necessary.
In Cambodia, despite the efforts of the ASEAN countries, the situation remains deadlocked. Nothing, however, warrants the foreign occupation which, by its continuation, has increasingly assumed overtones of colonization. Viet Nam should  understand the deadlock in which it now finds itself. It must try to find, together with its neighbours and with help from all, particularly Prince Sihanouk, whom Prance is pleased to be welcoming again, the paths towards a political solution. For the people of Prance, who are linked to the Khmer people by an old and ever-present friendship, such a solution can only be the restoration of a Cambodia that is free from all foreign occupation and free to determine its destiny.
There are other situations in which stated intentions have unfortunately not been translated into concrete actions. It is therefore incumbent on the international community to redouble its efforts and its firmness.
Covering Afghanistan, certain Soviet statements led to the assumption that the new team of leaders in Moscow had perhaps understood that the invasion, followed by the occupation, of this independent non-aligned country, which was not at all hostile to the Soviet Union, was a grave mistake. It is a fact that eight years of fiercely waged war have not shaken the determined resistance of a courageous people. Their unyielding determination, the sweeping condemnation of the aggressor by the international community and the resolute support for the cause of Afghanistan, and also for Pakistan, which has generously welcomed on its soil 3 million refugees forced into exile, should convince the Soviet Union that it cannot rely on time to impose a solution by force. While the conditions for a settlement have already been largely defined, thanks to the efforts of the Secretary-General and his special envoy, Mr. Cordovez, the fact remains that the Geneva talks on a timetable for the withdrawal of Soviet troops have still not achieved their objective. If the Soviet leaders sincerely wish to embark upon the path to a negotiated solution, they should act accordingly and, in order to end promptly this conflict of another age, fully accept the right of the Afghan people freely to determine its future. That is what France and almost all the countries represented here expect of them. To a considerable extent the evolution of the international climate will depend on this.
In the Middle East, after years of deadlock, the Israeli-Arab conflict recently showed renewed and hopeful signs of progress towards a comprehensive settlement in the revised framework of an international conference which would bring together the parties to the conflict and the permanent members of the Security Council. Since the beginning. Prance has been favourable to such a project, in which it hopes to take an active part. To our mind, such a conference should serve for reflection and advice, without imposing itself on or taking the part of the parties themselves. It should serve to sanction and enrich the dialogue which, thanks to the bold initiatives of certain Arab and Israeli leaders, has begun to take hold. The movement towards peace, unfortunately, appears to be at a standstill at this time. It is essential for its momentum to be restored, naturally on the initiative of the parties directly concerned, but also with the encouragement of the international community as a whole, and particularly States that have special responsibilities and therefore special duties. After 40 years of confrontation, it is more than time to ensure Israel's right to live in peace within secure and recognized borders, and that of the Palestinian people to choose its future by means of self-determination, with all that that implies.
At the centre of this conflict, against its wishes, Lebanon, a torn and ravaged country, is paying an ever heavier tribute to the crises of the region on which it has no influence. To the tragedy of war are now added the effects of an unprecedented economic crisis. Prance has decided to continue its presence in Lebanon in spite of the risks and dangers. It continues to be a part of the United Nations Force which, despite its shortcomings, embodies the commitment of the international community to Lebanon's sovereignty and territorial integrity. The entire world should now mobilize and make an exceptional effort on behalf of all the populations of Lebanon without exception. France, for its part, has Increased its aid again this year. It calls on everyone to contribute to the special fund set up by the recent summit of French-speaking countries. Lebanon, however, will find peace only in the reconciliation of the Lebanese themselves and the establishment of normal relations with the countries of the region. This is the position which we have consistently conveyed to each of Lebanon's leaders and each of the neighbouring States.
Lastly, one crisis, far from abating, seems likely to spread to an entire region. The devastating war between Iraq and Iran has been going on for seven years. In terms of the number of victims and ferocity of the fighting, this war must already be counted among the deadliest of this century. Forms of warfare have been resorted to that are particularly to be condemned, such as the use of chemical weapons and sending to the front children who are barely in their adolescence, today the fighting directly threatens other countries and seriously impinges on the principles of the freedom and safety of navigation endorsed by the international community. 
France, along with the majority of States represented here, calls for an end to a conflict that can be dealt with only in its entirety. Over and above the cruel suffering of the two peoples, France is particularly sensitive to the concerns of riparian States of the Gulf and intends to demonstrate in concrete terms its commitment to freedom of navigation. Some of our ships are present in the region where they are ensuring the protection of our interests. But we are deliberately maintaining this action within specific limits and have declined to participate in any multinational actions that could give the situation the overtones of an East-West confrontation.
With a tenacity to which I should like to pay a tribute, the Secretary-General nine months ago called on the Security Council to try new efforts. After close consultations among the five permanent members of the Council and a constructive debate among all the members, these efforts led, on 20 July, at a meeting at which I had the honour of presiding, to the unanimous adoption of resolution 598 (1987). This balanced resolution should be implemented in its entirety, starting with the decision on the cease-fire it imposes.
Two months have since elapsed. The Secretary-General has been to Tehran and Baghdad. It appears that one of the two belligerents has confirmed its acceptance of the resolution in its entirety while the other seeks to impose its own reading of the text and its own conditions. The authority of the Security Council, which has acted under Chapter VII of the Charter, and the authority of our Organization as a whole are at stake. Great firmness is called for because, as our Prime Minister, Mr. Jacques Chirac, emphasized a year ago from this rostrum the stubborn pursuit of this absurd war, beyond the suffering it imposes on the two peoples, threatens to shatter the equilibrium of a region of strategic importance for the whole world. 
Other regional crises in addition to those I have just mentioned remain unresolved and continue to retain our full attention. In Cyprus, a de facto situation, which France does not recognize, persists despite the efforts of the Secretary-General, who is in the best position to help bring forth a solution. In the Korean peninsula, where a remarkable process of democratization is under way in the south, we hope that direct contacts between Seoul and Pyong Yang will be resumed at an early date and that the Korean people as a whole will at last he represented in our Organization.
I should like finally to mention the situation in Central America, of which Costa Rica's President has just underlined the hopeful aspects. After more than four years of persevering effort at the initiative of the Contadora Group, the Presidents of the five countries of the isthmus have reached an overall agreement. Admittedly, no one supposes that the road ahead is without obstacles.
Nevertheless, an important step forward was made with the summit in Guatemala. The Central American countries themselves have demonstrated their determination to break the cycle of confrontation and settle their disputes themselves. The hopes occasioned by that meeting should be sustained. The commitments made should, by involving all the interested parties, make it possible to extend democracy to the whole region and lay the foundations for a lasting peace.
It is obvious that the improvement in East-West relations does not, of itself, imply a solution to regional crises. Solutions can result only from the efforts of the countries directly concerned and action by the international community to bring about conditions conducive to the success of those efforts, Europeans, who in the past have been torn by fratricidal wars and are today resolutely committed to building a common future, know this well. France, for its part, is ready to contribute to any regional attempt to settle conflicts and to act in a way that may allow Europe to contribute.  The serious economic and financial problems besetting the international community reveal the extent to which all too often selfish, short-term responses still prevail over awareness of the necessary Interdependence and shared interests. In this respect the European experiment is showing the way.
The European Community is growing stronger. Its enlargement in January 1986 to include Spain and Portugal has enhanced the Mediterranean dimension of the Community. The Single European Act, in effect since July 1987, has opened up new areas for action, while setting for the Community a key objective; the completion in 1992 of a huge internal market. Since its establishment nine years ago the European monetary system has become a pole of stability in an international monetary system in crisis. Technological Europe, lastly, has distinguished itself by achievements that at times go beyond the Twelve, as in the case of Ariane and Eureka.
Encompassing 320 million Europeans and open to the world, the Community is determined to acquire both a political and a security dimension enabling Europe to regain its rightful place.
Like its partners, France is convinced that this movement towards Europe's unity would lose its significance and thereby its force, if it led Europe to turn inwards on itself. The Twelve have demonstrated their firmness in the face of rising protectionism and continue to favour the development of foreign trade. The world's leading exporter, the Community is also one of the most open markets. The majority of its imports are exempt from all customs duties or levies, the exemption being applicable to 90 per cent of the products from the developing countries. The Lomé Convention, which governs the privileged relations with African, Caribbean and Pacific countries, has established an exemplary form of North-South co-operation. The system of generalized preferences offers other countries important guarantees with respect to the flow of their products to the Community's markets. Finally, Europe has concluded association and co-operation agreements with regional organizations and numerous States, particularly Mediterranean States.
We are now prepared to go further, and accordingly the Twelve are entering on a new round of trade talks. These will include, as everyone knows, the sensitive area of agriculture. The Community, including France, are prepared to address seriously the imbalances of world agricultural markets, but we cannot be asked to call into question the principles and achievements of the common agricultural policy. The new round of trade negotiations that I have just mentioned offers an opportunity for considerable trade liberalization. World economic expansion is based on the further development of international trade, which should largely benefit the poorest countries, with each country or group of States doing its share.
There has been a greater awareness over the past year that the disorder in the international monetary system since the end of the 1960s has undoubtedly been one of the causes of the mediocre performance of the world economy. France has worked consistently for greater stability in exchange rates and the reduction of interest rates. In this respect 1987 has been characterized by changes in the right direction. The Louvre agreement, concluded in Paris last February and confirmed by the Venice summit, comprises, as we had hoped, specific objectives for the stabilization of exchange rates of the principal currencies and the convergence of economic policies. Such agreements have produced encouraging initial results, but clearly everyone realizes that much remains to be done to ensure a stable international monetary order.
We have long advocated concerted action in the area of commodities. Prices for these commodities continue to be unstable and low. Apart from sound market organization, diversifying the economies of the producer countries is a necessity. One of the headings of the Common Fund meets this objective. France hopes that this agreement will enter into force at an early date. 0f all the evils troubling the world economy, the most serious and the most fraught with danger is, of course, the issue of third world indebtedness. For some States the situation has become critical. Prance is aware of the difficulties they are encountering in this respect, especially in Africa; it is familiar with the adjustments and restructuring many of them have courageously undertaken, and the painful consequences that can result for the populations. These States should benefit most particularly from the international community's support, and the conclusions of the special session of the General Assembly devoted to the African continent should not be allowed to remain a dead letter.
France has made proposals regarding debt that would extend the grace period and time-frame for repayment in the case of the poorest countries. These recommendations have since begun to be implemented by the Paris Club. Financial flows to the developing nations should be substantially increased. All lenders should contribute, and the participation of banks is more necessary than ever, especially in Latin America. The multilateral institutions should also step up their efforts to help the third world. It is, therefore, indispensable for the resources of the World Bank to be enlarged and for the discussions on tripling the resources of the Structural Adjustment Facility to be completed before year's end so that concessional loans to the poorest countries can be speedily increased.
Increasing official development assistance remains an imperative need. In the case of Prance, it has been decided to raise aid for development to 0.54 per cent of the gross national product in 1988. We are continuing to move closer to the target of 0.7 per cent of the gross national product for development assistance. Our effort will be directed as a matter of priority to the poorest nations, whose situation should be examined anew by the international community. Accordingly we have offered to host the next conference of the least developed countries in Paris in 1990. Without consultation and dialogue control of the international economic situation will not be attained. For this reason we welcome the results of the recent United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), at which the European Community made a substantial contribution, as my colleague from Denmark, current President of the Twelve, has recalled. That Conference revealed the existence of a general resolve to address the third world's problems realistically, in a spirit of openness and generosity. 
Efforts to come up with solutions to the problem of underdevelopment and, by the same token, to improve the material situation of the majority of human beings, cannot be separated from the international community's struggle to ensure greater respect for human rights in the world.
Human rights transcend East and West, North and South. At issue is the dignity of each man. It is inadmissible to say that one can look at the human person differently depending on place or circumstances, or to think that liberty may have several faces or that certain fundamental rights should have priority over others. France will never be silent so long as human rights ate trampled underfoot, whether it be in South Africa or Cambodia, Afghanistan or Chile. It will always be on the side of those who want democracy to live despite threats, whether in the case, today, of the Philippines or Haiti.
Precisely because Prance wishes to be above reproach on this score, it recently organized a vote on self-determination in New Caledonia. The New Caledonian population made a clear and indisputable choice, in conditions that were calm and beyond dispute, in favour of the territory remaining within the French Republic. In the spirit of open-mindedness that has always been its hallmark, the French Government is proposing, after broad consultations with all Caledonians, a statute for broad autonomy that should be acceptable to all.
Among attacks on individual rights, one of the most odious is terrorism because it systematically targets innocent people and resorts to the most cowardly actions - from a bomb thrown to kill in a place of worship or in a department store, to the taking of hostages, accompanied by blackmail for their lives, thereby submitting the victims to interminable torture and their families to unbearable anguish. Experience has shown dramatically that no State, however powerful, no person, however well protected, is safe from this scourge. No struggle, however legitimate, can Justify resorting to such crimes which constitute, along with the intolerance and fanaticism that feed them, an ongoing threat to the entire international community.
The measures that must be taken at the national level to prevent, fight and punish terrorism cannot be totally effective unless they are backed by a more concrete co-operation among States. The efforts against this outrage should be accompanied by unequivocal condemnation, no encouragement or complicity, even passive, should be tolerated. France urges all countries of the world to pursue this fight unsparingly, unceasingly, with absolute resolve, until this leprosy of our age is completely tooted out.
In conclusion, whether we are talking about East-West relations, the settlement of crises or responses to the major issues of our time, much still remains to be done. Were the international community, out of weariness or discouragement in the face of constantly new obstacles, to give up in one or another area, all our efforts would be reduced to nothing.
These are the responsibilities of the United Nations. It is easy to highlight the shortcomings, the defects, the red tape of the United Nations. There is nothing surprising about this since these deficiencies are our own and pertain to each and every one of us.
First we must adapt our Organization to the changes taking place in the world and undertake the necessary reforms while preserving the indispensable balances. We should be distrustful of reforms that would undermine the foundations of the system put in place in San Francisco it has proved itself irreplaceable. Real reforms should have as their objective a better Implementation of the Chatter and a better functioning of the machinery. This is why we believe the prompt implementation of the conclusions of the Group of 18 is desirable, and we are hoping for a settlement of the financial problem weighing over the life of our Organization and its specialized agencies. This is also why we, together with all the French-speaking nations recently represented at the Quebec Summit, are asking for the strict application of the regulations regarding the use of languages, especially French.
With regard to what has been done, as well as what remains to be done, we know that the Organization has been and will be able to rely on the man who is at one and the same time its soul and its principal officer, the Secretary-General. I should like to express again to Mr. Perez de Cuellar the French Government's high regard and appreciation for the remarkable services he renders the international community with a skill, talent and courage that has earned him the esteem and the constant support of all of us.
This mission, more than any other, is performed in the service of peace. Over-used and often misused, the word "peace" must remain the expression of our greatest ambition and, at the same time, the expression of the greatest reason. Our highest priority, of course, is to put an end to conflicts: solutions imposed by force will never be as enduring as a settlement freely negotiated and consented to. Efforts to bring about peace must also include organizing an effective and controlled disarmament that ensures our security. Working for peace, lastly, means addressing the causes of conflicts and bringing about the conditions that lessen tension. Security, disarmament and development, as was shown by the recent United Nations Conference devoted to this relationship, remain Interdependent,
Hence the reasonable ambition which is ours: namely, a genuine peace that la not dissociated from the reduction of inequalities in the world, nor from aid to development and co-operation.
Here again, we find the central role o£ the United Nations, together with all the specialized agencies of the United Nations family, in ensuring that the Immense wealth engendered by modern technology should benefit not a few peoples but the greatest possible number. There, transcending quarrels often Inherited from centuries past, lies the true challenge of our age. 
﻿
Mr. President, let me first extend to you my congratulations on assuming the presidency of the General Assembly, and at the same time express my country's warm appreciation to the outgoing President, and representative of a fellow Commonwealth country, the Foreign Minister of Bangladesh.
The General Assembly meets this year at a moment of great hope for the world, yet also at a moment of grave and mounting danger: hope because, after years of effort, an historic arms agreement between the United States and the Soviet Union is within sight; and grave and mounting danger because the conflict between Iran and Iraq poses daily a more serious threat to wider peace and security.
In the Gulf two proud, independent countries, themselves both founding Members of the United Nations, have been mauling each other relentlessly for seven years. That is almost twice as long as the First World War. We have before our eyes the image of hundreds of thousands of corpses, young people blown up, gunned down or gassed to death, civilians on both sides mercilessly bombed. The combatants have moreover extended this senseless destruction and loss of life into the international waters of the Gulf. Only two days ago another British vessel, the Gentle Breeze was attacked with loss of innocent life. This was a disgraceful and unprovoked act of aggression against an unarmed vessel, the sixth attack on a British ship in the Gulf.
Ships have sailed this great seaway for centuries. It is an international thoroughfare; no State may dictate who uses it. As it has done throughout its long history, the United Kingdom will continue to champion freedom of navigation. Individual States that take action to uphold that freedom are entitled to support from the entire community of nations. Yet today, and for many months now, freedom of navigation in these waters is threatened - threatened by indiscriminate attacks on unarmed vessels, by harassment of innocent merchant shipping and, most reckless of all, by the laying of random mines. The world saw another example on Monday, as Iran sowed mines in the path of a convoy in international waters. The response of the United States to that insane act was fully justified, and it should be supported by all those who wish to bring this conflict to an end, for the stability of the entire region is menaced by this escalating threat to peace.
The challenge to this institution and all it stands for could not be more direct. The blunt truth is that the way in which the United Nations handles the conflict between Iran and Iraq must have a decisive effect upon its reputation in the eyes of all the peoples whom we represent.
If the United Nations is to rise to this challenge, to help end this grotesque slaughter, then we must strive for and maintain a degree of unity that has hardly ever been achieved before. Other international groupings can give a powerful lead, by condemning the conflict and mobilizing all their energies in the cause of Peace. That is why we value the mounting weight of support from the Organization of African Unity, the Arab League, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the Organization of the Islamic Conference. In the same sense, the twelve members of the European Community are giving their United backing.
All this shows how deeply the world cares about ending the Gulf conflict. But caring is not enough. The Security Council has a particular responsibility to act. That responsibility has been unanimously accepted by the Council, and that unanimity has been built on the collective determination of the five permanent members. Each permanent member has resisted the temptation to put its national interest before the cause of peace - and must continue to do so, for there is an overriding need for the five to continue working together, as the motor of action by the whole Security Council. 
No one has understood and emphasized that need more than the Secretary—General himself. So it was particularly fitting that he personally should have undertaken the difficult and delicate mission recently entrusted to him by the Security Council· For this, as for all his service in the cause of peace, he deserves our warm thanks and admiration.
As a result, we now know the views of the Iraqi and Iranian Governments on resolution 598 (1987). That resolution, legally binding, demanded that both Iran and Iraq should cease fire. It paid due attention to the legitimate concerns and grievances of both Iran and Iraq. And, rightly, it provided that in the absence of compliance the measures necessary for enforcement would be put in place, The Security Council's determination to ensure compliance must remain firm. What we now have to decide is whether the Security Council should move without further ado to an arms embargo.
After Iran's deeds and words this week, can anyone still believe that it intends to comply with the resolution? Monday's two unprovoked attacks, with missile and mine, show Iran's true intentions. So do the words of its President from this rostrum yesterday. He described the Security Council as "a paper factory for issuing worthless and ineffective orders". He invited the world to conclude that "the only option left is to use violence' (A/42/PV.6, p. 57).
The United Kingdom therefore thinks it essential now to start work on the further measures foreseen in resolution 598 (1987). The first step should be an arms embargo, to prevent the flow of arms to those wishing to ignore the United Nations and to prolong the conflict. For action is needed - action to show that the Security Council is neither worthless nor ineffective, that it will uphold its authority. We in Britain will not hesitate to take the steps at home which we judge necessary. I can announce today that we have decided to close down the operations of the Iranian military procurement offices in London. For us, the cynical attack on the "Gentle Breeze" was the last straw. The United Nations as a whole should learn the same lesson from what Iran has said and done this week.
The Gulf conflict is the most imminent danger. But it is not the only threat to world peace. The Arab-Israel dispute has already dragged on for decades. But the present deadlock is no solution, no panacea. Far from it: It is highly unstable. In the occupied territories, misery and repression persist. In Israel itself, the Palestinian population is rapidly expanding. Already two generations of Arabs and Israelis have lived out their lives under the shadow of war and insecurity. Yet the basis for the settlement that must one day be reached is plain to see: Israel's right to a secure existence; and the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination.
Virtually the whole world now accepts the idea of an international conference under United Nations auspices. The United Kingdom is convinced of the need for it. An international conference will provide a framework for negotiations. It will not be a trick or a trap. It will not impose solutions, nor have the right to veto agreements reached between the parties. It need not be feared by any man of goodwill. Nor can the international community ignore Lebanon, where the United Nations Interim Force needs our full support. The Lebanese must be left to tackle their problems free from outside interference. All foreign forces should withdraw, and Lebanon's international borders must be respected. 

There are far too many innocent victims of all these conflicts. They include those who have been taken hostage, some of whom, alas, are citizens of my own country. We have some experience of defending ourselves against terrorism. Our position is clear and quite unshakeable. We will do no deals with terrorists. That is the only policy that makes sense. Every sordid deal by a Government, every ransom paid, makes another terrorist act worthwhile and increases the threat to all out citizens.
I say to those who are holding Britons hostage; we shall never submit to your blackmail. You will gain nothing. You will only bring your cause into disrepute. Set the hostages free. I urge all those with Influence over those holding hostages to say the same. And I urge this whole Assembly, on behalf of the hostages of every nation, to send the same plain and urgent message.
Another problem cries out for a United response from the International community; southern Africa - never off the agenda of this Organization, and tightly so. For although South Africa may not be the only example of racial Intolerance in this world, it is unique in the Institutionalised domination of other races by the white population. Apartheid is morally repugnant, indefensible, inhuman. But it is indeed more than that; it is also suicidal for those who practise it. All the lessons of history tell us that. Apartheid breeds discontent, violence and revolution. We understand the seething discontent of the black population, who can fall to be moved by the thought that a whole generation  as come of age while Nelson Mandela has remained behind bars?
And yet a prosperous, stable and just South Africa cannot be built by violence that is the way to ruin, despair and death. Those who rule South Africa must change course before it is too late. There are signs that some of them realize that, but reforms so far have been too slow and too limited. The time bomb is in place and the clock is ticking; it must be defused before it is too late.
We all share one common aim: the elimination of apartheid as quickly as possible. What can the world do to encourage South Africa in the right direction? The answer cannot lie in further measures which would serve only to unite the whites against the world, to slow the process of change, to prolong apartheid, and to blight the lives of the very people we wish to help. Yet we must maintain the moral pressure on the rulers of South Africa. They must not be allowed to put their faith in the status quo. We must convince them that peace and security can be achieved only through genuine dialogue with the leaders of the other races, and by comprehensive reform. We are working to that end.
Of course, apartheid afflicts not only those who live in South Africa; it also destabilizes South Africa's neighbours. The United Kingdom is taking a lead in helping the front-line States: for some of them we are giving practical help in training and equipping their military forces to ensure the security of their transport links; for others we have given extensive aid to develop alternative transport systems and to pay for training and equipment. Our aid to the States of the Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference (SADCC) over the last five years totals more than $1 billion. Few if any of the States represented here today can match that record.
South Africa is by far the world's worst example of racial intolerance. But very few areas of the world are free from quarrels founded on differences of race, religion or language. Such quarrels need not be insoluble. The European Community is one of the most successful examples in history of making shared values and aspirations rise from the ashes of war and division. Yesterday's speech by the Foreign Minister of Denmark, which now holds the presidency, was eloquent testimony to our progress towards "ever closer union". In Sri Lanka there are hopeful signs that ethnic conflicts might be ended. The agreement between President Jayawardene and Mr. Gandhi is a bold step forward. The deplorable terrorist attack on the Sri Lanka President last month underlined the dangers besetting those who work for an agreement of this kind. They displayed great courage. Everyone must now work for its continuing success.
Likewise in Cyprus we support the Secretary-General's efforts to bring the two sides towards a settlement. The United Kingdom knows that difficult decisions are needed. We call on both sides to show the necessary courage.
And, in Korea, the United Kingdom notes with close interest the recent moves to restart dialogue between North and South. We support moves to reduce the tensions in that divided peninsula. We hope that the Korean people may soon be represented here. All these political problems demand the urgent attention of the United Nations. So do those in the economic field, which directly affect so many Member States.
One economic burden, one which has featured prominently in many speeches from this rostrum, is the cycle of debt. Here Britain has recently put forward an initiative to help the poorest countries of sub-Saharan Africa, which are striving to set their economies on a sustainable basis for development. This means converting aid loans into grants, rescheduling official loans with longer grace periods, and reducing interest rates on official loans. Already in this region we have written off aid debts to the tune of £244 million.
Yet despite all our efforts, glut and famine still disfigure the world. In the industrial countries we subsidize our farmers to produce food nobody wants and sell it below the cost of production. In developing countries, the subsidy, if there is one, goes to the consumer, and price control deprives the farmer of the incentive to produce more. So he leaves the land to find work in the city - and his Government has to buy from abroad the food he would have produced. The cost to the world and the waste are enormous.
The huge and urgent task of agricultural reform is to recreate market incentives and progressively to eliminate protectionist measures around the world. Food must be on the agenda whenever nations gather for discussion. It will be much on our minds at next month's important meeting of Commonwealth Heads of Government in Vancouver, to which Britain much looks forward.	.In Europe in the last 40 years we have shown that the divisions of history can be healed by wholly peaceful means, by political co-operation and by economic integration. Military force, as we Europeans know to our cost, seldom brings a lasting solution to anything) it can be only a last resort when everything else has failed.
That is just as true in Central America. Here, too, long-term security can only be assured by a peaceful settlement reached with the free consent of all its peoples, democratically expressed. That is why we welcomed the agreement signed by the five Central American Presidents in Guatemala in August. We wish it every success.
It is true too in the South Atlantic. We shall continue to look for ways of restoring more normal relations with Argentina while upholding the Falkland Islanders' rights to self-determination.
This universal truth applies to Asia as well, and nowhere more than in Afghanistan. During eight years of Soviet occupation, tens of thousands have been killed and 5 million refugees have been driven to leave their country. That is a bitter indictment of Soviet polices and a grave burden for Pakistan, which has shouldered it nobly. 
But the Soviet Union of today is not the Soviet Union which invaded Afghanistan. Since he took over the reins of power, Mr. Gorbachev has made a remarkable effort to reform, to restructure, to let in light and air from the outside. We have publicly applauded this, and we wish him well. We believe that a more prosperous and efficient Soviet Union will be easier for the world to live with and for its own citizens to live in.
I believe that Mr. Gorbachev knows that he needs a stable international environment to carry out his programme of reform. I detect a genuine wish to find a way to end the war in Afghanistan and to bring Soviet soldiers back from the rocky valleys where so many of them have fallen. Of course that is not an easy task. But the Soviet leaders must make the necessary leap of Imagination if glasnost and perestroika are to have the effect that they should on Soviet foreign, as well as domestic, policy.
The Soviet Union can reasonably seek to avoid instability or threats to its security on its borders. But it must accept that only when a government emerges in Afghanistan that truly commands the confidence and trust of the Afghan people, only then will Afghanistan be stable. The Soviet Union must grasp the nettle: it must withdraw its troops and let the Afghan people decide their own future.
So yet again we meet in the shadow of numerous conflicts. But the gloom is not unbroken. The arms control agreement announced last week by the United States and Soviet Foreign Ministers has lit a beacon of hope for all those who see in greater co-operation and mutual trust between the super-Powers the key to a less troubled world, for the hope must be that an intermediate-nuclear-force (INF) treaty, once concluded, will have benefits extending beyond the agreement itself. It has always been clear that arms control cannot on its own carry the weight of placing and keeping East-West relations on an even keel. Indeed, recent years have shown how difficult it is to make progress in arms negotiations if relations between East and West are generally sour.
But these things do cut both ways. An INF agreement which, for the first time ever, bites into the nuclear arsenals of each side, which, for the first time ever, provides for stringent verification - such an agreement should significantly increase the mutual confidence without which any significant progress in East-West relations is unattainable.
We have not suddenly arrived at some promised land, but an INF agreement will give a shot of adrenalin to the often lethargic and lumbering process of arms control. The next priorities are a 50 per cent cut in the strategic arsenals of the super-Powers, a world-wide ban on chemical weapons, the removal of imbalances in conventional weapons from the Atlantic to the Orals. They are complex and difficult and will test to the utmost the skill, patience and determination of both sides' negotiators.
But an INF agreement will begin to erode the thick ice-cap of mistrust that has accumulated over the years. Of course the melting process will itself release dangerous ice blocks and floes around which we shall all have to navigate with care.
The key is greater trust. If we can see the Soviet Union making a genuine effort to co-operate in solving the world's regional tensions; if we can see them putting the solution of such tensions before the pursuit of national interest; if we can see a more just, free and humane society developing in the Soviet Union, then I think we shall see greater trust between East and West.
I am not unhopeful. The co-operation between the Five on Security Council resolution 598 (1987) may be a sign of better things to come; and the· last year has seen real progress on human rights in the Soviet Union. But there is still a long way to go. For our part we have worked intensively to build up the East-West dialogue. The visit to Moscow by the British Prime Minister and myself in March was an occasion for unusually deep and valuable exchanges. They will continue.
At the beginning of this statement I spoke of a moment of hope. The INF agreement and the impending summit between President Reagan and Mr. Gorbachev are indeed reason for hope. I think it will be the prayer of every one of us here that' that still faint shaft of light will grow and will drive the shadows of fear and distrust ever backward until they ate finally eliminated from this world.
In opening the first General Assembly session in London, Clement Attlee, then British Prime Minister, described the simple truth behind the formation of the United Nations; "The realization by all nations that without co-operation for peace there can be no security for any nation".
That is still the most basic truth. That is why we are here.
﻿Mr. President, your election to the presidency of the United Nations General Assembly at its forty-second session attests to your personal eminence and distinction and our confidence in the guidance and leadership you will provide to our deliberations. We are particularly happy since you come from a country with which India has warm and fraternal relations. We congratulate you on your election and look forward to working together with you.
Allow me also to pay a tribute to our esteemed friend and neighbour from Bangladesh, Foreign Minister Humayun Rasheed Choudhury, for the effective manner in which he conducted the proceedings of our last session.
We greet also our distinguished Secretary-General, and wish him well in the discharge of his many exacting responsibilities.
The year 1987 has special significance for us in India. Four decades ago our people won freedom from colonial bondage through a unique non-violent struggle. Independent India took its rightful place in the comity of nations. We have sought to strengthen the foundations of new India by keeping what is best from our own tradition and by assimilating what is admirable from other civilizations. The fundamental concepts of tolerance, non-violence and equality have conditioned our Weltanschauung. Tolerance and non-violence are embedded in our policy of peaceful coexistence and the principles of Panchshila. Equality lies at the root of our belief in democracy and in the sovereign equality of all nations, a principle that is embodied in the Charter of the United Nations.
Even before our independence, the people of India reposed great faith in this Organization. We were present at its creation. The founder of modern India, our first Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, proclaimed that India's attitude towards the United Nations was one of wholehearted co-operation, and of unreserved adherence, both in letter and spirit, to its Charter, It was in this spirit that he promised that India would; "participate fully in its varied activities and endeavour to assume that role in its Councils to which her geographical position, population and contribution towards peaceful progress entitled her."
In our own way, we have endeavoured to fulfil this promise. Though the Organization has had many ups and downs in its short but chequered history, our commitment to it has never wavered. We ate happy that it has been resilient enough to withstand the attempts to retreat from multilateralism and the financial and budgetary pressures brought to bear upon the Organization.
My delegation welcomes the significant understanding between the United States and the USSR to eliminate in termediate-1ange nuclear forces. Even though these forces constitute only a very small fraction of the world's nuclear arsenals, we see the significance of the understanding in the prospects it has opened up for more wide-ranging agreements, which could eventually lead to meaningful nuclear disarmament.
This understanding vividly demonstrates that, given political will, disarmament measures can become a reality. It is imperative that this momentum towards peace and disarmament be sustained. While the primary responsibility for nuclear disarmament rests with the United States and the Soviet Union, a decision by other nuclear-weapon Powers to eliminate nuclear weapons would be an important contribution to the promotion of peace.
Not long ago, on 22 May 1987, Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi joined with leaders of Argentina, Greece, Mexico, Sweden and Tanzania in emphasizing that: "For too long, fear and mistrust have prevented progress in disarmament. Arms and fears feed on each other. Now is the time to break this vicious circle and lay the foundation for a more secure world". (A/42/319, Annex). It may perhaps be premature to believe that the "vicious circle" is broken·, but it has perhaps been dented and we hope that the momentum will not be lost.
A historic event in this continuing struggle to save humanity from a nuclear holocaust was the signing of the Delhi Declaration on principles for a nuclear-weapon-free and non-violent world, in New Delhi last November. Its importance lies in the fact that a major nuclear-weapon Power, the USSR, joined with a major non-aligned country, India, to announce 10 principles that could pave the way to a nuclear-weapon-free civilization. We are happy that a beginning has been made by the super-Powers towards translating at least some of the principles of the Delhi Declaration into concrete action.
The international arms race and its deleterious effect on the world economy was the focus of a conference earlier this month. The International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development threw into stark relief the deplorable dilemma of massive global expenditure on arms, on the one hand, and the non-availability of resources for meeting the basic needs of a large portion of the world's population, on the other. An overwhelming majority of nations took part in it. I had the privilege of presiding over that Conference, which reaffirmed, at the political level for the first time, the relationship between disarmament and development. It is important that follow-up steps be taken quickly so that the conclusions of that Conference may be translated into action. May we now hope that those who stayed away from those discussions will participate in this effort. 
I now turn my attention to southern Africa, where the struggle for freedom and equality continues to this day. The racist regime in Pretoria violates every norm of civilized conduct. Its policy of apartheid is an affront to the conscience of mankind. The Pretoria regime remains in illegal occupation of Namibia and continues to carry out acts of aggression against the front-line States. It is thus the root cause of tension, instability and conflict in the region, endangering international peace and security. It has rejected every initiative for a peaceful resolution of the problems of the region. 
In the face of the intransigence of the racist regime, the only peaceful course before the international community is to impose comprehensive mandatory sanctions against South Africa·, the alternative is violent upheaval. We reiterate our full support for the freedom struggle of the people of Namibia, under the leadership of the South West Africa People's Organization. The only basis for a peaceful settlement of the Namibian question lies in Security Council resolution 435 (1978), without bringing in any linkages.
The non-aligned countries, at their summit meeting in Harare last year, decided to set up the Africa Fund, with the object of assisting the front-line States and national liberation movements in southern Africa against the depredations of the racist regime. India is privileged to have been chosen to chair the fund, which has become operational with wide support from the international community. Those of us who believe in the moral need to work for the peaceful resolution of the problems of southern Africa have a duty to support and contribute to the fund.
On 29 July President Jayawardene of Sri Lanka and Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi signed a historic agreement which has brought peace and tranquillity to Sri Lanka after four years. We had throughout stressed the importance and the necessity of a political settlement to the ethnic conflict that had plagued Sri Lanka since 1983. I should like to pay tribute to the President of Sri Lanka for signing this agreement, which is a manifestation of the fact that non-aligned countries can resolve their problems without outside interference. Bearing in mind the recent history of the conflict, there are inevitably minor hitches and problems, but they are not insurmountable. Given the existing understanding and goodwill between the two countries they will be resolved sooner rather than later.
The situation in West Asia is gravely worrying. The core problem is the question of Palestine. The people of Palestine are still denied their inalienable human rights, including the right to establish an independent state in their homeland. We support the struggle of the Palestinian people, led by the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO). We urge that an international peace conference on the Middle East be convened at an early date, under the auspices of the United Nations and with the participation of all the parties concerned, including the PLO.
The continuing hostilities between Iran and Iraq concern us greatly. We have close historical ties with both countries. Our heartfelt desire is to see those two nations live in peace. The conflict between two important members of the Non-Aligned Movement, taking place as it does in a region which is in our immediate neighbourhood, has consistently engaged our attention. The United Nations has been deeply involved in seeking ways and means to end the war. The Security Council adopted unanimously resolution 598 (1987) and the Secretary-General has been engaged in important consultations relating to its implementation. We commend and support these continuing efforts in the hope that they will bring about a	'
negotiated, mutually acceptable settlement of this tragic conflict.
India supports the efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special Representative to secure an early and peaceful solution to the situation in Afghanistan. The military presence of great Powers in the Indian Ocean is ominous. Such presence has unfortunately intensified in recent months. The heightened military, presence of outside Powers is in conflict with the 1971 Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace. It demonstrates vividly that the main objective behind the 1971 Declaration is as valid today as it was when the Declaration was made.   What is more, it shows the futility of efforts to dilute the thrust of the primacy in the objective of the Declaration, which is to tackle the external threat in the Indian Ocean. In that context we believe that for the proposed international conference on the Indian Ocean to achieve meaningful results it will be necessary to ensure that all big Powers having a military presence in the Indian Ocean participate.
I come new to another neighbouring region of ours with which we have very close historical and cultural links. As we have always advocated in conflict situations, the south-east Asian question can be resolved only through political dialogue. The legitimate interests and concerns of the countries in the region must be taken into account. We are encouraged by the fact that all countries in the region want a peaceful solution and are engaged in finding a formula for a regional dialogue. We have seen possibilities of common areas of understanding emerge following the recent meeting of the Foreign Ministers of Indonesia and Viet Nam I have myself recently visited all the countries belonging to the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the Indo-China States. We believe that such contacts must be strengthened and more widely established among the countries of the region.
The Korean peninsula continues to remain divided. We support the desire of its people for peaceful reunification. There have been encouraging developments in Central America. Following the invaluable work of the Contadora and Support Groups the Central American States have taken a regional initiative of great importance. We warmly welcome the Guatemala accord and the subsequent follow-up action. We trust that all parties, both within and outside the region, will co-operate fully to ensure the success of this regional initiative, which offers the prospect of peace, progress and stability in Central America.
We reaffirm once again our solidarity with the people of Cyprus, whose country remains divided with part of it under foreign occupation. We reaffirm our support for the unity, territorial integrity, sovereignty, independence and non-alignment of Cyprus, a country with which we have traditionally had close and friendly relations. We support the efforts of the Secretary-General to bring about a satisfactory resolution of this issue.
The events in Fiji have been deeply distressing. It is particularly tragic that at a time when the political parties representing the people of Fiji had come to an agreement which could have taken the country on the path of national reconciliation the armed forces have dealt a severe blow to that process, by seizing power for a second time. Attempts to deprive citizens of the country of their legitimate rights merely on the basis of their racial origin are against all tenets of democracy and human rights and are contrary to the United Nations Charter. What is happening in Fiji has distinct and unacceptable racial overtones. This development is reprehensible. We believe that the path to peace and prosperity in Fiji lies in the restoration of democracy and the rule of law.
This year India achieved the unique distinction of becoming the first registered pioneer investor under the United Nations regime of the oceans with the allotment of a deep sea-bed mine site in the Central Indian Ocean. An equivalent mine site has been reserved for international exploration and exploitation. We believe that this historic event has set in motion the international regime of deep sea-bed mining and has strengthened the rule of international law. 
I now turn to the world economy, which continues to be in a state of deep disarray. The rates of growth of even developed countries are historically very low. All future projections indicate even lower rates of growth for those countries. The per capita incomes of many developing countries have dropped to levels lower than they were a decade ago. Commodity prices in real terms have collapsed to their lowest levels in 50 years. Despite the launching of the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations, the proliferation of protectionist measures continues unabated. Interest rates continue to be high in real terms. International liquidity has suffered a sharp contraction in relation both to the volume of trade and to the needs of developing countries. The pattern of trade balance is extremely skewed, with unsustainable surpluses in some countries and deficits in others, and exchange rates continue to show wide fluctuations. It is now widely recognized that the world economy faces a structural crisis which cannot be overcome within the framework of the system instituted after the Second World War. There is therefore an urgent need for evolving co-operative strategies informed by the explicit recognition of increasing global interdependence. We require concerted and comprehensive policy measures in the interrelated areas of money, finance, debt, trade, resource flows and development. The current crisis of the world economic system can be overcome only if we work towards a new international economic order.
In the area of international trade, the highest priority must be given to the preservation and strengthening of an open multilateral trading system, and particularly to translating into practice the oft-repeated commitments on standstill and rollback. It is important to ensure that the Uruguay round of negotiations leads to the emergence of a truly international trade regime conducive to growth and development, with a clear recognition of the needs of developing countries. Multilaterlism and non-discrimination must form the basis for the sustained expansion of trade.
In the area of commodities, we reaffirmed at the seventh session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) the continued validity of the integrated Programme for Commodities. We trust that with the new ratifications the Common Fund will become operational before the end of 19B7. We also hope that the new round of consultations on commodities not covered by existing agreements and arrangements will be initiated soon.
The flows of financial resources from developed to developing countries should be increased substantially and the resources of international financial institutions should be augmented so as to enable them to play a leading role in development finance. We are disappointed that the eighth replenishment of the International Development Association is no larger in real terms than the sixth replenishment. We are however encouraged by the recent move towards reaching agreement on a general capital increase of the World Bank.
The external debt crisis is one of the most serious problems afflicting the developing countries today. The solution to the debt crisis has to be equitable, flexible and development-oriented, based on the concept of shared responsibility and political dialogue. For the success of such a strategy, the promotion of parallel objectives - such as increased access to markets for exports of developing countries, lower interest rates, strengthened and stabilized commodity prices, more stable exchange rates and more vigorous growth-oriented macro-economic policies in major developed countries - is indispensable.
In the light of the generally dismal state of the international economic dialogue, the recent seventh session of UNCTAD must be viewed as a modest success. In at least some areas progress was achieved. Viewed against the background in which the Conference was held, its major significance lies in the reaffirmation of the validity and mandate of UNCTAD.
The report of the World Commission on Environment and Development is a major contribution to the subject. We are glad to note that the Chairman of the Commission, Prime Minister Brundtland, in her address to UNCTAD VII, sought to allay apprehensions that environmental concerns could be used for imposing additional conditionality in the lending policies of international financial institutions. The Brundtland report clearly demonstrates the importance and urgency of tackling environmental issues on a global level. If we seriously want to attach high priority to this objective, the international community must find additional resources for sound environmental measures. Any diversion of existing resources from growth-focused to environment-focused disbursement will be counter-productive. Poverty pollutes. Any slowing down of development can only aggravate environmental problems in developing countries.
We meet here each year in the month of September to deliberate on what ails mankind. Does looking back on the past nine months fill us with hope or despair? This is a time for stocktaking, self-criticism and introspection. The international horizon presents a dark and sinister picture. Here and there an all too brief break in the clouds is visible; otherwise we seem to be looking at clouds that have no silver lining.
Some weeks ago the world population exceeded the 5 billion mark - a sobering event. The drain on sources of energy is unabated. The affluent are burning their candles at both ends and in the middle too, while the less fortunate are deprived of the basic necessities of life. The daily onslaught on the environment continues. The economic scene is not cheering. Terrorists and fanatics disturb the peace and repose of nations.
The United Nations does not offer salvation, but it has paved, it can pave, the way, create the atmosphere, provide the venue and propose the agenda for peace. As somebody has said, while it cannot, perhaps, negotiate for the world, the United Nations can help the world to negotiate.
﻿
Permit me, Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the General Assembly.
I wish to take this opportunity to express our support for the relentless efforts of the emissary of peace and goodwill, the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar.
In a world grown cynical of the super-Powers increased arms competition and fearful of the technologies it has unleashed, the people of Israel appreciate the readiness of the United States and the Soviet Union to begin a process of nuclear disarmament. This is not just a technical accord. It is a political dictum: no longer can we find military answers to political problems. What is necessary are political answers to the military menace. The world remains divided. While on the global level the parties seem to edge slowly towards accommodation, on the regional level passion still endure.
Today, threatening mines in international waterways are symbols not of the modernity of warfare but of its persistence. In our region, mines of extremism lurk just beneath the surface; they may explode when least expected.
Thus, we support the attempt to introduce a durable cease-fire in the Persian Gulf. In the vicinity of the world's most significant source of oil, two flames send dark clouds that obscure the horizon: the flame of fundamentalism launched to overpower moderation, and the flame of belligerency, residue of the Arab-Israeli dispute, seemingly calm, yet hardly extinguished. Each flame may reinforce the other.
Never before was the menace of extremism so perilous; never before were the moderate forces of the Middle East, on both aides, closer to an understanding than today.
Both Arabs and Israelis can be at peace with themselves only if they reach peace with each other.
Fundamentalism threatens moderation. Belligerency requires resources that can help contain extremism.
Arabs are troubled by the thrust of fundamentalism as they struggle with an impossibly expensive arms race and the need to address the just expectations of a rapidly growing population. Israelis are troubled by a demography wrought by war and the need to sustain a defence posture of "the few against the many". That is the heavy toll of the region's flames. They can be further fuelled; they can also be put out. Our actions today can either unleash forces of yet untold destruction, or they can launch us on a course of a new promise. Israel is celebrating its fortieth anniversary; four decades studded by hostility and war. From the memories of the Holocaust we have had to build a new life, as tragic biographies merged into a history of hope. We have returned to the birthplace of our faith, to the cradle of our biblical values. The language of the Prophets now echoes with the joy of children in the mountains and valleys where it began. Deserts were turned into gardens, human talent into industries. No emergency has delayed the growth of the democratic spirit; no war has prevented the construction of a just society and a modern economy.
The historical analogy is inspiring: For 40 years our people wandered in the desert before Moses brought them to the promised land. Today again, after 40 years in the wilderness of belligerency, we stand at the gates of a new promise to our children and to the children of our neighbours: to live in understanding despite the differences; to determine their own fate without interference by armed forces triggered by hate.
Can we offer them a Middle East where the intellectual challenge is man's conquest of nature, free of man's conquest of man? In brief, can we bring peace?
We remember the last words of Moses before he parted from his people at the gates of the promised land. We admitted his inability to provide them with adequate clothing and fresh bread, and he offered them the right of choice;
"I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing: therefore, choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live". (Deuteronomy, 30:19)
I speak with a sense of urgency, as the coming few months may be crucial.
During this brief period we may begin negotiations on one of the most important issues of our day, or miss the ark of hope. This brief period may produce the long-sought-after breakthrough or be absorbed by political paralysis. 
Confidence that was built carefully, almost tacitly, among several parties in the area may evaporate. A coalition for peace held together by fragile links may fall apart with uncertain likelihood of revival.
Present crises - in the Persian Gulf or Lebanon - may take unexpected turns; disillusionment with the absence of progress may produce new coalitions of hostility. Thus, in the absence of a vibrant peace process, the political skies may become capricious again, bringing drought to a thirsty region.
Against these prospects of uncertainty stands the unprecedented if vulnerable reality whereby relevant parties to the conflict see a way to begin negotiations. Indeed, two years ago both Arabs and Israelis announced from this podium support for the current initiative for peace. Moreover, since then further progress has been made.
We have rekindled our peace with Egypt and intensified the dialogue with its leaders and its people. We have found President Mubarak to be a builder of a better life for his people and of bridges for comprehensive peace in the region.
At the cedar groves of the mountains of Ifrane, we met courageous leadership; King Hassan of Morocco calling for peace, aloud, and clearly.
Across the Jordan River, rich in history and poor in water, we hear the echo of the voice of King Hussein, an experienced leader who wishes, like us, to bring our peoples out of the darkness of old hostility into the new greenhouses of peace, security and development.
In the West Bank and Gaza, we notice an unannounced change. Many Palestinians seem to have concluded that violence leads nowhere, that dialogue should not be postponed. There is a real readiness to negotiate in a joint Jordanian-Palestinian delegation to solve a problem that all of us need, and would like, to solve; the Palestinian problem. 
We have all matured politically with the repeated failure of attempts to produce peace plans for our region. We have realized that none can be acceptable as a pre-condition of negotiation, for it is the object of negotiation to produce solutions that are otherwise unattainable. Hence, over the past three years efforts have focused on the most promising plan; to begin negotiations without pre-planning their outcome.
Five months ago those efforts crystallized and found expression in a document worked out with the support of American emissaries, whose tireless and creative efforts should be credited with much of what has been accomplished. That document reflected a meeting of minds, Arab and Jewish, on the basis of eight principles.
First, the goal is peace and direct negotiations are the way to reach it. Second, an international conference is the door to direct negotiations. Once convened it should lead immediately to face-to-face bilateral negotiations. Third, the conference would not impose a settlement or veto agreements reached bilaterally. Fourth, those who would attend the conference must accept Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and renounce terrorism and violence. Fifth, negotiations would be aimed at solving the Palestinian problem in all its aspects. This would be done in negotiations between the Jordanian-Palestinian delegation and the Israeli delegation. Sixth, negotiations would be conducted independently in three bilateral-geographic committees: a Jordanian-Palestinian delegation and an Israeli delegation in one·, a Syrian and an Israeli delegation in another·, and a Lebanese and an Israeli delegation in the third. All delegations, as well as an Egyptian one, would be invited to participate in a fourth, multilateral, committee. Seventh, whereas the bilateral committees would be engaged in solving the conflicts of the past, the multilateral committee would deal with the charting of opportunities for the region's future. Eighth, the five permanent members of the Security Council would serve as the matchmakers, entrusted with bringing the parties together and legitimising the process whereby the parties would negotiate freely and directly, without uninvited - and occasionally divided - external involvement. This would not be a ceremonial role but an essential one in facilitating negotiations.
Israel is United in its search for peace, in our desire to negotiate directly with our neighbours. We differ over how best to move the process forward. The idea of an international conference raises opposition in some Israeli quarters, while others see it as a real opening. The Israeli Cabinet is divided on the issue and has yet to make a decision. Much depends on the nature of the conference. Unless the permanent members of the Security Council respect the current consensus, rather than insisting on their old preferences, the international conference may remain just a slogan.
We call upon the Soviet Union to credit us with the same good faith in our efforts towards peace as we credit it within its readiness to make glasnost a way of life. The Soviet Union is not our enemy. It must be aware of our historical and family attachment to our brethren living in its land. We appeal to the new leadership in Moscow to allow the Jewish people to express their identity freely and to reunite with their destiny in the land of their ancestors.
We call upon the People's Republic of China, a great country that we respect, not to be timid or one-sided in its support for negotiations.
To both Moscow and Beijing we say candidly that diplomatic relations are not the prize for peace but a channel for communication. Those wishing to participate in bringing peace cannot confine their relations to one side in the rivalry alone.
I should like to address myself to the Palestinian people. The time for recrimination and blame is past. They have brought only violence and terror. Now is the time to turn from violence to dialogue and to travel jointly towards a different destiny. There, your children, like ours, will live in self-respect, exercise self-expression and enjoy freedom and peace. We, who have experienced domination by others, do not wish to dominate others. We, who sought justice and security, do not wish to deny them to others.
For the past 40 years our ancient region has become - not by choice - a testing ground for the technology of war. Thousands of human lives, Arab and Jewish, have been tragically lost and billions of dollars have been spent to no avail.
We are unable to change the past but we can design a future in which our region will be able to develop into a testing ground for mobilizing science and technology, to offer a new source of growth; a future in which peace attracts economic investment; a future in which resources saved by restraining the arms race are invested in basic and higher education.
It is this vision of an alternative future that has given birth to the suggestion that in the wake of the opening of political negotiations an economic conference, without political strings attached, should take place. Such a conference, composed of those having a stake in regional stability and the capacity to contribute to it, could offer a most Imaginative plan for regional development.
To those who preach indecision, to those who take shelter in the illusion of a tranquil status quo, we say: this is our moment of choice; decisions of today will determine the fate of our people for decades to come. Our choice is between hatred and dialogue, suspicion and hope. Our choice is between investment in an arms race and investment in the well-being of our people, of our children. Our choice is between extremism and moderation, between fundamentalism and reason. It is our choice to prevent the next war.
It is up to us to make the months to come a time for reason.
I welcome the forthcoming visit of Secretary Shultz to our region as an opportunity to negotiate on the remaining obstacles. I am convinced that there are no conflicts for which there is no hope for solution, only people who have best hope in their search for solutions. I am convinced that the real conflict in the Middle East today is not between Jew and Moslem·, Arab and Israeli; Palestinian and Zionist. The conflict is between "past-oriented" leadership and "future-oriented" leadership; between those resigned to the fatalism of belligerency and those determined to alter this fate. For the future of our children, for a better tomorrow, we must all stand up to the preachers of war.
To the advocates of destruction, United we have to say there are no holy wars, only holy human lives.
On the very first day of our independence I learned from my mentor, David Ben-Gurion, who said this time and again, that peace is the highest degree of security·, and that the moral call is the highest degree of wisdom. I shall remember it forever.
﻿To the representatives of the countries of the world - greetings. Bring to us from your home countries the gifts we can all share, your words of wisdom and your love. I am very happy that we have all arrived here at this gathering of world leaders. 
On behalf of New Zealand I add my congratulations, sir, to those of the many speakers who have preceded me on your election as President of the forty-second regular session of the General Assembly.
Seven weeks ago the New Zealand Labour Government was re-elected with an increased majority. The Government was greatly encouraged by that demonstration of support from the people of our country for the policies we have pursued at home and overseas. My address today provides an opportunity for me to reaffirm the commitment of the New Zealand Government and people to the United Nations. That commitment comes from 42 years of membership of the Organization, from active participation in its work and from New Zealand's firm adherence to its ideals.
In this spirit of steadfast support for the United Nations I am happy to be able to announce here that the New Zealand Government has recently reviewed its capacity to contribute to United Nations peace-keeping operations. As a result, we have decided to notify the Secretary-General of our willingness to expand our practical contribution to that most important part of the United Nations work. We have participated in United Nations peace-keeping operations in the past. At present, we provide personnel for the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) and we contribute financially to the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) and the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). In future, we anticipate giving favourable consideration to requests from the Secretary-General for future involvement of New Zealand forces in peace-keeping for the United Nations. In our case, that would probably, for example, take the form of specialist teams from the New Zealand armed forces. Our broad purpose in making this commitment is to demonstrate active, practical support ; for the United Nations role of strengthening and monitoring international peace and security. 
Fundamentally the job of the United Nations is to preserve peace. That was why it was founded 42 years ago. That is why it remains so important in the world today· And in today's world that means that this Organization must address clearly and critically the overriding threat to international peace and security posed by the global arms race, and in particular the nuclear-arms race.
New Zealand's first priority in this Assembly is to work for the achievement of urgent reductions in nuclear weapons. The ultimate goal must be a world rid of nuclear weapons; a world in which no country can claim to have to rely on nuclear weapons as the guarantor of its security.
New Zealand has been greatly encouraged by recent developments in relations between the two super-Powers. Along with all other nations we welcomed their decision to agree in principle to scrap an entire class of nuclear weapons - the intermediate-range nuclear forces (INF) stationed in Europe and Asia. If that agreement in principle is followed, as it must be, by a treaty giving legal force to the political commitments made in Washington, it will mark a turning-point in the arms race. The INF agreement will be the first ever nuclear-arms reduction treaty. It will be testimony to the conviction that security can be maintained with fewer, not more, armaments, and that an increasing number of weapons is not necessary to preserve the peace.
An INF agreement will be a welcome first step. But it is only a first step. It must be followed by measures to bring about deep reductions in strategic nuclear weapons, and by measures to prevent an arms race in outer space. Moreover, if progress is to be made on those two fronts, it will be necessary to address as a matter of priority the perceived imbalance in conventional forces and thus to achieve a balance of such forces at significantly reduced levels.
President Reagan and General Secretary Gorbachev have themselves pointed the way. At Reykjavik last year they showed that there is no disagreement on the goals that must be achieved: a 50-per-cent reduction in strategic nuclear arsenals and, ultimately, the complete elimination o£ nuclear weapons. We urge them not to turn away from those objectives, not to turn away from the vision we saw from Reykjavik of a world without nuclear weapons. That vision will not be realized this year, perhaps not even this century. Yet it is an objective in the achievement of which every country in the Assembly has a direct and vital interest.
The immediate challenge is to find ways of working towards that goal while at the same time maintaining the security of every State and region.
New Zealand has long held that concluding a comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty is one important way to do that. In the resolutions that we, together with Australia and a number of other countries, have put before the Assembly, we have urged the international community to seize on the central means of putting a brake on the nuclear-arms race. While we have welcomed, therefore, the recent agreement between the United States and the Soviet Union to begin stage-by stage negotiations on nuclear testing, we would nevertheless still urge the participants to see that those negotiations are more closely linked to the objective the Assembly has reiterated for so many years - an end to all nuclear testing by all States in all environments for all time. 
We will again be putting a resolution on nuclear testing before the First Committee of the Assembly. We will be calling on the Conference on Disarmament to break the impasse which has strangled effective multilateral consideration of this issue for the past five years.
Another issue which the multilateral disarmament process has so far failed to address adequately is the prevention of an arms race in outer space. Three years ago my Prime Minister David Lange noted from this rostrum the disquieting indications that the military competition between the two super-Powers might be moving into the new environment of outer space. Developments since that time have done little to allay our concern. New Zealand is unequivocally opposed to the extension of the arms race into outer space. We will be following closely the deliberations at the Conference on Disarmament on this subject next year and at the third special session of this Assembly on disarmament, where it can be expected to receive considerable attention.
However, there have been some notable achievements this year. Progress has been made at the Geneva negotiations on a convention to eliminate chemical weapons - some of the most barbaric instruments of war, the use of which we unequivocally condemn. We look forward to the early completion of that most urgent work. In addition, the successful conclusion o£ the International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development, which I was privileged to address just over a month ago, should have restored some faith in multilateralism. The consensus achieved at that Conference is all the more significant when considered against the pessimism that marked its preparatory process. It should encourage us as we prepare for the third special session on disarmament next year. 
As a smaller nation with little power to influence the great nuclear-weapon States, We simply make a plea, an impassioned plea, to our brothers and sisters that have that power. We are now at a historic turning-point in the modern era. Having gone steadily forward in preparation for defence or conflict since men first formed groups and alliances, we have come to the brink. We, most of us, want to turn back. But there are still abroad fears that those whom we have not learned to knew or to trust will keep pressing ahead, that to proceed with disarming will undermine our own security. Learning to trust each other enough, learning to tone down the rhetoric we use against each other/ is now fundamental to the steps we need to take to enable this small, delicate planet and its people to survive.
That is why my country is so determined to see progress towards disarmament. The stakes are enormous. While the arms race continues in its nuclear and conventional dimensions, the security of each of us is at risk. New Zealanders do not expect others to act while we do nothing ourselves. Equally, we do not tell others how to resolve the particular security imperatives of their region as they seek to give substance to the principles of the Charter and to the international community's desire for a safer, less militarised world.
At home my Government has enacted legislation to ensure that New Zealand remains nuclear free. With our partners in the South Pacific Forum we have made a contribution to the security of our region through the adoption and entry into force of the South Pacific Nuclear-Free-Zone Treaty. That Treaty reinforces the non-proliferation undertakings already given by nearly all Forum countries through our adherence to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. It gives expression to the unanimous desire of all the independent and self-governing States of our region that our part of the world should not be used as a testing ground for nuclear weapons or a dumping ground for nuclear waste. For the zone established by the Treaty to be truly effective, however, we rely on the nuclear-weapon States to commit themselves unreservedly to respecting its provisions. It is our earnest hope that all five nuclear—weapon States will demonstrate respect for the wishes of South Pacific States by adhering to the protocols to the Treaty. It is our particular hope that France will demonstrate its understanding of the sensitivities of our region, the region in which it seeks to be a partner, by putting an end to its nuclear-testing programme in the South Pacific.
The control and reduction of armaments may help to maintain international security. It is the use of arms that destroys it. The Charter accordingly imposes an obligation on all States to settle their differences by negotiation and not to go to war. In the Security Council the Charter created the means by which the United Nations could uphold the rule of law and work for the peaceful settlement of disputes and the ending of conflict. The Council's record is far from unblemished we believe that its performance could be improved if its members could co-operate to settle disputes before the parties turn to conflict and its decisions might be less often disregarded or defied if the policies and actions of the great Powers showed greater respect for the laws they enjoin others to follow.
New Zealand welcomes the rare unanimous decision by the Security Council to seek an end to the war between Iran and Iraq. We regret only that the conflict was allowed to continue for seven years before the Council intervened to fulfil the role assigned to it by the Charter. The Secretary-General may be assured of our full support in his patient efforts, on behalf of the Council and with the trust of both parties, to settle the conflict in accordance with resolution 598 (1987). It is to his office, too, that we look for assistance in ending the aggression against the peoples of Afghanistan and Kampuchea, which has continued year after year regardless of the wishes and condemnation of the General Assembly. Political settlements in both countries and the withdrawal of foreign forces from them are long overdue. In Korea, the armed confrontation still continues after more than three decades. The absence of Korean representation is a major gap in the universality of the United Nations. New Zealand shares the widespread view that the two Koreas should be admitted as Members of the United Nations as soon as possible and should pursue their negotiations towards reconciliation and, if possible, national reunification.
Pew situations have preoccupied the United Nations longer than the South African Government's racist practices, its illegal occupation of Namibia and its policies of destabilization in the region. Like those of the Commonwealth Group which last year sought to initiate a dialogue between the Government and genuine representatives of the black community, mediation efforts by the United Nations have come to nothing. The South African Government equates justice with white supremacy and right with the forces at its disposal. Its armies have marched in territories of neighbouring States. Its police have detained both black leaders and children looking for something better than education for a life of subjection. For our part we have given effect to the measures against South Africa recommended by the Commonwealth to impress on the authorities in Pretoria the urgency of dismantling apartheid. But, sadly, I have to say that, in the absence of effective action by more countries or a firm response to the threat by the Security Council, I see little prospect that the South African Government will depart from its determination not to reject apartheid, but to tinker with it, at its own pace and in its own time.
Apartheid is a most brutal manifestation of racism and disregard of human rights. It is not, however, the only such manifestation. We all know too well the many abuses of human rights that occur in various countries represented in this body. The United Nations has done much valuable work in codifying universal standards of respect for human rights. We must ensure that this work continues and that the standards already set are fully respected.
Abuses of human rights are a direct attack on the integrity of the individual. Terrorism strikes at the integrity of the community. It kills the innocent and cruelly disrupts the normal operations of society. It is also a threat to world peace. An important task at this session will be to build on the achievement of resolution 40/61 and thereby encourage the adoption of practical measures to deal with international terrorism. Another item of importance to New Zealand is that on Antarctica, an issue that has been on the Assembly's agenda since 1983. New Zealand is firmly committed to maintaining the Antarctic Treaty which has preserved the peace and stability of the region to our south over the past 27 years. We hope that the Assembly's deliberations on Antarctica at this session will bring further understanding and support for the Treaty, which any Member of the Organization is free to join.
Events in Fiji show that the South Pacific is not immune from turmoil or change. For New Zealand - a close friend and neighbour - these events have been a matter of very great sadness. Since the time of the first coup New Zealand has steadfastly supported the efforts of Fiji's Governor-General to return the country to parliamentary rule·, we continue to regard him as the legitimate source of authority in Fiji. It follows that New Zealand does not recognize the legality of Colonel Rabuka's self-declared republic. Even at this late stage we hope that the people of Fiji will pull back and insist that their leaders find a just political solution which takes account of the interests of all. New Zealand trusts that the Governor-General will hold fast to the principles of legitimacy which have guided him thus far. We very much hope that no constitution will be adopted that would make Fiji Indians second class citizens in their own country. We want to see Fiji regain its rightful position in the Pacific region and on the wider world stage. Like all its neighbours New Zealand wants to see Fiji strengthened by a reassertion of its traditions of tolerance and good sense, playing an active part in the peaceful development of the South Pacific. Failure to achieve a solution would be a major set-back, not only for Fiji but for the entire South Pacific region.
Fiji's crisis is a recent development. We have, however, been concerned for some time at the dangers inherent in the situation in our closest neighbour New Caledonia if the natural progress of that Territory to self-determination is frustrated. At the initiative of the countries of the South Pacific Forum, the General Assembly last year resolved that New Caledonia was a Non-Self-Governing Territory within the meaning of the United Nations Charter. Forum countries sought to have New Caledonia re-inscribed on the list of Non-Self-Governing Territories because of their wish to see a more constructive approach by the administering Power. Present policies serve to exacerbate divisions within the Territory and appear likely to frustrate movement towards independence.
My Government believes that France has a continuing role to play in the South Pacific region. But that will require a far-sighted approach to resolving the problems of New Caledonia and a sensitivity to the views and feelings of the peoples of the region. We have watched with genuine regret what has appeared to us to be a policy that does not take sufficient account of long-term concerns and solutions, bringing with it the prospect of more confrontation and division within New Caledonia.
Since last year's vote, France has promoted a referendum in New Caledonia, an exercise which in our view has not helped the political process there and about which, as we know from the debate which surrounded the passage of the referendum legislation through the French Parliament earlier this year, there are considerable doubts in France itself. A referendum which did not offer the full range of choices prescribed by United Nations practices and guidelines is deficient. It cannot be regarded as a free choice when the administering Power is committed to promoting one particular choice and the forces of government are directed to that end. A process of preparation during which options were not fully presented and were not adequately explained is a further serious deficiency. A period of preparation in which there was only circumscribed dialogue within the Territory and throughout which there was a strong military presence, is no atmosphere for free and impartial consideration of New Caledonia's long-term future. In short, a political consultation that forced a substantial sector of the community to repudiate the very process, is inherently flawed. It is not a valid act of s el f -determination.
I appeal to the French Government to resume contact with all interested parties in New Caledonia, to accept the offer of dialogue which the South Pacific Forum has made and to involve the United Nations in the political process that is to take place in New Caledonia.
Elsewhere in the South Pacific the United Nations has played a valuable role in the decolonization process as Non-Self-Governing Territories have moved to self-government or to independence in accordance with United Nations principles and practices. For this reason my Government urges strong support for the moderate, principled and constructive resolution on New Caledonia which will be taken up in the Fourth Committee at this session of the Assembly.
For the most part the decolonization process in the Pacific has been peaceful and has laid the basis for good regional co-operation. That tradition has been continued this year with the proclamation of the Compacts of Free Association of ' the Marshall Islands and the Federated States of Micronesia. New Zealand welcomes them as new members of the South Pacific Forum. We look forward to increasing contacts with the Micronesian Governments in the years to come and to the fulfilment of the United Nations role in the Trust Territory of the Pacific.
Political security must be reinforced by economic security. Not only in the South Pacific, but throughout the world, the effect of low commodity prices is having a serious effect. Growth in developing countries is expected to average only 4 per cent in 1987, half the average of the 1960s and 1970s. Hardest hit is the agricultural sector which, in low-income developing countries, employs 70 to 80 per cent of the population.
Yet the undisciplined nature of world agricultural trade means that countries with a comparative advantage in agriculture have to compete for markets with subsidized exports that distort prices. The twin spectres of surpluses and starvation are an economic and moral outrage that cannot be allowed to continue  a contradiction which we must find ways to remove.
At its seventh session, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development noted that while many countries, developed and developing, are adjusting their economies, much remained to be done to reduce or eliminate "growth retarding distortions and rigidities". The positive forward-thinking spirit that marked that session should guide us in our efforts towards the elimination of trade-distorting measures. Crucial to these efforts are the negotiations currently under way in the Uruguay round. If we really believe in having a healthy international economy, contributing to world peace, we must ensure that these negotiations succeed.
As we work to improve the functioning of the system of international relations we must also work to improve the functioning of the institution that underpins so much of the system. Last year's financial crisis made clear that we, the membership, had failed to ensure that this Organization remained responsive to changing demands and circumstances. The financial crisis itself was precipitated by a failure on the part of some of the Members to fulfil their Charter commitments. It served to highlight, however, a more long-standing failure of the collective membership and of the institution to ensure the continuing revitalization of the Organization.	.
Every institution, no matter how noble its goals, needs to undertake from time to time a thorough-going reappraisal of its structures and procedures. In recognition of this need, for instance, my Government is in the process of carrying out a far-reaching reform of the functioning of government in New Zealand. The United Nations is no different. It needs to change with the times.
From the work of the past year a number of studies and reforms are under way. They must be pursued to their conclusion. The financial crisis may have abated to a degree: the need for change has not. One of the areas to which my Government will pay particular attention is the review of management of the United Nations development effort to be undertaken by the Economic and Social Council over the next year. The United Nations and its agencies have a unique role to play in development assistance, particularly in areas such as the establishment of development planning mechanisms and negotiations by Governments with trans national corporations. But such assistance must be appropriate and effective. The special needs of the isolated island developing nations of the South Pacific are often inadequately met by structures and rules which have been set up to cover large continental recipients in other regions. Any decisions taken on the spot in the South Pacific by a more coherent United Nations presence would reflect more truly the South Pacific realities than decisions taken in places such as Geneva, New York or Bangkok. 
I offer those remarks not as the representative of a country that is critical of or disenchanted with the United Nations. Quite the reverse: as 1 said at the beginning, the New Zealand Government and people are firm supporters of the United Nations. We shall remain so. But we would be bad friends of the Organization if we failed to encourage it to change where change is necessary. The process of change is under way. Let us keep up the momentum, and let us get the balance right. I end as I began, drawing on the wisdom of the Maori people of New Zealand. There is a Maori saying which goes,
"A warrior who works hard at growing food will not fail".
That expresses in a nutshell what this Organization is all about. We must be firm in our resolve to retain the peace, but must look also to improving the lot of all our peoples. Getting the balance right is an international imperative.
﻿
The Soviet delegation has instructed me Sir, to congratulate you on your election to the honourable post of President of the forty-second session of the General Assembly of the United Nations.
One of the rules of procedure of this Organization reserves a minute for prayer or meditation. Each session of the United Nations General Assembly is an occasion for reflection on the future of the world. Today the world is on the threshold of great changes and our thoughts are about that. For the first time in history, the idea of nuclear disarmament is close to the beginning of fulfilment. It is not a new idea. What is new is that this is proving to be possible. Only yesterday, all we could see ahead of us was a blank wall: today we can see far ahead.
Two thousand warheads are but a small part of nuclear arsenals, but that is a big enough part forbids disappearance to give to the world a new vision. The agreement on these weapons is only a small part of what has happened. Something much more important has taken place; the Soviet Union and the United states have finally spoken together the first word in a nuclear-free vocabulary. When that word becomes deed, the world will also gain new knowledge. It will become convinced that nuclear weapons and security are not synonymous and that security becomes stronger when those weapons disappear.
For the present, that principle is being established in a specific case, but it is already being established in practice. The whole question now is whether we shall be able, proceeding from the same logical premise, to abandon the entire nuclear arsenal rather than just a part of it, to scrap all weapons of mass destruction.
The Soviet Union is convinced that we shall be able to do so. The launching pad is small but it provides a boost to a great undertaking. The recent agreement may be followed by an accord on the reduction by as much as one half of strategic weapons - provided, of course, that the Treaty limiting anti-ballistic missile system is preserved.
Today there is an increasingly realistic prospect of a convention on the prohibition and complete destruction of chemical weapons. We can expect a productive development of the parallel process of reduction of conventional weapons based on the concept of sufficiency. There is a possibility of making headway because we have bold ideas and willingness to remove the remaining obstacles.
An affirmative answer to the question of whether it is possible to scrap nuclear arsenals will become a reality if the international community once again helps us.
There is no need to compete here for the palm of victory, which does not go well with the olive branch of peace. I could describe how the Soviet Union has worked towards the global double zero, but let others claim the credit if they wish. For that matter, if we have to compete in something it should be only in nuclear disarmament. What is important for us is that what was sought has now been achieved and the outcome is not at variance with the will of the majority.
We are moved by the enthusiasm with which the world has welcomed the agreement. It convinces us once again that we are on the right track. Listening to the voices of approval and solidarity, which drown the morose and solitary voice of the nuclear profiteers, your Soviet colleague, without sharing the euphoria and yet without curbing the optimism  keenly feel that today all of us here are truly United nations - United not merely by formal membership in this Organization but by a common destiny and a shared objective. We thank you for this wonderful feeling. It should be treasured and carried further. Thank you for the atmosphere of unity of thought, co-operation and support which alone could have produced an agreement.
In this sense the agreement is yours. And the fact that it belongs to everyone is, as we see it, the best guarantee of its implementation.
"We were born to live together. And our community is like an arch which holds up precisely because Its stones prevent each other from falling ..." One is amazed by the ability of human thought to establish the supreme ethical law for all times. "We were born to live together", so wrote Seneca to Lucillius many years ago in his Epistles, but it is only today that this idea is being understood as the imperative of our time.
Today, Lenin's Decree of Peace is perceived as a message of supreme morality addressed to our time. The repudiation of secret treaties, open and public conduct of International affairs, the immediate withdrawal from the war and the rejection of War as a method of resolving conflicts reflected, even as far back as 1917, a common need, which has now become the will of the entire International community.
A long and difficult road must be traversed for human thought to become action, but it does happen sooner or later. When, in Washington, we were discussing the techniques of the destruction of nuclear warheads we were suddenly struck by the fact that only a year ago this had seemed something well beyond our grasp. Our American partners can confirm this. It is hard to find words to express this. Let us just say that the past gives a powerful impetus to the present, and the present gives guarantees to the future.
"The reality and the guarantees of a secure world" is the title of Mikhail Gorbachev's article published before this session began, and it conveys the gist of our thinking today.
A secure world is possible. It Is possible because anything else is too dangerous. The possibility of a secure world is commensurate with the need for it This is the reality. As for guarantees, we see them in a comprehensive system of security. It is the natural task of the United Nations to give inspiration to and take the lead in building such a system.
This, reduced to a concise formula, is the logic of that article, which develops the doctrine of a secure world. It stems from the history of our country and is the fruit of political thinking that honestly analyses the entire preceding period.
In this context I would venture to remind the Assembly that its forty-second session coincides with the eve of the seventieth anniversary of the Great October Socialist Revolution. This is our celebration and we are not imposing it on anyone. The feelings aroused by the birthday of our State are ours. Nevertheless, I would venture to share with representatives my thoughts on some of the international implications of that date.
I do not think that it can be disputed that the October Revolution was one of the major events of this century and has had a tremendous impact on the destinies of peoples, not only those of the former Russian Empire. We think that the process of renovation which is under way in our country is more than just a strictly domestic affair of the Soviet Union, It is impossible to describe as purely the concern of the Soviet Union its desire to do away with one of the products of the cold war, which is the splitting of the world into hostile alliances.
All this, naturally, is also part of the objectives of perestroika - our process of change - while glasnost - openness - and dialogue are, as logically, its instruments, in both domestic and foreign policies. Between these two there exists a direct and open relationship and one cannot be implemented without the other. This, and this alone, allows me, when speaking about the seventieth anniversary of our revolution, to invite you all to take thought together.
If we have a concept of a world revolution, which is most closely linked with the process of revolutionary change in our country, we make no secret of it. It is this: organizing the entire human community on the basis of recognizing peace as the supreme value of existence, human life, freedom and dignity as a general yardstick, and peaceful coexistence as a universal principle of relations among States. This concept, proclaimed in the Political Report to the 27th Congress of our Communist Party, has been substantiated by a series of practical steps taken by the Soviet Union,
Perestroika has also heralded major changes in international affairs. It should not be obstructed. But, of course, unlike the position in 1917 or 1918, in 1987 no external action could halt our revolution. Today we live in different times, and it is a different country. And that could be one of the greatest achievements of the October Revolution. The price of this was enormous. It was set by the foreign intervention and the civil war; the ruined economy and the economic blockade; terror and the attempts to subvert the foundations of our multinational State; Nazi aggression and the cold war, which was imposed on us; nuclear blackmail and constant attempts at political diktat. Not a single day passed without our having to pay the highest price.
Unlike many other revolutions, the October Revolution was almost bloodless. Unlike many others, its architects never Intended to build their temple on blood; they never thought, as had many before them, that cruelty, violence and fear were the best glue for cementing their ideal.
It was the policies of conspiracy, terror and intervention against Soviet Russia that made it shut and lock its doors and cut itself off from a hostile world. 

In order to survive it was necessary to do the maximum within the historically minimum space of time. A chronic lack of time and unending pressure on all fronts also helped create the conditions which resulted in innocent victims and irreparable losses. We are saying this for all to hear: there is not and there cannot be any justification for that. We do more than just say it. As heirs to both victories and defeats, achievements and mistakes, we are doing our utmost to consolidate the victories and to prevent even the slightest possibility of the errors being repeated In either domestic or in foreign policies. 
This is a distinctive feature of our perestroika, its dominant trend, any indicator of the vigour and health of our society, a guarantee of Its future, of its profound internal democratism, openness and integrity. And there is no need to engage in linguistic research to try to provide listeners with an English equivalent of the word glasnost. One might go astray in a foreign language, as has indeed already happened with the same speaker, who claimed that there is no word meaning "freedom" in the Russian language. It is generally dangerous to play with words in this forum in which by no means everyone is ready to applaud insults summarily flung at entire countries and peoples. Freedom does indeed serve peace - but it is not the freedom that is interpreted as licence to interfere in the affairs of others and to finance counter-revolution as a most profitable business.
As for our perestroika, no one should be a prey to illusions. We shall not turn aside from the main road or borrow from others their norms and rules of democracy. We thank them for their advice, but we shall conduct perestroika according to our own design, on our own socialist basis. Allow us to determine for ourselves what the Soviet Union is going to be and that will be what the Soviet people want it to be.
Those who want to support us will also support the project of rebuilding international relations on a broad democratic basis. They will support the concept of a nuclear-free world and all actions to resolve the knottiest issues of world politics. For here the interests of most members of the community fully coincide.
This rostrum is not a pulpit for preaching "free enterprise". This Hall is not a schoolroom or a university auditorium in which one can teach lessons in rhetoric or lecture the international community on the manners of "good political behaviour". it is even less worthy to adopt the tone of pastoral admonition and tell the Organization that "sometimes it has strayed" and "it is time for it to come home". One can say, however, that this rostrum and this Hall are the very place where new political thinking should be expressed.
However much the world is split by confrontation and hatred, it is United in facing the need to preserve itself and to perpetuate mankind.
Prom this objective reality there emerges another guiding light for new political thinking; in our time, the correlation between the national interest and the interest of all mankind has changed. It has changed in the sense that truly national interests cannot be opposed to common interests.
If, on the pretext that something is contrary to the interests of national security or to considerations of national prestige, one rejects everything that is born of the political thinking of the systems or governments that one does not like, then, sooner or later, this will boomerang on the genuine national interests of one's own people and State.
New political thinking must put an end to that. New political thinking will put an end to it if it is put into action. And there is no doubt that it will be, for action, unity of concept and implementation, of thought and its realization, of word and deed, are crucial conditions for the existence of mankind.
New political thinking will inevitably make its way, for it is nourished by some remarkable elements: by the accumulation of progressive political experience  by strictly scientific analysis, evaluation and forecasting of contemporary realities} and, ultimately, by the freedom of new political thinking from national narrow-mindedness that provokes animosity towards countries, groups of countries or social political systems.
In this regard, let me say that the policy of hostility towards socialism is now bankrupt, both in theory and in practice. The very fact of the establishment of the United Nations contained the embryo of the new political thinking. Even at that time its principles were embodied in the articles of the United Nations Charter  which is undoubtedly one of the greatest statutory instruments of all time and of all nations.
The fact that our Organization has been functioning for over 40 years now is testimony to the triumph of mankind's common interests over narrow-minded nationalism and great-Power attitudes. In fact, all the post-war decades have been nothing but the history of the struggle between outdated political concepts and the new political thinking that was born in the agony of war.
When life on earth depends on one's ability to destroy it 20 times over, there is something wrong either with oneself and one's trust in such a guarantee of life, or with the very idea of deterrence. Most likely, it is both. New political thinking exposes the absurdity of the idea of safeguarding anyone's security with nuclear weapons.
However, a question immediately arises: Is it possible to ensure peace by other methods and, indeed, do such methods exist at all? New political thinking answers: Yes. And here again I should like to focus on a comprehensive system of international security.
As emerges clearly from Mikhail Gorbachev's statements, we envision its formation as a multilinear process extending over time and implemented through collective efforts. In essence, its objective is that peace should be ensured exclusively by the United Nations and its Security Council on the basis of strict observance of the principles and provisions of its Charter. I anticipate a question here: If that is your objective, then what is the meaning of your proposal? After all, the Charter of the United Nations already exists and the universal organization for peace is functioning.
Let me remind the Assembly that the United Nations was established for a world free of nuclear weapons and that its Charter was, naturally, designed to solve the problems of such a world.
Nuclear weapons gave rise to a different reality which, in the final analysis, made it impossible to use the United Nations fully as the principal mechanism for the maintenance of peace and security. It so happened that the nuclear tumour limited the scope of, and the possibilities for applying the Charter. Now the prospect of militarization of outer space threatens to erode its principles even further. There should however be no question of adapting the Charter to the realities of the nuclear and space age or, still less, of wrecking it. The Charter is a great document, which even today contains all the necessary provisions to enable mankind to live and solve its problems without war.
However, even the Charter cannot do the impossible. No organization, no set of rules, no code of behaviour can save the world in the few minutes between the launching of a missile and a nuclear holocaust. If and when the implementation of the "Star Wars" programme begins, the "shagreen leather" of that time interval will shrink even further. And yet that programme has been touted here once again as a way "to ensure a safer world".
This is not so. And here I will refer to a person whose statements have been quoted so readily by the President of the United States - even the day before yesterday. That person is academician Andrei Sakharov, who said:
"My opinion as regards this programme is different from that of the Reagan Administration... it is also wrong to assert that the existence of the SDI programme has made the Soviet Union negotiate on disarmament. To the contrary, the SDI programme impedes the negotiations."
If we are to believe an academician in one area, why should we not believe him in another, in which he is really a qualified expert and a professional?
Leave the ocean of space to peaceful vessels, so that future generations - our children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren - will not have to build space minesweeper s.
Excluding the nuclear and space component from the security equation is the only path towards real security. We regard a comprehensive system of security as a kind of interim programme for reasserting the role of the United Nations and its Charter as the primary instruments for peace.
What, then, are the practical aspects of a comprehensive system? Throughout the past year the sponsors of the resolution on this question have held consultations with Members of the United Nations and discussed their proposal in international forums. As a result many things have now become clearer, our ideas have become more concrete, and an atmosphere of teamwork has arisen. The system is taking precise shape in all its four aspects: politico-military, economic, environmental and humanitarian.
In the politico-military area, it comprises the obligation of Governments not to be the first to use nuclear weapons or any force or threat of force making military doctrines exclusively defensive in nature) making public data regarding defence expenditures and calendars of exercises and manoeuvres) the adoption by all of the principle of non-offensive defence} and instituting a reliable system of verification.
We are convinced that a comprehensive system of security will also provide the key to the settlement of situations of regional conflict. That may be one of the roost difficult tasks of today.
In this connection I shall venture to make a brief digression to address some ideas presented here the other day. I am referring to the statement made here by the President of the United States the day before yesterday. I am not going to relish engaging in polemics with him. The emotions aroused by the agreement we have reached, ray status as a guest and respect for seniority restrain  e from taking up, point by point, allegations and arguments that are groundless in the extreme. But since the President mentioned the human heart - claiming, as it were, a monopoly on having a heart while denying it to others - I should like to say the following.
It is heartless to declare regions and continents zones of special interest for the so-called free world out of which it pumps into its own economy resources belonging to other peoples. It is heartless to recruit and arm mercenaries, to proclaim them freedom fighters, and to pay millions of dollars for the murders committed by them. It is heartless to put into the hands of bandits weapons they use to shoot down civilian aircraft. The human heart is an extremely sensitive organ, and it shudders at such treatment.
Those who have not suffered have no compassion for anyone, we know what war on our own territory means. Therefore it is not for the sake of rhetorical effect that we declare our support for the efforts of the United Nations.
It plays an extremely important peace-making role in Afghanistan, where the mission of the Personal Representative of the United Nations Secretary-General organically combines with the policy of national reconciliation. It is now becoming increasingly clear that the Afghans themselves are able to decide the future of their own country and indeed are doing so. This new encouraging trend is in keeping with our sincere desire to withdraw Soviet forces from Afghanistan as soon as possible, and in this we are meeting with the full understanding of the Afghan leadership.
In Central America, the States of the region themselves have made impressive headway towards a long-awaited peace. Their success is shared by members of the Contadora Group and the Support Group and by all Latin American countries.
Dialogue between the countries of Indo-China and the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) has revealed promising elements. The policy of national reconciliation is also beginning to work in Kampuchea.
Real possibilities exist for the settlement of the Korean problem. The yearning of the Korean people for an easing of tension in the peninsula and the withdrawal of foreign troops and nuclear weapons cannot but evoke sympathy.
The United Nations has a detailed plan for giving effect to the resolution on the granting of independence to the Namibian people. Its implementation would also constitute a major step towards a settlement of the situation in southern Africa. A consensus is emerging in favour of convening a conference on the Middle East problem. In Cyprus, our Organization and its Secretary-General have also been taking vigorous action and refusing to retreat in the face of obstacles.
Here is our view of the situation in the Persian Gulf. It has become critically dangerous and might get out of control. We are not at all pleased that the development of events - which we warned was quite possible from the very outset - shows that we were right. The greater the military presence, the higher the probability of yet another conflict and the involvement in it of a State not belonging to the region. This is a source of great anxiety to us; it also strengthens our resolve to act in a sober and carefully considered manner and leads us once again to emphasize the question of removing the danger of a massive military presence.
In the circumstances, it is extremely important to preserve the unity in the Security Council. That is not an end in itself, but a prerequisite for implementing resolution 598 (1987) . In their individual actions, each member of the Council must abide by the resolution's requirements and not violate them.
The safety of navigation in the Gulf can and must be ensured by the entire world community, on whose behalf the United Nations will be acting. If necessary, appropriate and sufficient forces should be made effectively available to it, and the Soviet Union would agree to such a decision.
It is necessary to secure, concurrently and immediately, a cease-fire between Iran and Iraq and to work for the fulfilment of the Secretary-General's mission with respect to an impartial body to investigate the question of responsibility for the conflict. The Security Council should receive a report within a clearly established time-frame. This would also make it possible painlessly to withdraw foreign naval and other armed forces from the Persian Gulf.
It is very important now, in our view, to keep our composure and render every assistance to the Secretary-General and the Security Council.
In the economic field, a comprehensive system of security seeks to promote co-operation that would be free of confrontation and would cover the entire system of co-ordinates of international economic relations. A failure to resolve issues in this area is fraught with an explosive potential which, if detonated, would spell catastrophe for mankind. The picture of prosperity painted here the day before yesterday fades in the harsh light of reality, it is hard to imagine a "march of democracy" in the developing countries saddled as they are with a trillion-dollar debt. It is Impossible to talk seriously of equal opportunities when a new, technological, variety of colonialism is at work.
It is imperative to act.
We believe that the international community could reach agreement to reduce interest payments on bank credits, institute further benefits for the least developed countries, limit the annual debt-service payments of each developing country to a fixed portion of its annual export earnings, accept export products of debtor nations as payment for their debts and remove protectionist barriers to their imports, and refrain from charging additional interest for loan-payment rescheduling and debt refinancing.
These, of course, are only suggestions for discussion, but even now consideration could be given to devising a programme of Immediate action to ease the debt burden of the developing world.
Over the long term it is also necessary to restructure the entire international monetary system. And, of course, nothing would be more conducive to the economic development of nations than the most far-reaching programme of disarmament.
We are familiar also with a different viewpoint which does not acknowledge the relationship between disarmament and development. There are some who explain poverty by the inability of people to work and build their own lives. This is but another form of outright racism. No people is without talent or incapable of creating material and spiritual wealth. It is just a matter of different conditions that either help a people to realize its potential or thwart its efforts to do so. The elimination of economic discrimination creates favourable conditions for people to prosper economically and spiritually.
The environmental aspect of the proposed concept reflects the evolution of thinking about the relationship between man and nature. The achievement of mankind's environmental security is as imperative as the threat of an ecological disaster facing it is real. Today we must realize that the protection of the environment must be ensured on a world-wide basis. Confrontation narrows the scope for concerted action, while co-operation can expand it. Our concept provides for a set of measures in this area.
The human dimension is the primary yardstick for a comprehensive system of security. Nations can and must co-operate in establishing the best international conditions for safeguarding the fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual everywhere, democratising internal conditions and building trust and harmony on that basis.
We should together begin to devise a broad range of practical steps in the humanitarian area, promote co-operation in eradicating apartheid, racism, chauvinism, nationalism and discrimination on those bases, deal jointly with the problems of national minorities and refugees, and safeguard the rights of emigrants.
We submit that for States and nations trust begins at home and that to a large extent it is based on the unity of words and deeds and in complete accord between political declarations and actual positions. Our domestic and foreign policy is and will continue to be guided by that principle, and we reserve our right to demand the same of all other Governments/ our partners. The political, social, economic and cultural rights of the individual should be safeguarded on the basis of generally accepted international instruments. That is the way it should be everywhere.
The countries that have put forward this proposal do not claim a certificate of copyright. The system of security grows out of what has already been accomplished in the process of the peaceful coexistence of nations in the post-War years. It grows out of the activities of the United Nations, It is rooted in a broad legal foundation and the treaties which restrain the arms race. It is rooted in the negotiations on the central problems of our time and the codification of human rights standards/ in regional security-building processes and in the Non-Aligned Movement.
As a logical result of the development of mankind's common culture in this century, that system promises to become in the future a framework for the collective application of the creative efforts of all countries and peoples. Today, when 2/000 weapons can be removed from the face of the earth/ when a historic breakthrough has been achieved in a 42-year-long trend/ such a system reflects what we believe to be a genuine, irreversible process; a product of will and perseverance. For we are indeed born to live together and we shall stand together if we become an arch in which we support each other.
Our Assembly session provides the best occasion for reflecting on this. Its time should not be taken up with confrontation and hostility, I tell you frankly that the world is tired of that. There have been too many quotations intended to prove that you are dealing with the spawn of Hell. That is simply not serious or well founded. There have been too many accusations that detract front the dignity of nations. It is time for us to proceed to earnest dialogue; time to get down to business.
In these moments, as we stand face to face with the past and the present, we are keenly aware that when this pause for reflection is over we shall once again have to act, and again act.
﻿Let me first welcome the Secretary-General back from his pilgrimage for peace in the Middle East. Hundreds of thousands have already fallen in the bloody conflict between Iran and Iraq. All men and women of goodwill pray that the carnage can soon be stopped, and we pray that the Secretary-General proves to be not only a pilgrim but also the architect of a lasting peace between those two nations. Mr. Secretary-General, the United States supports you, and may God guide you in your labours ahead.
Like the Secretary-General, all of us here today are on a kind of pilgrimage. We come from every continent, every race and most religions to this great Hall of hope where, in the name of peace, we practise diplomacy. Now diplomacy, of course, is a subtle and nuance craft - so much so that it is said that when one of the most wily diplomats of the nineteenth century passed away, other diplomats asked, on reports of his death, "What do you suppose the old fox meant by that?"
But true statesmanship requires not merely skill but something greater, something we call vision, a grasp of the present and of the possibilities of the future. I have come here today to map out for you my own vision of the world's future - one, I believe, that, in its essential elements, is shared by all Americans. And I hope those who see things differently will not mind if I say that we in the United States believe that the place to look first for the shape of the future is not in continental masses and sea lanes, although geography is obviously, of great importance. Neither is it in national reserves of blood and iron or on the other hand, of money and industrial capacity, although military and economic strength are also, of course, crucial. We begin with something that is far simpler and yet far more profound - the human heart.
All over the world today, the yearnings of the human heart are redirecting in course of international affairs, putting the lie to the myth of materialism and historical determinism. We have only to open our eyes to see the simple aspirations of ordinary people writ large on the record of our times.
Last year in the Philippines, ordinary people rekindled the spirit of democracy and restored the electoral process. Some said they had performed a miracle, and, if so, a similar miracle - a transition to democracy - is taking place in the Republic of Korea. Haiti, too, is making a transition. Some despair when these new young democracies face conflicts or challenges, but growing pains are normal in democracies. The United States had them - as has every other democracy on earth.
In Latin America, too, one can hear the voices of freedom echo from the pea з and across the plains. It is the song of ordinary people marching, not in uniforms and not in military file, but, rather, one by one in simple, everyday working clothes - marching to the polls. Ten years ago, only a third of the people in La in America and the Caribbean lived in democracies or in countries that were turning to democracy. Today over 90 per cent do.
But this world-wide movement to democracy is not the only way in which simple, ordinary people are leading us in this room - we who are said to be the makers of history - leading us Into the future. Around the world, new businesses, new economic growth, new technologies are emerging from the workshops of ordinary people with extraordinary dreams.
Here in the United States  entrepreneurial energy - reinvigorated when we cut taxes and regulations - have fuelled the current economic expansion. According to scholars at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, three quarters of the more than 13.5 million new jobs that we have created in this country since the beginning of our expansion rate from businesses with fewer than 100 employees - businesses started by ordinary people who dared to take a chance. And many of our new high technologies were first developed in the garages of fledgling entrepreneurs. Yet America is not the only or perhaps even the best example of the dynamism and dreams that the freeing of markets set free.
In India and China, freer markets for farmers have led to an explosion in production. In Africa. Governments are rethinking their policies, and where they ate allowing greater economic freedom to farmers, crop production has improved. Meanwhile, in the newly industrialized countries of the Pacific Rim, free markets in services and manufacturing as well as agriculture have led to a soaring of growth and standards of living. The nations of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), Japan, Korea and Taiwan have created the true economic miracle of   the last two decades, and in each of them much of the magic came from ordinary people who succeeded as entrepreneurs.
In Latin America, this same lesson of free markets, greater opportunity and growth is being studied and acted on. President Sarney of Brazil spoke for many
others when he said that "Private initiative is the engine of economic Development. In Brazil we have learned that every time the state's penetration in the economy increases, our liberty decreases." Yes, policies that release to flight ordinary people's dreams ate spreading around the world. From Colombia t Turkey to Indonesia, Governments are cutting taxes, reviewing their regulations, and opening opportunities for initiative.
There has been much talk in the halls of this building about the "right to development". But more and more the evidence is clear that development is not itself a right. It is the product of rights: the right to own property; the right to buy and sell freely; the right to contract; the right to be free of excessive taxation and regulation, of burdensome government. There have been studies that determine that countries with low tax rates have greater growth than those with high rates.
We are all familiar with the phenomenon of the "underground economy". The scholar Hernando de Soto and his colleagues have examined the situation of one country - Peru - and described an economy of the poor that bypasses crushing taxation and stifling regulation. This "informal economy", as the researchers all it, is the principal supplier of many goods and services, and often the only ladder for upward mobility. In the capital city it accounts for almost all public transportation and most street markets. And the researchers concluded that, thanks to the informal economy, "The poor can work, travel, and have a roof over their heads". They might have added that, by becoming underground entrepreneurs themselves or by working for them, the poor have become less poor and the nation itself richer.
Those who advocate statist solutions to development should take note - the free market is the other path to development and the one true path. And, unlike many other paths, it leads somewhere. It works.
So this is where I believe we can find the map to the world's future - in the hearts of ordinary people in their hopes for themselves and their children  and in their prayers as they lay themselves and their families to rest each night. These simple people are the giants of the Earth, the true builders of the world and shapers of the centuries to come. And if Indeed they triumph, as I believe they will, we will at last know a world of peace and freedom, opportunity and hope, and, yes, of democracy - a world in which the spirit of mankind at last conquers the old, familiar enemies of famine, disease, tyranny, and war.
This is my vision - America's vision I recognize that some Governments represented in this Hall have other ideas. Some do not believe in democracy or in political, economic, or religious freedom. Some believe in dictatorship - whether by one man, one party, one class, one race, or one vanguard. To those Governments I would only say that the price of oppression is clear. Your economies will fall farther and farther behind. Your people will become more restless. Is it not better to listen to the people's hopes now, rather than their curses later?
And yet, despite our differences, there is one common hope that brought us all to make this common pilgrimage - the hope that mankind will one day beat its swords into the hope of peace. In no place on Earth today is peace more in need of friends than in the Middle East. Its people's yearning for peace is growing. The United States will continue to be an active partner in the efforts of the parties to come together to settle their differences and build a just and lasting peace.
This month marks the beginning of the eighth year of the Iran-Iraq war. Two months ago the Security Council adopted a mandatory resolution demanding a cease-fire, withdrawal, and negotiations to end the war. The United States fully supports implementation of Security Council resolution 598 (1987), as we support the Secretary-General's recent mission. We welcomed Iraq's acceptance of that resolution, and remain disappointed at Iran's unwillingness to accept it.
In that regard, I know that the President of Iran will be addressing representatives tomorrow. I take this opportunity to call upon him clearly and unequivocally to state whether Iran accepts Security Council resolution 598 (1987) or not. If the answer is positive, it would be a welcome step and a major breakthrough. If it is negative, the Council has no choice but rapidly to adopt enforcement measures.
For 40 years the United States has made clear its vital interest in the security of the Persian Gulf and the countries that border it. The oil reserves there are of strategic importance to the economies of the free world. We are committed to maintaining the free flow of this oil and to preventing the domination of the region by any hostile Power.
We do not seek confrontation or trouble with Iran or anyone else. Our objective is now, and has been at every stage, finding a means to end the war with no victor and no vanquished. The Increase in out naval presence in the Gulf does not favour one side or the other. It is a response to heightened tensions and followed consultations with our friends in the region. When the tension diminishes, so will our presence.
The United States is gratified by many recent diplomatic developments - the unanimous adoption of Security Council resolution 598 (1987), the Arab League's statement at its recent meeting in Tunis, and the Secretary-General's visit. Yet problems remain.
The Soviet Union helped in drafting and reaching an agreement on Security Council resolution 598 (1987). But outside the Security Council, the Soviets have acted differently. They called for removal of our navy from the Gulf, where it has been for 40 years. They made the false accusation that somehow the United States - rather than the war itself - is the source of tension in the Gulf. Such statements are not helpful. They divert attention from the challenge facing us all - a just end to the war.
The United States hopes the Soviets will join the other members of the Security Council in vigorously seeking an end to a conflict that should never have begun, should have ended long ago, and has become one of the great tragedies of the post-war era.
Elsewhere in the region, we see the continuing Soviet occupation of Afghanistan. After nearly eight years, a million casualties, nearly 4 million others driven into exile, and more intense fighting than ever, it is time for the Soviet Union to leave.
The Afghan people roust have the right to determine their own future free of foreign coercion. There is no excuse for prolonging a brutal war or propping up a regime whose days are clearly numbered. That regime offers political proposals that pretend compromise, but really would ensure the perpetuation of the regime's power. Those proposals have failed the only significant test: they have been rejected by the Afghan people. Every day the resistance grows in strength. It is an indispensable patty In the quest for a negotiated solution. 
The world community must continue to insist on genuine self-determination prompt and full Soviet withdrawal  and the return of the refugees to their homes in safety and honour. The attempt may be made to pressure a few countries to change their vote this year, but this body# I know, will vote overwhelmingly as every year before, for Afghan independence and freedom.
We have noted General Secretary Gorbachev's statement of readiness to withdraw. In April I asked the Soviet Union to set a date this year when this withdrawal would begin. I repeat that request now, in this forum for peace. I pledge that, once the Soviet Union shows convincingly that it is ready for a genuine political settlement, the United States is ready to be helpful.
Let me add one final note on this matter. Pakistan, in the face of enormous pressure and intimidation, has given sanctuary to Afghan refugees. We salute the courage of Pakistan and the Pakistani people. They deserve strong support from all of us.
Another regional conflict we all know is taking place in Central America - in Nicaragua.
To the Sandinista delegation here today I say: Your people know the true nature of your regime. They have seen their liberties suppressed. They have seen the promises of 1979 go unfulfilled. They have seen their real wages and personal income fall by half - yes, half - since 1979, while your Party elite live lives of privilege and luxury.
This is why, despite a billion dollars in Soviet-bloc aid last year alone, despite the largest and best equipped army in Central America, you face a popular revolution at home. It is why the democratic resistance is able to operate freely deep in your heartland. But this revolution should come as no surprise to you. I' is only the revolution you promised the people, and that you then betrayed.
The goal of United States policy towards Nicaragua is simple. It is the goal of the Nicaraguan people and the freedom fighters as well: it is democracy - real free, pluralistic, constitutional democracy. Understand this: we will not, and the world community will not, accept phoney "democratisation" designed to mask the perpetuation of dictatorship.  In this 200th year of our own Constitution, we know that real democracy depends on the safeguards of an institutional structure that prevents a concentration of power. It is that which makes rights secure. The temporary relaxation of controls - which can later be tightened - is not democratisation. Again, to the Sandinistas, I say: we continue to hope that Nicaragua will become part of the genuine democratic transformation that we have seen throughout Central America in this decade. We applaud the principles embodied in the Guatemala agreement, which links the security of the Central American democracies to democratic reform in Nicaragua. Now is the time for you to shut down the military machine that threatens your neighbours and assaults your own people. You must end your stranglehold on internal political activity. You must hold free and fair national elections. The media must be truly free - not censored or	'
intimidated or crippled by indirect measures such as the denial of newsprint or threats against journalists or their families. Exiles must be allowed to return, to minister, to live, to work, and to organize politically. Then, when persecution of religion has ended and the jails no longer contain political prisoners, national reconciliation and democracy will be possible.
Unless this happens, democratisation will be a fraud. And until it happens, we will press for true democracy by supporting those fighting for it.
Freedom in Nicaragua, or Angola, or Afghanistan, or Cambodia, or Eastern Europe, or South Africa or anyplace else on the globe is not just an internal matter. Some time ago the Czech dissident writer, Vaclav Havel, warned the world that
"respect for human rights is the fundamental condition and the sole genuine guarantee of true peace". And Andrei Sakharov, in his Nobel Lecture, said:  "I am convinced that international confidence, mutual understanding, disarmament, and International security are inconceivable without an open society with freedom of information, freedom of conscience, the right to publish, and the right to travel and choose the country In which one wishes to live."
Freedom serves peace. The quest for peace must serve the cause of freedom. Patient diplomacy can contribute to a world In which both can flourish. We are heartened by new prospects for improvement in East-West and, particularly. United States-Soviet relations.
Last week Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze visited Washington for talks with me and with Secretary of State Shultz. We discussed the full range of issues. Including my long-standing efforts to achieve, for the first time, deep reductions in United States and Soviet nuclear arms. It was six years ago, for example, that I proposed the 2ero option for United States and Soviet longer-range intermediate-range nuclear missiles. I am pleased that we have now agreed in principle to a truly historic treaty that will eliminate an entire class of United States and Soviet nuclear weapons. We have also agreed to intensify our diplomatic efforts in all areas of mutual Interest.
Towards that end Secretary Shultz and the Foreign Minister will meet again, a month from now, in Moscow, and I will meet again with General Secretary Gorbachev later this fall.
We continue to have our differences and probably always will. But that puts a special responsibility on us to find ways - realistic ways - to bring greater stability to our competition and to show the world a constructive example of the value of communication and of the possibility of peaceful solutions to political problems. Here let me add that we seek, through our strategic defence initiative, to find a way to keep the peace through relying on defence - not offence - for deterrence and for eventually rendering ballistic missiles obsolete. The strategic defence Initiative has greatly enhanced the prospects for real arms reduction. It is a crucial part of our efforts to ensure a safer world and a more stable strategic balance.
We will continue to pursue the goal of arms reduction, particularly the goal that the General Secretary and I agreed upon: a 50 per cent reduction in our respective strategic nuclear arms. We will continue to press the Soviets for more constructive conduct in the settling of regional conflicts. We look to the Soviets to honour the Helsinki accords. We look for greater freedom for the Soviet peoples within their country/ more people-to-people exchanges with our country and Soviet recognition in practice of the right of freedom of movement.
We look forward to a time when things we now regard as sources of friction and even danger can become examples of co-operation between ourselves and the Soviet Union. For instance, I have proposed a collaboration to reduce the barriers between East and West in Berlin, and more broadly in Europe as a whole. Let us work together for a Europe in which force or the threat of force, whether in the form of walls or of guns is no longer an obstacle to free choice by individuals and whole nations, I have also called for more openness in the flow of information from the Soviet Union about its military forces, policies and programmes so that our negotiations about arms reduction can proceed with greater confidence.
We hear much about changes in the Soviet Union. We are intensely interested in these changes. We hear the world glasnost which is translated as "openness" in English. Openness is a broad term, it means the free, unfettered flow of information, ideas and people, it means political and intellectual liberty in all forms. We hope, for the sake of the peoples of the USSR, that such changes will come. And we hope, for the sake of peace, that it will include a foreign policy that, respects the freedom and independence of other peoples.
No place should be better suited for discussions of peace than this Hall. The first Secretary-General, Trygve Lie, said of the United Nations:
"With the danger of fire, and in the absence of an organized fire department, it is only common sense for the neighbours to join in setting up their own fire brigades."
Joining together to drown the flames of war - this, together with a universal declaration of human rights, was the founding ideal of the United Nations. It is our continuing challenge to ensure that the United Nations lives up to these hopes.
As the Secretary-General noted some time ago, the risk of anarchy in the world has increased because the fundamental rules of the United Nations Charter have been violated. The General Assembly has repeatedly acknowledged this with regard to the occupation of Afghanistan, The Charter has a concrete practical meaning today because it touches on all the dimensions of human aspiration that I mentioned earlier: the yearning for democracy and freedom, for global peace and for prosperity.
That is why we must protect the Universal Declaration of Human Rights from being debased as it was through the infamous "Zionism is racism" resolution. We cannot permit attempts to control the media and promote censorship under the ruse of a so-called new world information order. We must work against efforts to introduce contentious and non-relevant issues into the work of the specialized and technical agencies where we seek progress on urgent problems, from terrorism to drug trafficking to nuclear proliferation, which threaten us all. Such efforts corrupt the Charter and weaken this Organization.
There have been important administrative and budget reforms. They have helped. The United States is committed to restoring its contribution as reforms progress. But there is still much to do. The United Nations was built on great dreams and great ideals. Sometimes it has strayed. It is time for it to come home. It was Dag Hammarskjold who said:
"The end of all political effort must be the well-being of the individual in a life of safety and freedom."
Should this not be our credo in the years ahead?

I have spoken today of a vision and of the obstacles to its realization. More than a century ago a young Frenchman, Alexis de Tocqueville, visited America.
After that visit he predicted that the two great Powers of the future world would be, on the one hand, the United States, which would be built, as he said, "by the ploughshare"; and, on the other hand, Russia, which would go forward, again as he said, "by the sword". Yet, need it be so? Cannot swords be turned to ploughshares? Can we and all nations not live in peace?
In our obsession with antagonisms of the moment, we often forget how much unites all the members of humanity. Perhaps we need some outside, universal threat to make us recognize this common bond. I occasionally think how quickly our differences worldwide would vanish if we were facing an alien threat from outside this world. And yet, I ask, is not an alien force already among us? What could be more alien to the universal aspirations of our peoples than war and the threat of war?
Two centuries ago, in a hall much smaller than this one, in Philadelphia, Americans met to draft a constitution. In the course of their debates, one of them said that the new Government, if it was to rise high, must be built on the broadest base - the will and consent of the people. And so it was. And so It has been.
My message today is that the dreams of ordinary people reach to astonishing heights. If we diplomatic pilgrims are to achieve equal altitudes, we must build all we do on the full breadth of humanity's will and consent and the full expanse of the human heart.

