
May I begin by congratulating you warmly, Sir, on your election to the presidency of this session of the General Assembly. I am sure that, with your remarkable ability and rich experience and the concerted efforts of representatives from various countries, this session will be a success. I also wish to take this opportunity to express my heartfelt thanks to your predecessor, Mr. Peter Florin, for his outstanding contribution in fulfilling the high mission of President of the last session.
When the forty-second session of the General Assembly opened here a year ago people already saw signs of relaxation in the prolonged international tension. Now, a year later, when we look at the world situation again, the trend towards relaxation is definitely gaining greater momentum. Some problems that have long been a cause of concern are heading towards solution. The Soviet-United States Treaty on the Elimination of Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles - the INF Treaty - signed last December after many years of negotiations, is being implemented. 
Agreement was finally reached in April tills year on the Afghan question, which has been a cause of grave concern to the international community for more than eight years, and the Soviet troop withdrawal is now under way.
Another issue of grave international concern is the eight-year-long war between Iran and Iraq, but the situation has at last taken a Favourable turn thanks to acceptance of Security Council resolution 598 (1987) by the two sides. The two countries have agreed to a cease-fire and are on the way to a negotiated peace. In south-west Africa, after long years of war and upheaval, the parties concerned have reached agreement in principle on the withdrawal of foreign troops from Angola and on the initial steps to implement Security Council resolution 435 (1978) regarding the independence of Namibia. There have also been positive developments in the Horn of Africa, Western Sahara and the eastern Mediterranean. Efforts towards a settlement of the Middle East and Central American questions are also being made.
Dialogue is playing an increasingly prominent role in improving the international situation. There has been frequent dialogue between the United States and the Soviet Union, and also fairly active dialogue between the parties concerned on questions of regional conflicts. In various regional organizations and conferences in Asia, Africa and Latin America, in the Non-Aligned Movement and in many bilateral contacts, countries are seeking settlement of international, regional or bilateral issues through dialogue. This year saw the first meeting of Foreign Ministers of the Balkan region, which was aimed at boosting co-operation among the Balkan countries. In order to ease the situation on the Korean peninsula and promote the peaceful reunification of Korea, the north and the south of Korea are making contacts. Facts show fully that in today's world dialogue is taking the place of confrontation, and the tendency to seek the peaceful settlement of international disputes is growing. This is a striking feature of the present international situation. Obviously, it is the outcome of the common efforts of all countries and is deeply rooted in the events of the time.
In the past 40 years or more since the Second World War history has made giant strides forward. The colonial system is now a thing of the past. Former colonies and, dependencies have become sovereign States one after another and stand on their own feet in the family of nations. Respect for each other's independence and sovereignty and opposition to foreign aggression and oppression has become a most important feature in the international politics of the day. The power politics that prevailed in former days are becoming less and less operative. Facts have shown time and time again that even the super-Powers, which possess strength unmatched anywhere in the world, cannot conquer weaker and smaller nations by force and impose their will on others. All their attempts have inevitably failed because of the resolute resistance of the peoples subjected to aggression and the widespread condemnation by the international community. This is thought-provoking.
While the danger of war still exists, the forces of peace are steadily growing. People all over the world have voiced an increasingly strong demand for peace and against war. None of the third-world. East European or West European countries or other developed countries want to go through the holocaust of another world war. Even the super-Powers, which possess sufficient nuclear armaments to destroy the Earth several times over, do not believe that they could win a nuclear war. All these factors have helped to check the outbreak of another world war.
Problems among developing countries ought to be settled through negotiation. Unfortunately, some differences have given rise to armed conflicts. There is a growing trend in developing countries towards seeking the peaceful settlement of disputes through dialogue. This indicates that they are becoming more and more aware that their major historical task is to develop their national economies and improve the quality of people's lives, and that armed conflicts among themselves can only deplete their national strength, to the detriment of their fundamental interests. War means mutual disaster, while peace brings mutual benefit. If the third-world countries handle their relations in this spirit, it will greatly hasten their development and enable them to play a more effective role in the cause of maintaining regional and global peace. 
Rapidly developing science and technology, which is being translated into unprecedented great productive forces, spurs the development of the economy and is changing the face of human society. This is a salient feature of the present era. The aggregate strength of a country depends more and more on its economic, scientific and technological level. A review of post-war history clearly indicates that countries which practise hegemonism and engage in the arms race, foreign expansion and military conflicts have found their national strength seriously weakened, while those countries which devote themselves to the development of science, technology, the economy and education have rapidly grown strong. Some have even risen in the world as great economic Powers with advanced science and technology. Meanwhile, the third world is very active in the international arena as a growing political force. Many regional political and economic organizations are also playing an ever more important part in international affairs. With the combination of these elements, the world is moving from bipolarization to multipolarization, which, in our view, is conducive to peace.
It is against such a backdrop that there emerges the trend of dialogue replacing confrontation and of the peaceful settlement of international disputes. These developments are a source of encouragement to the people of all countries.
However, is the present world free from troubles? Obviously it is not. The root cause of turbulence in the world has not yet been removed. The peoples of all countries must make unremitting efforts to safeguard world peace.
The world's peoples are faced with the common task of halting the arms race and striving for disarmament in order to preserve peace. The recently concluded third special session of the United Nations General Assembly devoted to disarmament represented a major effort by the international community to push forward the process of disarmament. Although the special session failed to achieve specific results because of the rigid positions taken by one or two countries, in disregard
  

of the reasonable demand of the vast majority of countries, the statements made by representatives of many countries and non-governmental organizations and the suggestions and propositions that they put forward mirrored the universal desire of the international community for peace and disarmament. The powerful public opinion arising there from has a positive impact on the promotion of the disarmament process. The special session enabled people to have a clearer picture of the present state of the arms race and the correct orientation of and approach to disarmament. On the question of disarmament, the Chinese delegation deems it necessary to expound the following three points at this session of the General Assembly.
First, it is a welcome development that the United States and the Soviet Union have taken a step forward on the road to disarmament. However, we cannot but note that the huge nuclear arsenals they possess still pose a threat to world peace. The arms race between them is still going on. They are trying greatly to improve and upgrade the quality and function of their respective nuclear weapons, vying with each other to develop high-tech weaponry and extending the arms race to outer space. Hence, the disarmament task remains arduous and formidable.
Secondly, countries across the world have repeatedly reaffirmed the important principle that the super-Powers, which possess the largest and most sophisticated arsenals, bear a special responsibility for disarmament and should take the lead in drastically cutting their arms. This is a correct direction and an effective approach for the realization of disarmament. We hope that the super-Powers will, in conformity with the trend of the times, quicken their pace on the road to disarmament and reach agreement on a drastic reduction of nuclear weapons at an early date, starting with a 50 per cent cut in strategic nuclear weapons. Their talks on conventional disarmament should also be speeded up and the arms race in outer space, in all its forms, should be halted. 
Thirdly, the question of disarmament concerns the security interests of all countries. Countries, big or small, strong or weak, all have the right to participate in the discussion and settlement of the disarmament question on an equal footing, and can each play a positive role. The super-Powers should respect and take seriously into consideration the reasonable demands and propositions set forth by the small and medium-sized countries. The United Nations and other multilateral disarmament agencies are important venues for the discussion and solution of this question by all parties on an equal basis. Their role should be strengthened. Multilateral and bilateral disarmament negotiations should complement and promote each other.
The third special session of the United Nations General Assembly devoted to disarmament showed that most countries have identical or similar views on the aforementioned questions. We hope that the current session of the General Assembly will give full expression to the strong desire of these countries, and make significant progress towards disarmament. While there is greater effort to seek the peaceful settlement of regional conflicts through dialogue, the Flames of war in quite a Few conflict-ridden areas are yet to be extinguished. Dialogue on a number of issues has failed to make substantive progress. On some other issues, although agreements have been reached, the successful implementation of those agreements requires continued efforts by the parties concerned. In international relations the Chinese Government has all along advocated the observance of the five principles of mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence. As regards regional conflicts, it has always stood for a fair and reasonable political settlement; therefore aggression must be stopped, foreign troops withdrawn and the sovereignty of all countries respected. Differences among developing countries should all the more be settled appropriately through peaceful negotiations on mutually acceptable terms.
The Chinese Government has consistently opposed Israel's policy of aggression and expansion and supported the just struggle of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples and the efforts of the Arab countries and the Palestine Liberation Organization (РLO) to seek a solution to the Middle East question. We hope to see an early, fair and comprehensive solution to the question and an end to the turmoil caused by four decades of war, so that the people of the Middle East may enjoy peace again.
We are concerned about peace and stability on the Korean peninsula. China supports the reasonable proposition of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea for the independent and peaceful reunification of the country through consultation and dialogue and opposes any action that adds to tension on the peninsula.
Following the decision of the Soviet Union to pull out lt4 troops from Afghanistan, the international community has voiced an even stronger demand for Vietnamese troop withdrawal from Kampuchea and for an end to the war of aggression. Regrettably, however, what the Vietnamese authorities have been doing runs counter to the desire and demand of the international community. While professing their readiness to withdraw their troops, they have put forward unreasonable demands in an attempt to delay their troop withdrawal and legalize the results of their aggression, so as to get what they have failed to achieve in their 10-year war of aggression. It should be stressed that on the Kampuchean question Viet Nam is the aggressor and the Vietnamese troops are the only foreign troops on Kampuchean territory. It is explicitly and solemnly stated in the very first Article of the United Nations Charter that to maintain international peace and security it is essential to take effective measures for the suppression of acts of aggression. Since the Vietnamese invasion of Kampuchea, the General Assembly has for nine successive years adopted resolutions calling for the withdrawal of foreign troops from Kampuchea so as to facilitate the settlement of the Kampuchean problem by the Kampuchean people themselves, free from outside interference. All this shows that the international community brooks no legalization of the results of aggression. The Chinese Government considers it necessary for the current session of the General Assembly to reiterate those just demands and to uphold the sanctity of the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter.
The Chinese Government has for the past decade worked hard towards a fair and reasonable settlement of the Kampuchean question. Recently it has further elaborated its position on the question, which can be summed up in the following five points.
First, a complete withdrawal by Viet Nam of its troops from Kampuchea is the key to a settlement of the Kampuchean question. The Vietnamese side should produce, as soon as possible, a timetable for its troop withdrawal from Kampuchea within a short period of time. 
Secondly, we favour the establishment, with Prince Norodom Sihanouk in charge, of a provisional quadripartite coalition government in Kampuchea as Viet Nam withdraws its troops from the country. Each faction's candidates for the provisional government should be proposed by the faction itself but should be acceptable to the other parties concerned. We stand for a quadripartite coalition in Kampuchea. We are against the exclusion of any of the four factions from it or the exercise of power by any one faction alone.
Thirdly, upon the establishment of the provisional quadripartite coalition government of Kampuchea, a freeze should be imposed on the activities of the Kampuchean armed forces of all factions. They should refrain from becoming involved in politics and interfering in the general election, so that the Kampuchean people may conduct a free election in the absence of outside interference and the threat of force. To prevent a civil war in Kampuchea the existing armed forces of all factions might be disbanded, to facilitate the creation of a unified national defence force composed of an equal number of officers and men from each of the four factions, under a unified command.
Fourthly, practical and effective international supervision should be instituted over Viet Nam's troop withdrawal, the maintenance of peace in Kampuchea and the conduct of a free election there. To that end the Chinese Government supports the proposition for the sending to Kampuchea of an international peace-keeping force and an international control committee.
Fifthly, when the parties concerned have reached agreement on a political settlement of the Kampuchean question, China will be ready to join other countries in an international guarantee for an independent, neutral and non-aligned Kampuchea.
It must be clear to all that China seeks no self-interest in Kampuchea as in any other region of the world. The Chinese Government's position is based entirely on the principle of opposing aggression, upholding justice and safeguarding the United Nations Charter and the norms governing international relations. It is our hope that the international community will continue to work under this principle for a fair and just settlement of the Kampuchean question.
We should attach adequate importance to world economic problems while paying attention to the international political situation. The current world economic development is extremely uneven, despite the presence of a few positive factors. Worrisome problems still exist and some have even gone from bad to worse. While developed countries have enjoyed economic growth for six successive years, developing countries have suffered severe economic setbacks. Many of them have witnessed increasing signs of stagnation in the process of development. The economic difficulties of African countries have aroused wide concern. The heavy debt burden, reduced inflow of funds, worsening trade terms and growing protectionism have all seriously hampered the economic growth of developing countries. All this demonstrates that present international economic relations are becoming increasingly out of accord with the needs of economic growth in the world and of developing countries in particular.
In the present-day world there is even greater economic interdependence among countries. Developed countries will find it difficult to sustain their economic growth if developing countries long remain in difficulties and their economies cannot move ahead. It is an urgent task in the international economic sphere to improve, by effective measures, the external environment of developing countries in such fields as commodities, trade, debt, capital, currency and finance. That would contribute not only to resumed growth and development of developing countries but also to the stability and growth of the world economy. Recently the Group of 77 has proposed the convening of a special session of the United Nations General Assembly devoted to economic matters. The United Nations Secretary-General, Mr. Perez de Cuellar, has also proposed a summit meeting similar to the Cancun Meeting. The Chinese Government seconds those proposals and hopes to see increased North-South co-operation through dialogue and the invigoration of the world economy.
Over the past few years, regional economic co-operation has increased markedly, which is an important trend in international economic relations. We believe that regional co-operation based on equality and mutual benefit is of positive significance, for it helps the development of different regions. At the same time I should like to emphasize that in the present world economic conditions neither a country nor a region can achieve development and prosperity behind closed doors. It has to open itself to the outside world. Trade protectionism, while harming others, is in the final analysis detrimental to the initiator as well. It is our hope that countries and regions across the world will open up to and complement one another, to the benefit of their common development and prosperity.
As there is growing regional co-operation in the world, co-operation and development in the Asia-Pacific region have attracted more and more attention in recent years. This region is indeed making rapid economic progress and has tremendous potential. However, the development level varies with different countries in the region, where many countries remain underdeveloped or even impoverished. As a large country in the region, China supports regional economic co-operation. China's development is closely linked with that of the Asia-Pacific region. We hope to see closer co-operation and the common prosperity of all countries in the region. 
China will implement unswervingly the policy of deepening reform and wider opening to the outside world. It is opening itself to the whole world, including the developed and developing countries, countries whose social systems are similar to or different from the system of China. Recently, we have adopted new measures in an effort to restructure our foreign trade and improve our investment environment. Most important, we have mapped out an economic development strategy for China's coastal regions. Those regions, which cover an area of about 320,000 square kilometres with a population of 160 million, boast a better infrastructure, greater economic and technological strength and higher quality of labour force. Accelerating their opening-up and strengthening their multi faceted, multi channel and multiform economic and technological co-operation with the Asia-Pacific region and the rest of the world will not only speed up China's economic development but also make positive contributions to the prosperity of the Asia-Pacific region and that of the world as a whole.
This year marks the fortieth anniversary of the adoption by the United Nations of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Forty years ago the people and Governments of various countries that had suffered from the catastrophe of the two world wars worked out and adopted that Declaration through their joint efforts. It is the first international instrument that systematically and specifically sets forth respect for and protection of fundamental human rights. Despite its historical limitations, the Declaration has exerted a Far-reaching influence on the development of post-war international human rights activities and has played a positive role in that regard. In the past four decades the concept of human rights has continuously developed, and its content has been enriched and its theory improved. A series of subsequent declarations and conventions concerning human rights has further developed and stipulated in detail the specific content of each human right. In this connection particular mention should be made of such important items as the right to national self-determination, the right to racial equality, the permanent sovereign right over natural wealth and resources and the right to development. All those are of great significance to the fight for equality, freedom and liberation waged by the nations and peoples under the apartheid system of foreign aggression and oppression, to the efforts made by countries newly independent in the post-war period to preserve their sovereignty and territorial integrity and to the demands of the developing countries for restructuring the irrational international economic situation. The Chinese Government has always appreciated and supported the United Nations efforts to promote and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms, in accordance with the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter.
Three years ago, from this solemn rostrum, the Chinese leader Zhao Ziyang pointed out that the world needs the United Nations, while the United Nations needs the support of the world. Events have repeatedly testified to that important thesis. With the passage of time the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter, which are increasingly recognized as norms governing international relations and as an embodiment of the lofty ideals of mankind, are playing an ever greater role in the international community.
Despite its inadequacies the United Nations is irreplaceable in its role as the most broadly representative and most influential international organization in the world. Gone are the days when a few big Powers could manipulate world affairs. The United Nations is the proper forum in which countries meet to discuss world affairs. It has proved itself capable of doing important work, and it has great potential for solving questions facing mankind, questions such as those of the environment, population, public health and scientific and technological development. Above all, it should be pointed out that in recent years the Security Council and the Secretary-General, with the support o£ Member States, must be credited with achievements in promoting the settlement of major international disputes. Here, I want to present my compliments to the Secretary-General, Mr. Perez de Cuellar, and to wish him continued successes in his peace mission. The importance of the United Nations role is on the rise, in keeping with the expectations of our time. The people of the world expect the United Nations to play a greater role in maintaining world peace, in spurring development and in strengthening international co-operation. As a permanent member of the Security Council, China is ready to continue to work with other Member States for the realization of the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter.
﻿
Please convey, Sir, my warm congratulations to the President on his election to preside over the forty-third session of the General Assembly. I wish him luck and success in his high office.
As in previous years, my delegation will do everything possible to help the General Assembly achieve positive results.
I wish to thank the President of the forty-second session, Ambassador Peter Florin, for his successful contribution. He guided the Assembly's proceedings circumspectly and pragmatically and with a view to getting results.
This session begins in encouraging circumstances. When we met here 12 months ago the war between Iraq and Iran was claiming countless victims day after day. In Afghanistan an end to the human suffering was not foreseeable. In southern Africa, too, there was no cause for hope.
Today the weapons in the Gulf are silent. Negotiations have been begun between the warring parties. A year after its unanimous adoption by the Security Council, resolution 598 (1987) has been accepted by both parties to the conflict as a basis for a cease-fire. In Afghanistan the Geneva agreements, likewise achieved with the decisive assistance of the United Nations, created the conditions for the withdrawal of the Soviet troops. Fifty per cent of those troops have already left the country in accordance with the terms of the agreements.
Following his talks in southern Africa the Secretary-General has expressed his confidence with regard to the implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978).
None of this progress has simply fallen into the world Organization's lap. These achievements are the outcome of a favourable change in the international climate and are the product of the manifold efforts of the principal organs of the United Nations, above all its Secretary-General, Mr. Perez de Cuellar.
The Secretary-General has said that serving the cause of peace is worth the maximum personal endeavour. He is making that endeavour and we all, the Members of the United Nations, are grateful to him for it. He has proved wrong those who had doubts about the United Nations. He encourages all who seek to strengthen its peace-promoting role.	.
The Federal Republic of Germany has actively supported the United Nations and its Secretary-General.
As a non-permanent member of the Security Council, we have worked constructively for the implementation of Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 598 (1987). After the adoption of resolution 598 (1987) we kept in touch with both parties to the conflict, calling upon them to accept and implement it. I appeal to Iraq and Iran to conduct the negotiations with a will to make compromises and to achieve a comprehensive, just and honourable peace settlement. 
In Afghanistan the withdrawal of the Soviet troops opens up the possibility of a new political beginning in that country. This opportunity should be seized by all concerned, like the European Community, the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany is ready to provide substantial humanitarian assistance in the process of repatriating and reintegrating the millions of refugees and, given the right domestic conditions, to contribute to Afghanistan's reconstruction.
Major progress has also been achieved towards a settlement of the conflicts in southern Africa. Important forward steps have been taken. The South African troops have left Angola. Negotiations are under way for the withdrawal of the Cuban troops. We have come a good deal closer to Namibia's independence. Security Council resolution 43S (1978) has always been and remains the only viable route to this goal. As a member of the Contact Group, my Government offers its good offices in seeking the implementation of that resolution.
Developments have also been favourable in other parts of the world.
In Cambodia the contours of a peace settlement are beginning to appear.
Talk between the Governments of South Korea and North Korea now seem to be within the realm of the possible.
In Central America the continuing cease-fire can facilitate dialogue between the conflicting parties so that democracy may be firmly established.
A peaceful settlement of the conflicts in Western Sahara and between Libya and Chad is moving nearer.
Representatives of the two ethnic groups in Cyprus are negotiating on the island's future.
 · 
The Middle East is still a source of concern. Negotiations are still not in sight, although the Palestinian uprising in the occupied territories shows that the status quo is untenable. An international conference on the Middle East is and remains the appropriate framework for the necessary negotiations on a peace settlement that will enable the Palestinian people to exercise their right to self-determination and guarantee the right of all States in the region, including Israel, to exist within secured borders.
We wish sorely-tried Lebanon a peaceful solution to its problems based on sovereignty, unity and national reconciliation.
If we want to secure peace world-wide once and for all we must strengthen the forces of peace. This means, first of all, that we must strengthen the United Nations. To achieve this we must continue the successful endeavours to bring about internal reforms. What we need above all is full implementation of the Charter. We are prepared to consider seriously proposals aimed at enhancing the peace-promoting powers op our Organization. This is also the objective of our initiative for preventing conflicts which has been put before this session of the General Assembly for final approval. We deem it essential that the United Nations be in a position to act before a conflict actually breaks out.
The kind of peace we pursue can be based solely on the rule of law. It must derive from the right of self-determination of nations and from the civil, economic and social human rights enshrined in the International Covenants on Human Rights adopted by the United Nations. There is a growing awareness that all public power comes up against its absolute limit in human rights. Respect for human rights is not only an internal affair, within the framework of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe ÍCSCR) process those rights have become a central issue.
One of the most blatant mockeries of human rights and manifestations of disregard for those rights is the system of apartheid in the Republic of South Africa. We demand the abolition of this un-reformable system. We demand the release of Nelson Mandela, Eric Molohi and all other political prisoners in South Africa. We demand the lifting of the ban on the African National Congress of South Africa (ANC) and all other organizations of the black
majority so as to open the way for a peaceful national dialogue. Let there be no doubt about it; we will not be prohibited from helping anti-apartheid organizations.
The chairman of the largest single trade union in the world, the Metal Workers' Union in the Federal Republic of Germany, has drawn up a catalogue of minimum standards for labour relations to be respected by the South African subsidiaries of German companies. They afford South African unions and workers, irrespective of their colour, the same claim to social justice as their colleagues in the Federal Republic of Germany. Large German companies have promised to apply these minimum standards in South Africa. From this rostrum I appeal to all trade unions and all firms to follow this example.
The rule of law implies absolute respect for international law. That respect is the foundation of policies that are geared to negotiation and agreements rather than to the threat or use of force. The rule of law implies protection of and respect for minorities, be they religious, national or ethnic minorities. All such minorities have a right to develop their identity, to cultivate their language and to live according to their cultural traditions and to exercise their religion, while enjoying equal political and legal rights.
The rule of law is menaced by international terrorism. The international community must oppose terrorism, which is hostile to human dignity and any human order, with still greater determination.
The rule of law implies joint efforts to combat drug trafficking. This is an increasingly urgent international problem which can only be solved through the joint efforts of all governments. My Government hopes that the deliberations of the forthcoming diplomatic conference in Vienna will lead to a United Nations convention to combat illegal drug trafficking. This could mean considerable progress. 
We can look to the future with confidence. The community of nations is showing greater respect for the rule of law. There is a growing willingness to resolve even the most serious differences by negotiation. This indicates a fundamental change in international relations. The core of these changes is in the attempts by West and East to place their relations on a new foundation. One of the reasons why the world Organization has been able to achieve progress in the peaceful settlement of conflicts is that West and East have increasingly been co-operating to this end. It has become obvious that West-East confrontation must not be carried over into the third world but must, where it arises, be defused step by step and, as far as possible, be resolved through dialogue and co-operation.
The progress of the European Community is one of the promising world trends. By creating a community of 12 European democracies we have won a victory over national egoism, power politics and prejudice. It is the greatest and finest victory in the history of Europe. It has not cost a single human life, yet it is winning us the future.
Franco-German friendship and co-operation are at the core of this future-oriented development. The European Community is the most advanced association of sovereign States to date. The dynamism and attractiveness of our Community are growing constantly. The European Community has committed itself to free world trade and world economic co-operation. It is becoming a driving force of growth not only for ourselves but for the world economy as a whole. This makes us resolute opponents of protectionism.
The growth potential of the single market and of the common social and monetary area will make the European Community even more capable of developing a world economic partnership with the North American democracies and Japan. By increasing our economic strength we can also increasingly promote the development of the third world. The larger European market will be able to absorb even more products from the third world.
As the Lomé Conventions, our agreements with the Mediterranean area and our co-operation agreements with the Association of South-East Asian Nations, the States of Central America and the Gulf Co-operation Council show, the European Community is already a major partner of the countries of the third world. This co-operation takes place on the basis of equal rights.
The powerful growth of the European Community creates a considerable opportunity for the development of West-East relations. The task now is to plan the architecture of the whole of Europe, from the Atlantic to the Urals. The more the Soviet Union pursues the process of opening itself internally and externally, the more capable it will become of co-operation with the West and the East. We want this reform policy to prove successful. Europe's future lies not in hoping for, let alone seeking, the destabilization of the other side, but rather in co-operation and productive competition.
The manifold forms of co-operation will determine the architecture of the peaceful order in Europe or, as it also can be termed, the common European house.
The ensuing interdependence will enhance mutual confidence and make for greater stability. This new order must not be characterized by fences, but by open doors, by freedom of movement for people, for ideas and goods, as well as respect for human rights.
One of the pillars of the European structure is and will remain the European Community oriented towards openness and co-operation. We know that Europe is more than the European Community. President Mitterrand put this most impressively in his historic speech in Aachen in 1987. As a result of increasing co-operation, of genuine détente and of disarmament, the military elements will lose significance in the West-East relationship, whereas political, economic, ecological and cultural co-operation will gain in importance.  Thanks to this development. West and Fast will derive a fresh potential which can he used not for disarmament but for the advancement their own societies and for co-operation with the developing countries.
The change for the better in the whole of Europe derives energy from the revival of our continent's identity. That identity emanates from our common European history, Europe's glories and aberrations, its common culture - to which all European nations have made major contributions, and from the awareness of our mutual responsibility for the future of our continent and for peace and development in the world. Decades of separation have not made two Europes out of one Europe; decades of separation have not made two German nations out of one German nation. The German people in the heart of Europe, having often been in conflict with its neighbours, has learned its lessons from history. Both German States are meeting their responsibility for peace in Europe, including through mutual co-operation. 4hat benefits all Europeans.
Through our membership of the European Community and the Atlantic alliance, we Germans in the Federal Republic of Germany have responsibly used the freedom we regained after the Second World War. We have established the strongest imaginable bond States can have: the bond of common values. Our commitment to peace in Europe also led us to conclude treaties with the Soviet Union, the Polish People's Republic and Czechoslovakia, and to conclude the Basic Treaty with the German Democratic Republic, united, too, to our active participation in bringing about the Final Act of Helsinki and in the process of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE). We regard the development of our relations with the Soviet Union, which are of crucial importance to us, as playing a key role in improving the overall West-Fast relationship. Chancellor Helmut Kohl's forthcoming visit to the Soviet Union will serve that purpose. 
We have been nailing for a peaceful order in Europe ever since the Atlantic alliance presented its Harmel report in 1967. For a long time we received no answer to this proposed grand design for a better Europe. The policy initiated by General-Secretary Gorbachev in the Soviet Union can turn the design contained in the Harmel report into reality. This new policy in the Soviet Union meets not merely with a favourable but with a constructive response from us. We all have a responsibility to use every opportunity to bring about a change for the better. The distinct improvement in United States-Soviet relations indicates the opportunities arising there from.
The Final Act of Helsinki marks the course towards a peaceful order in Europe in which states with different political and social systems can live together in peaceful competition without fear of one another. By seeking to establish such a peaceful order in Europe, the Federal Republic of Germany is complying with the mandate of its Constitution, the Basic Law, which is to serve the cause of peace in Europe and to overcome the separation of our indivisible nation. Our efforts to achieve the early conclusion of the Vienna follow-up meeting with the adoption of a substantive and we11-balanced final document should bring us another step forward towards a European peaceful order.
We are today confronted with the task of protecting mankind from the dangers which man himself has created. Technological development leaves in our hands the decision whether we create a better and more humane world or we perish. The responsibility not only for ourselves but for all future generations must determine our policies, our thinking and our actions. 
In view of the danger of nuclear annihilation, the disarmament process had to begin with nuclear disarmament. In this connection the Treaty on intermediate-range nuclear forces represents a breakthrough of fundamental importance since till now arms have only been limited. Now, for the first time, a whole class of weapons is being eliminated. The global elimination of Soviet and United States intermediate-range nuclear weapons must be followed by radical measures with regard to nuclear, chemical and conventional weapons. Reducing the strategic nuclear forces of both super-Powers by half must become a reality.
The shocking pictures of the consequences of the use of chemical weapons prompt me to appeal to all participants in the Geneva Conference on Disarmament to bring the now-far-advanced negotiations on a global ban on such weapons to the earliest possible conclusion. Only a world-wide convention ensuring the verifiable prevention of the manufacture, storage, transfer and use of chemical weapons can free mankind from the scourge of these cruel weapons for all time. My Government is playing an active part also in efforts to strengthen all instruments which can be utilized to prevent the use and proliferation of chemical weapons even before a global ban is in force. We welcome President Reagan's initiative calling for a conference of the signatories of the 1925 Geneva Protocol. While pursuing all these efforts, we must devote our entire energy to the task of achieving a global ban as the priority objective.
In the field of conventional arms our aim is to remove superiority and imbalances by means of asymmetrical disarmament. We want to create conditions in Europe in which neither side will still be capable of launching an attack on foreign territory. Large-scale offensive options do not feature in our Western concept. True conventional stability and further confidence-building require also consensus on the question of the defence philosophy underlying the policies. We seek а consensus on the functions to be given to both sides' forces. This must cover their size, equipment and command principles. I appeal to all concerned, to all the participants in the CSCE, to adopt before the end of October 1988, together with this final document of the Vienna CSCE follow-up meeting, a mandate for the commencement of negotiations on conventional stability. The time is ripe; all must now live up to their responsibility. 
Unlimited armaments do not create unlimited security, but balanced and mutual disarmament can help create more security. That is why disarmament and arms control are just as much an integral part of the security policy of the Atlantic Alliance as our defence efforts.
In the nuclear age war must be made un-wageable once and for all. New thinking requires that over the net of deterrence - the safety net of the ultimate ratio - an additional net of new, co-operative structures of military security be created which will reduce the enormous risks of exclusive reliance on deterrence.
Being realists, we know that we cannot base today's security on hopes for tomorrow. But, being men of action, meeting our responsibility for the future, we must today already create the foundations for our future security, foundations which must be broader, more solid and stronger than the ones on which peace has been based up to now.
Mankind's future is not threatened by war alone. There is a growing danger of man's destroying his own sources of life on this planet. We are faced with the task of preserving our natural sources of life and pressing ahead with the development of the third world. The two are closely intertwined. At present the world's population is more than 5 billion; soon it will be 6 billion. According to the World Bank statistics, about one billion people live in absolute poverty.
The industrial countries - all industrial countries; not only those in the West but also the socialist States - have a duty to act together. We must use our economic, scientific and technological potentials in order to render development possible and to preserve the world's natural sources of life. This presupposes the development of new forms of transport, new sources of energy, new materials and new production methods. It is on this and not on the development of new and ever more terrible weapons of mass destruction that the energy and the technology of industrial countries must he concentrated. What the nations of the third world need from industrial countries is not weapons but help for their development. I repeat my proposal that the United Nations record exports of weapons in a register. I welcome the Soviet Union's support for this proposal as expressed yesterday.
The purpose is also to satisfy the basic needs of hundreds of millions of people in the developing countries. Time and again, at ever shorter intervals, catastrophic food shortages occur which pose a challenge to mankind's solidarity and willingness to help. But humanitarian assistance alone cannot solve the problem. In spite of some favourable trends this year - the world economic situation having improved more than expected - we must admit that poverty in the third world is growing and the debt burden is growing. True, the gross domestic product increased in the developing countries as well last year, bat in many instances this improvement is being negated by population growth. Investments for the future are impeded by debt-servicing commitments.
In 1987 the debt-servicing payments of developing countries exceeded incoming funds by $15 billion. In such circumstances it is impossible for these countries to increase their economic potential.
The situation is particularly serious in the sub-Saharan countries. My Government supports the programme of action adopted at the special session of the General Assembly on Africa. 11 had previously cancelled about 2.9 billion marks of the debt owed by 20 of these countries. It has also announced its readiness to write off debts worth about 2.3 billion marks for six more African countries that are not among the least developed countries and are prepared to implement adjustment and reform programmes in collaboration with the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. 
All donors should include in their official aid to the poorest countries a large grant element. We intend to increase the grant element of our financial co-operation with the developing countries overall. Our development assistance to the least developed countries is already being provided in grant form
My Government also proposes that initial, tangible debt-servicing relief should be afforded within the scope of the Paris Club rescheduling operations. It has also decided to broaden and considerably ease the terms of our bilateral financial co-operation with our partners in the third world.  We expect the commercial banks too to increase their commitment in the developing countries. Many of the newly industrializing economies as well are suffering from the consequences of their heavy foreign debts. Here, too, the commercial banks in particular are urgently called upon to provide the funds necessary to ensure the economic development of these countries. Such funds will not bring any long-term benefits, however, unless the recipients carry out effective adjustment programmes which create suitable conditions. We hope that the new Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency will also be conducive to this process.
It remains indispensable to secure free access for developing countries to the markets of industrial countries. The main problem here lies in non-tariff trade barriers. These must be removed in the course of the ongoing Uruguay Round if the concept of free world trade is not to lose its credibility. In the first six months of this year our imports from developing countries increased by over 5 per cent, while corresponding exports are down by more than 8 per cent.
In their joint efforts to promote development the industrial and developing countries must make sure that those very efforts do not themselves become one of the factors causing the destruction of the environment. The principle still to be observed is that the industrial countries, when investing in developing countries, should submit to the standards that apply at home.
The idea of introducing an international criminal law for crimes against the environment, which is being considered by the Committee on Crime Prevention and Control, is right. We must prevent large parts of the third world being turned into poison-garbage depots of the northern over-consumption societies as a result of criminal transport practices, but also as a result of exploitation of the financial distress of some developing countries. The political and economic colonialism of the past must not now be followed by poison-garbage colonialism.
There is more to the relationship between development and ecology than that, however. Many developing countries, owing to their economic plight, are compelled to over-exploit their natural resources. 
The economy-ecology relationship must be made one of the main items of the agenda in the North-South dialogue. The violation and destruction of nature is much the same as the violation of human rights. The damage caused in one country is the concern of all- Who would still dispute that this has long since become a task of world domestic policy? For this reason, all German development projects are thoroughly examined as to their compatibility with the environment. Such a review should be carried out as a matter of course in the context of all development co-operation between North and South.
The extent of the danger to which we are all exposed is obvious from the changes in the world's climate. The gap in the Earth's ozone layer is constantly widening. A commission appointed by the German Federal Republic Parliament came to the conclusion that a catastrophic deterioration of the Earth's climate can be avoided only if the present international agreements are drastically tightened up in the next few years and if the aerosols causing the damage to the ozone layer have been almost completely removed by the year 20Ü0,
Over the past 20 years more than 3 million people have lost their lives as a result of natural disasters all over the world. More than 800 million people have suffered as a result of such disasters and damage to property has exceeded $23 billion. The forty-second session of the General Assembly quite rightly proclaimed the last 10 years of the century the decade for disaster prevention.
The number of disasters afflicting mankind that do not have natural causes but are nature's reaction to its maltreatment by man is increasing all the time. The repair of damage resulting from such disasters must be complemented by preventive measures designed to ensure their early detection and mitigate their consequences. We already have the science and technology to achieve this, if only we can pool our efforts. This is a dictate of political and economic reason and applies to all members in the community of nations. The international community as a whole is responsible for the state of the Earth, which has been entrusted to us for safekeeping. The consequences of any aberrations affect us all.
Genetic engineering will soon give man the power to change himself. This poses the question of our self-perception as human beings, a question which no congress of biogenetic engineers, no State, but only mankind itself can answer. It therefore needs to be dealt with by the United Nations. Let us bring together the best and the wisest citizens of all nations so that they may tell us where man should set his own limits if he is not to betray himself, if he is not to abandon his dignity, his uniqueness.
We must set our minds to that task. It, too, calls for a new approach. The scientist accepts as a matter of course that there is a complex interdependence, an interaction of different elements and processes. Similarly, politics too must now be understood as the interaction of quite different people, States and systems with but one framework for their actions, the biosphere in which we live, and with one dimension of responsibility, which extends far beyond our age, embracing the survival of mankind and the fate of the whole of creation.
Let us erect a barrier against the maltreatment and destruction of creation. Because we all depend on the success of these efforts, we all depend on one another. While dependence compels all of us to desist from trying to dominate others, to desist from an arms race and to reject the arrogance of power and the egoism of the stronger.
West and East, North and South, must channel their energies into a new responsibility for this planet and for the future of mankind. We must no longer ask what our neighbours are doing to protect the Earth. We must ask what we ourselves can do, what can we do together. We need not despair in the face of this responsibility, which is unique in the history of mankind. We have no reason to be faint-hearted or despondent. As we face up to our responsibility for the future our best allies are the nations themselves. The people wish to live, they wish to live without fear; they wish to live without want. They will no longer allow themselves to be made objects of exploitation, oppression and power politics. They demand the chance to exercise their human rights, their civil, economic and social rights. The people are determined and inspired by the idea of their inalienable human dignity, the idea of freedom and the idea of peace. Nothing is more powerful than an idea whose time has come. The time has come. We must act now.
﻿I begin by paying tribute to the wisdom of the members of the General Assembly at its forty-third session, who, in electing you President, Sic, have made clear both the deservedly high esteem in which they hold you and the prominent place held by Argentina and, beyond Argentina, by Latin America in today's world.
I wish to add that I deeply appreciate the great honour of having this opportunity to address the Assembly again.
Having just learned, as the Assembly has, the news about the Nobel Peace Prize, I wish immediately to convey my congratulations to the United Nations on the award of the Prize to the United Nations peace-keeping forces.
When I came to this rostrum five years ago the world was dominated by the East-West confrontation, the proliferation of regional conflicts, the deepening of the gulf between North and South and repeated violations of human tights and the rights of peoples. Have those realities now disappeared? Is our planet decisively turning towards unity and peace? I shall not claim that that is so. In spite of the passing years, I seem to hear too often the same words, the same vain incantations, and to see too often the same hopes being aroused only to end in the  same disillusionment. The expectations of too many peoples remain unfulfilled. Two centuries after the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen there are still many Bastilles to be taken, many liberties to be won, many rights to be safeguarded. But here and there some progress is being seen. What had seemed for ever immovable has begun to move. Will hope come into its own again in the society of men?
We know how much we owe to Mr. Reagan and Mr. Gorbachev, who have had the intelligence and the courage to have done with the arms race and the escalations of confrontation.
Similarly, the adversaries engaged in some regional conflicts - whether they have taken stock of the limits of their action and the attrition of their strength, have changed their appraisal of their people's interests, or have wanted to contribute to the general movement towards the easing of tensions - are trying to disengage themselves from the tragedy they have been living through.
I wish to express my gratitude to peace-loving men and women everywhere who have worked ceaselessly to bring about such a result. Among them I should mention the name of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Perez de Cuellar. Without his skill, his persistence, his constant readiness to serve and his cultural resources, we should not have come this far.
For the first time since the last World War the two greatest Powers have begun to explore the path of disarmament. It must be stated that their agreement on the elimination of United States and Soviet intermediate forces in Europe is a good agreement. On behalf of France, I unhesitatingly approved it from the very first day. It is now my expectation that the United States and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics will make progress in the reduction of their strategic nuclear armaments, as they have planned to do. If the negotiations they are conducting lead to agreements consistent with the imperative rules of balance and verification this will do much to strengthen the security of all.
These questions are, of course, of tremendous importance. But it will be readily understood that, as the head of a European State, I attach priority to the reduction of the conventional armaments which are stockpiled in Europe, and stockpiled unequally, to the disadvantage of Western Europe. It is my earnest hope that the 35 participants in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe will take up the substance of these negotiations as soon as possible.
We have been offered an opportunity, unprecedented in the past half century, to ensure the establishment of a stable balance at a lower, sufficient and reasonable level of armaments. Will this balance be achieved? That will depend on the political will of the States involved. But who could assume the responsibility of rejecting this chance out of hand?
The objective is easy to formulate: that everyone should be able to defend himself, as is his right, without threatening anyone else. But how shall we go about this? I venture to suggest some elements of an answer.
First, by ensuring that no army and no coalition of armies in the area where East and West are facing each other has the means for the sudden launching of a surprise attack, nor for waging a prolonged war. To that end, it would be desirable to arrange measures in that area for the reduction, withdrawal and de-concentration of troops and equipment - tanks, armoured vehicles, artillery, portable bridges and all other techniques for crossing water barriers - and measures for the limitation of reserves and stockpiles.
Secondly, by preparing procedures for verification and inspection to prevent any violation of treaties. These new measures of transparency and confidence would usefully supplement the arrangements arrived at in Helsinki.
My country has taken a number of initiatives concerning the definition of the area in which these constraints would be applied, the ratio between new military equipment and foreign equipment and the ceiling to be set on the basis of an individual country in relation to the whole. It would also be my wish that at the end of the next two years the status of negotiations should be examined. If nothing had been achieved, there would be nothing to prevent people from exercising their freedom. However, a favourable outcome would open vast new prospects for the future of Europe. All of us, Europeans both in the East and in the West, belong to the same continent and derive our heritage from the same culture. History and geography invite us patiently to overcome, by every possible means, for the security of all, the confrontation of hostile blocs.
As for chemical weapons, whose ravages we have unfortunately observed in the recent past, we must eliminate them as quickly as possible. What President Reagan said last Monday about this subject was quite right. He expressed himself in lofty and urgent terms, which echoed our own concerns, and in a manner that is all the more timely because his country possesses such weapons. 1 noted with equal interest that the Soviet Union, which also possesses chemical weapons, had supported this proposal.
The proposals put forward by France, which has no chemical weapons, are of three Hinds. First of all, my country, the depositary of the Geneva Protocol of 1325, naturally favours a meeting of the 110 signatories to that agreement. The purpose of such a meeting, in our view, would be to solemnly reaffirm the commitment not to use chemical weapons, to prevent their proliferation to encourage new accessions to the Protocol, to improve investigative procedures - in short, to indicate a common desire for the success of the work currently being carried out at Geneva within the context of the Conference on Disarmament. .
Secondly, my country wants to increase the role of the United Nations in the struggle against the proliferation and the use of chemical weapons. In 1982 Prance was the originator of the resolution enabling the Secretary-General to arrange investigations in those parts of the world where chemical weapons had reportedly been used. This procedure has already confirmed that such weapons have in fact been used. Let us go further: let us create a situation that would make it impossible for any State to use chemical weapons with impunity to settle its external or internal problems. If any State should use them, I think it would become necessary, among other measures, to impose an embargo on all deliveries of products, technologies and, more generally, weapons to that State. For its part, France is ready, after consultation with its partners, to submit a draft resolution to this effect. This would be without prejudice to any sanctions decided upon by the Security Council.
The third and last point is the one I particularly wish to stress: we must prohibit not only the use of chemical weapons but also their manufacture. The risks of the normalization and the proliferation of chemical weapons compel us to accelerate our efforts to bring about the destruction of stockpiles, as well as to maintain close supervision of the means that would make it possible to rebuild them.
In signing the convention, each State possessing stockpiles of chemical weapons would undertake to destroy them. In the view of experts, this will take several years, and in the meantime the chemical threat will continue to exist. This is why I believe that chemical-weapons factories should be closed as soon as the convention enters into force and, like stockpiles, should b© subjected to international surveillance before they are dismantled. France declares its readiness, as of this moment, to renounce under the same conditions - that is to say, as soon as the future convention enters into force - any possibility of producing chemical weapons.
0£ course, the banning of chemical weapons could not be imposed on some if others, including the nuclear Powers, retained a clear field for themselves and did not persevere in their desire for nuclear disarmament.
In this connection, I recall that in September 1983, speaking from this rostrum, I stated the conditions under which my country would agree to participate, at the proper time, in a nuclear-disarmament conference among the Powers that possess nuclear weapons: a decisive narrowing of the gap between the arsenals of the great Powers and our own·, a halt in the anti-missile, anti-satellite and anti-submarine weapons race; and correction of the Imbalances In conventional armaments. Today I maintain what I said at that time.
I would add that limiting the disarmament effort must be extended to space, the common heritage of mankind. That is why France is opposed to an arms race in space but supports the use of space-borne means of control.
Before the INF treaty, the importance of which is becoming more apparent every day, and the on-site verification for which it provides - a clause the Importance of which can never be over-emphasized - disarmament negotiations had stalled over this problem. At the special session of the United Nations last June - the third special session devoted to disarmament - my country advocated control by satellite and by automatic surveillance, as well as the so-called routine or challenge on-site inspections. We can now define, on a case-by-case basis, a combination of means of control adapted to each disarmament agreement. But nothing can be done without the political will of States.
Coming now to regional conflicts, I can only welcome the developments in the Gulf, what has been initiated in Afghanistan, and what is expected in the Western Sahara, Cambodia and, perhaps, Cyprus. This is the easier for me because France has always refused to recognize the fait accompli, has ceaselessly condemned terrorist or military intimidation, and has tirelessly pleaded for settlement of conflicts by peaceful means. Far be it from me to underestimate the scope of the progress made in the past few months. I have noted, however, that while the rapprochement between the United States and the Soviet Union has contributed to the cessation of fighting, it remains insufficient to restore lasting peace, for the underlying causes persist. In this connection, I have noted that this period of diplomatic calm has not reached several parts of the globe; the Middle East, Central America, despite the Arias Plan and the action of the Contadora and Lima Groups, which France supports; and, while there may be some respite now and again, southern Africa, a direct consequence of the intolerable policy of apartheid.
It is the responsibility of the international community to consolidate what has been achieved and help extinguish the last retraining pockets of violence. When weapons have fallen silent, so much will remain to be done agreements to guarantee, wounds to staunch, adversaries to reconcile, economies to be rebuilt.
It will do no good to shower the work and the person of the Secretary-General with praise, if we are going to withhold our support from him tomorrow. For peace has its prices sending armed troops there, organizing a referendum here, and elsewhere setting up aid for reconstruction. All this has to be financed. I would hate to think that after being so lavish in their war efforts, States, particularly the most powerful, would be tight-fisted when it comes to peace efforts.
In Afghanistan no one can ever be satisfied with replacing an international conflict by a civil war. The withdrawal of foreign troops should normally open up the way for the restoration of the sovereignty of that country, the return of refugees and economic reconstruction. But this can only come about with extreme vigilance.
It is my wish that the cease-fire between Iraq and Iran will lead, as quickly as possible, to a genuine peace, a settlement of conflicts, the reconstruction of  disaster-stricken areas and the restored freedom of navigation in the Gulf and the Strait of Hormuz.
Peace is contagious and everyone, the States and the peoples of the region, will reap the benefits. At this time, how can we be unmindful of the fate of a minority which has suffered in a two-fold way, such as the Kurdish people? I hope that renewed conciliation in Western Sahara will prevail. We could believe it today. This will remove an obstacle to the construction of the Greater Maghreb, bringing with it peace and prosperity, a plan of which Prance approves. Here we count upon the wisdom of leaders.
In the Middle East, the uprising of Palestinian youth and the decision of King Hussein of Jordan have shown once again that the status quo no longer protects those who are subject to it, those who seek to benefit from it, and that it is increasingly deadly for those who are subjected to it.
Let us go back to the basic principles of a lasting settlement, as defined by the United Nations. All members are familiar with them. For my part, I outlined them both in the Knesset in Jerusalem and in the Arab capitals. Israel has the right to exist within safe and recognized borders; the Palestinian people are entitled to aspire to a homeland and to take charge of their own destinies.
In order to arrive at a peace settlement, which would enshrine these rights, there must be dialogue between the parties. Each side, Israelis and Palestinians, must do its share. Each must be willing to accept for the other what it demands for itself, and each must be able to say this in no uncertain terms. I do understand how difficult it is to take the first step.
In order to facilitate dialogue and break down the walls of distrust, the international community must clearly act as an intermediary. A procedure exists: the international conference. It is the only framework within which teal partners can meet and establish bilateral contacts between them. The international conference has become a reference point. Let us make it a reality. I proposed some time ago that a preparatory committee earnestly go about laying the groundwork. Mr. Gorbachev was in agreement with me on this idea. Now the time has come to revive this. I suggest that a diplomatic arrangement be made among the five permanent Members of the Security Council in conjunction with the Secretary-General. This preparatory work should result in recommendations on the organization and calendar of the future conference and recommendations about who its participants will be.
France, of whose ties to Lebanon need not remind the Assembly, will not resign itself to watching that country's independence and unity disintegrate. We call upon the United Nations as a witness to the obstacles which have been placed in the way of the free exercise of the sovereignty of the people. We appeal to the sense of reason of the neighbours of that country. A peaceful, reconciled Lebanon is no threat to anyone. A Lebanon dismembered and the object of conflict and dispute will remain an area of insecurity for us all. Let us urge the Lebanese to draw upon their national pride and patriotism to summon the strength and courage to have faith in their country. I can assure the General Assembly, in any case, that France will remain at the side of those who, in mutual respect, are fighting for a democratic future for Lebanon, as well as its territorial integrity and sovereignty.
Farther away, towards the Far East, an end to the sufferings of Cambodia is in sight. The decision announced by the Government of Viet Nam to end its intervention, the initiatives of the countries of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), the actions of such leaders as Prince Norodom Sihanouk may bring us closer to the hour of a political settlement. My country, which facilitated the initial meeting between the Cambodian partners, will continue to work even harder at this, and soon, I hope. We stand ready, if they so wish, to invite the parties involved to meet in Paris in due course.
At this point in my address, I wish to tell the General Assembly that nothing seems more important to me, whatever the importance of the subjects I have touched upon this morning - disarmament and the settlement of regional conflicts - nothing, I stress, is more important to me than closing the ever-widening gap between developed and developing countries. The causes of this disparity, as the General Assembly knows, are many: political, social, economic, demographic, financial, and so on. They have become so serious that many are tempted to dismiss all remedies as futile. 
That is not the case with France. For seven years now - and I am certainly not the only one - I have been repeating that it is in the interests of the North to help the South; that there is no such thing as fate; that man can always master the course of events and that it is urgently necessary to do so. I see in the persistence of the current imbalances the most damaging cause of tremendous unhappiness, a misfortune which, more assuredly than any other danger, will drive the world towards the endless chaos of war, or something even worse.
Nevertheless, International multilateral or bilateral aid is stagnating or receding. France - which, of all the industrially advanced countries, allocates the highest percentage of its gross national product to development aid - believes that it has not yet done its duty. The target of 0.7 per cent remains its ambition. In particular, the debt burden calls for immediate action. Ά number of very Interesting Initiatives have been launched by one country or another. For ray part, I suggested to the major industrialized countries at their Toronto meeting this year that they make the terms of repayment considerably easier for the poorest countries. As for France, It has chosen to cancel one third of the debt owed to it by these countries. This significant step is but a beginning.
For other heavily indebted countries, particularly In Latin America and Africa, debt also represents an intolerable burden, and in certain cases a threat to democracy. In the face of this situation the International community must show that it can be more realistic and more imaginative. All debts Incurred must be repaid, but the cost of this can be reduced without passing on the burden to the taxpayers of creditor countries.
Thus, last year the United States, in a bold move, guaranteed a proportion of the principal of Mexico's commercial loans. Several countries and many experts have thought of creating a multilateral fund which would lower the cost by guaranteeing interest payments. Various methods of financing this fund have been put forward.
In the view of France, the best technique would be to create a fund in the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to guarantee the payment of interest charged on certain commercial loans converted into bonds. This fund would lower significantly the finance charges payable by debtor countries and would involve them more actively in world trade.
In order to finance this, the developed countries would set aside their share of a new issue of special drawing rights for use by the developing countries. I realize that the implementation of this project would represent a significant legal and financial innovation. It would require lengthy preparatory work and many consultations among creditors and with their debtors. However, this alone would seem to be equal to the challenge.
But development requires many other things.  I  would mention the following: stabilizing the export earnings of countries in the southern hemisphere and diversifying and increasing the value of their production - and the Uruguay Round must take these into account; environmental protection, which only a short time ago was endangered by industrial wastes from the North being disposed of in the South - and the international community will have to agree to regulations and the necessary precautions; a massive transfer of technology and know-how from the North to the South - and I would like in this regard to suggest a new approach, modelled on what is known as Europe's EUREKA project, in which Government stimulus, together with initiatives freely undertaken by companies and universities, leads to co-operation on an equal footing. I continue ray brief list: launching major programmes of universal interest which can mobilize our energies to bring help to regions facing catastrophes due to natural causes or the folly of men. I cite as an example the stabilization of the rivers that have been flooding Bangladesh, the cause of a terrible catastrophe, as an appropriate beginning for a project of this kind. France, for its part, is ready to contribute.
Two centuries ago France began a revolution that changed the course of history throughout the universe. In doing so, France took a position in the battle which has yet to be won, and is still necessary, for a greater measure of freedom, equality and brotherhood. As we prepare to celebrate this bicentenary, let us defend human rights more fiercely than ever before, from the earliest recognized to the latest: human rights, the rights of peoples, the rights of mankind. Today, in certain emergency situations, in situations of distress or extreme injustice, we should affirm the right of humanitarian assistance.
Economic and social progress is the only solid foundation on which to build democracy; the moral weight of public opinion and unflagging vigilance will be its best guarantee.
So many people are still being denied their most elementary tights and for so many men, women and children poverty is the only world they know, and the absence of eights is their only horizon.
Surely the time has come to acknowledge that rights of mankind exist and should be defined. I am thinking of the protection of our natural environment in the face of the sometimes irresponsible requirements of our economy. I was happy to hear the representative of the Soviet Union asking for a plan to be worked out before 1992 on this subject. I am also thinking of the protection of the human species, the ravages of drugs, and the extraordinary possibilities of science, in particular genetics. 
The conference of Nobel Prize-winners which I convened in 1988 in Paris elected us to the dangers of this. It is not knowledge in itself that is dangerous; it is rather the applications of science that must be controlled, that we must master. Since we are accountable in proportion to the power we now possess in transmitting a natural and genetically intact heritage to our descendants, we must lay the foundations for the ethics of the third millennium.
I must stop here. Since, with you, I have been looking at the future, I dream of the day when Europe, as it is trying to take shape, will be able to speak here with a single voice, using, as I have just done, the language of peace among nations and confidence in the destiny of humanity.
﻿
Sir, may I offer you my congratulations on taking up the presidency of the General Assembly and send my warm thanks to the outgoing President, the Deputy Foreign Minister of the German Democratic Republic.
This has been a year of unprecedented natural disaster. No outsider can fully share the tragedy of the flooding in Bangladesh. The hurricane devastation in the Caribbean and Mexico has horrified us all. From South Asia, through Africa, to the Caribbean and even to the grain belt of America, we have seen destruction on a scale rarely equalled before.
Last week I was in Africa. I went first to the Sudan. I saw there the devastation caused by the recent floods and the brave efforts of the Sudanese Government and people to cope with that crisis. I visited a refugee camp of 500 tents supplied by Britain, made in Malta. Alongside them were tents from Saudi Arabia and Kuwait. Nations from all over the world had come to Sudan's aid. The following day I flew to Kenya, where pictures of the famine and suffering in southern Sudan were front-page news in the Nairobi press.
The tragedies that have been occurring this year are seen and felt by people in towns and cities around the globe, and the world community has responded with rarely equalled sympathy and generosity. My own country alone has this year contributed some £80 million to disaster relief around the world. The total contributed by the Western democracies is likely to have been at least 10 times that amount.
These immediate natural disasters are a poignant reminder of the need to tackle an issue that is of longer term but crucial for us all; the health of our planet as a whole. Some of its present transformation is good. Its resources are being better used for the benefit of mankind. But other elements are leading to a progressive pollution of the land, the sea and the air.
There has already been some disruption of natural patterns. Damage to the ozone layer, first identified by the British Antarctic Survey in 1985, caused instant international alarm. That concern has already led to agreement to limit the production of certain industrial chemicals.
The possibility of climatic change caused by the increase in the greenhouse gases, leading to a global heat trap, has become a real concern. The increases predicted in global temperatures would have substantial effects, within the next few decades, on life and human society. Even small variations would have great consequences in a crowded world.
We are totally dependent on climate. Damage it beyond repair, and the earth becomes a Lifeless desert spinning in space. We cannot leave a problem of this magnitude to technical bodies. Britain is among those who have pressed for a serious debate on the subject within the United Nations. Last year we welcomed the Brundtland report, the report of the World Commission on Environment and Development. We want to carry forward its work. So we welcome the forthcoming discussion in the Second Committee. The problem must command an urgent place on the world agenda.
It is in the face of natural disaster that we are made most vividly aware of the fragility and interdependence of human existence. Faced with the enormity of the difficulties, the speed and universality of response are extraordinary. Yet sadly, in the face of man-made disasters we have not so far been able to respond in such a United and effective way. Their causes are more complex, their effects are equally devastating, and they too demand our utmost and our urgent energy and ingenuity. This year we have broken the pattern of the past by applying the principles of the Charter to the resolution of a lengthy and bloody dispute, the conflict between Iran and Iraq.
Each one of us here is committed, bindingly committed, to the Charter of the United Nations; not just to words on a page, but to fundamental principles of·' justice and international law. It was those principles that I had in mind when I spoke here a year ago at the height of the Iran-Iraq war. I said then: "The blunt truth is that the way in which the United Nations handles the conflict between Iran and Iraq must have a decisive effect upon its reputation in the eyes of all the peoples whom we represent." (A/42/PV.8, p. 58) I called then for a degree of unity which the international community had rarely been able to achieve, and a year later the scene that then seemed so dark and hopeless has been lighted by the united efforts of the international community.
Many factors have helped to foster this change; the realization by Iran and Iraq that war to the death would mean mutual destruction the spirit and resolve of the Secretary-General and his dedicated staff; and, perhaps above all, the part played by the Security Council and its five permanent members.
The permanent members are given a unique power under the Charter. That power, the power of veto, carries with it a special responsibility, a responsibility that has rarely been exercised. But the last year has witnessed the development of a new co-operation among the five. It began tentatively; it was pursued pragmatically; but it was born of principle as well as pragmatism, of a combined determination to do all we could together to bring an end to the devastation of a senseless war.  
That determination, coupled with the skill, patience and persistence of the Secretary-General, culminated in the successful achievement of a cease-fire. Now the action has switched from the battleground to the negotiating table, from the banks of the Tigris to the banks of the East River. The Secretary-General must be allowed to build on the cease-fire so as to arrange the withdrawal of forces and the repatriation of prisoners of war. The framework for peace is Security Council resolution 598 (1987), which provides for negotiations under the auspices of the Security Council. Britain will do all in its power to sustain the spirit of co-operation and to contribute to a peaceful settlement.
If the international community can find a way forward on the dispute between Iran and Iraq it cannot ignore the plight of the Kurds, driven from their homes not by natural disaster but by unnatural force and brutality. The containment of conflict in one form must not lead to its prosecution in another.
The charge that Iraq has used chemical weapons against the Kurds adds gravity to the situation. Under Security Council resolution 620 (1988), the Secretary-General can conduct a prompt and independent inquiry. The need for such an inquiry is evident. The refusal of Iraq to co-operate in such an inquiry is all the more to be deplored, because the spread of chemical weapons is one of the most disturbing of recent developments.
As more countries develop a chemical-weapons capability, the risk of the increased use of these weapons as an instrument of war and terror multiplies. It is for that reason that Britain has taken a lead in preparing an international convention for the world-wide suppression of chemical weapons and in pressing the crucial case for greater openness in this field. Nowhere is glasnost more necessary. At the special session in June I made important proposals to strengthen the international standards of the 1925 Geneva Protocol. So today I welcome President Reagan's proposal to reconvene the 1925 Geneva Conference to mobilize the international community behind the search for a convention on chemical weapons which would outlaw their use.
Co-operation on the resolution of the Iran-Iraq conflict has been unique. But it must not be the only example of the constructive exercise of shared responsibility among the permanent members of the Security Council. There are grounds for hoping that will not be the case, for we have also been witnessing this year a change in the atmosphere which increases the scope for such co-operation.
East-West relations themselves have moved on to a new footing. The Treaty on the Elimination of Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles - the INF Treaty - the Washington and Moscow summits and the Moscow Party Conference have all been remarkable in their separate ways.
Perhaps just as significant has been the recent acknowledgement by Mr. Shevardnadze that foreign policy is no longer to be seen in Moscow as a special form of class struggle. "The struggle between the opposing systems", he said, "is no longer a determining tendency of the present era". I believe that most of the members of this Assembly will say "amen" to that. No longer, to paraphrase Clausewitz, need foreign policy be the continuation of class warfare by other means.
Even so, progress on arms-control talks would not have been made without the constant and united determination of the members of the North Atlantic alliance. Of course we want to see success in the negotiations between Washington and Moscow for a reduction in strategic weapons, but we want to see early progress as well in cutting the conventional imbalances in Europe, which prejudice the security of millions of people. 
Arms-control negotiations no longer bear the full burden of East-West relations. They remain a vital component in the creation of a climate of confidence. So too does the search for a world-wide pattern of respect for human rights and freedom. In Europe we look for further progress in this regard from an early conclusion of the Vienna Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. The fundamental principle, which we have long proclaimed and which Mr. Shevardnadze endorsed in his statement yesterday, is that the rule of law and the right of the individual to determine his own future are inseparable.
More widely than that, if we can establish confidence in East-West relations we can harness energies which have too often pulled in different directions, and put them to constructive work. The place to do that is the United Nations.
There are many tasks, many regional conflicts, but also growing signs that progress is possible.
Recent developments over Afghanistan are one example. Eight years after its forces invaded Afghanistan the Soviet Union has finally begun to take them home. Over half have now left. This may well reflect a new realism in Moscow, but it is also a consequence of the courage and determination of the Afghan people and of the sustained and overwhelming support of this General Assembly. Tens of thousands of Afghans have died. Millions have been driven from their homes. That is why we now look forward to the complete and prompt withdrawal of Soviet troops. The Afghan people as a whole must then be given the chance to select a truly representative government by a genuine act of self-determination. Only then can Afghanistan start to live again.
It is possible now to perceive as well that universal condemnation of Viet Nam's illegal occupation of Cambodia is also having its effect. Britain was among the first to insist that Viet Nam must withdraw from Cambodia unconditionally and quickly. Viet Nam cannot by itself sustain its occupation; its own economy is in ruins. 
One consequence of Viet Nam's policy has been the huge exodus of its own people in boats to Hong Kong and other destinations. It is time for this tragic migration to cease, time for Viet Nam to take back its own people in humane fashion. Hong Kong's policy of seeking to return those people who are not genuine refugees is the only way to cope with what would otherwise be an unmanageable influx.
We also think the time is now right to look closely at ways of promoting a settlement in Cambodia. The aim should be to secure the early and unconditional withdrawal of Vietnamese forces and a political settlement to give Cambodia a stable and secure Government, that must by definition preclude a return to the horrors of the Pol Pot regime.
Just as in the Gulf one resolution of the Security Council offers the prospect of peace, so in southern Africa another resolution offers similar hope of a peaceful end to an old dispute. Ten years ago tomorrow Security Council resolution 435 (1978) was adopted. It remains the best framework for independence for Namibia.  The first crucial step has been taken in South Africa's withdrawal from Angola and the establishment of an effective cease-fire. The next task is to achieve the withdrawal of South African forces from Namibia; and all Cuban forces from Angola and free- elections in Namibia, leading to independence. That will require enormous ingenuity, perseverance and compromise.
It will require from South Africa a new respect for the integrity of its independent neighbours. We hope the recent reaffirmation of the Nkomati accord represents a commitment by South Africa to the stability of the region as a whole.
It will require from Angola a determined effort to achieve reconciliation within Angola, where the Cuban presence has helped to make an international issue of what is essentially a matter for internal resolution.
Just as Security Council resolution 435 (1978) has stood the test of time, so too has the British Government's commitment to act in its support. We long ago offered to provide a signals unit to the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG). We remain ready to play our part, and are ready, with our partners in the European Community, to offer assistance to an independent Namibia.
A settlement in Angola and the independence of Namibia would not in themselves resolve the intractable problems of South Africa. The principle at stake there is a simple one; the liberty and dignity of the individual. We are committed to the abolition of the system of apartheid, which stifles liberty and denies dignity. We have to find the lever that will effect that change. We do not believe that comprehensive sanctions are that lever. Some see sanctions as a political gesture which should be made almost for its own sake, but it would be an empty gesture. It would be a gesture with too high a price attached; too high a price in terms of the millions of black jobs, black livelihoods, which would be at stake. Our goal is the same as that of our friends in Africa. We are doing all we can to bring apartheid to an end.
Our aid to South Africa's neighbours since 1980 is worth well over £1 billion. We supply defence assistance to Mozambique and Zimbabwe. The Limpopo railway is being repaired with British help and defended by Mozambican troops trained in Zimbabwe by British army officers.
We give aid to black groups and individuals within South Africa so that they can educate themselves, build their own enterprises and free themselves from the oppression of apartheid.
In southern Africa, the parties to a longstanding dispute seem at last to be seeking agreement within the framework of a Security Council resolution.
The principles of a settlement in the Middle East were similarly laid down in a Security Council resolution 21 years ago. They are no less valid today. Israel and the Palestinians have a historic sense of injustice. That injustice is aggravated, not alleviated, by terrorist attacks against Israel. And the violent suppression of Palestinian aspirations jeopardizes the search for a peaceful settlement.
The international community cannot afford to give up the search for peace. The need for an international conference involving the five permanent members of the Security Council is more vital than ever. We shall be persistent in our efforts to help create the conditions in which such a conference can be held.
In Western Sahara, we have been the two sides to a dispute brought together by the commendable efforts of the Secretary-General. They have accepted that a referendum is the only way of resolving their differences. 
I hope that this new willingness to seek peaceful solutions will prove contagious. Regarding one dispute with which Britain itself is concerned, let me just say one thing; the right of the Falkland islanders to self-determination cannot be compromised, hat my country will continue energetically to seek ways of restoring more normal relations with Argentina.
Regional disputes around the world are by no means all or even the worst of our problems today. Conflicts within a nation pose some of the most complicated and intractable problems facing the international community. Often they are at a level deeper than a dispute between one nation State and the next. Often they escape the procedures and the mechanisms by which we are accustomed to operate. Yet the way in which they dislocate the very fabric of nationhood is itself a cause of tension and a challenge for the international community.
The tragedy of the Lebanon is an example of such sub-national conflict that divides a country down the middle and at the same time extends beyond its borders. We can think of other examples. Earlier this month, in Sudan, I saw the tragic consequences of an internal conflict unresolved. And the conflict in Ethiopia has exacerbated the horrors of famine and starvation in that country.
In Burma, we have been appalled at the killing of unarmed demonstrators, women and children, which has taken place over the past three months. Such violence will solve nothing. The Burmese authorities must recognize that the only way to a lasting solution to the country's internal crisis lies in meeting the desire of the Burmese people for greater freedom and multi-party democracy.
This type of internal problem poses particular difficulties for the international community. We must work hard to find answers.
I welcome the resumption of the peace process in Cyprus. The Secretary-General has met the leaders of the two communities on the island. Agreement has been created on negotiating a just and lasting settlement by 1 June next year. As we meet here, another international event is under way on the far side of the world. In Seoul, in Korea, the hosting of the Olympic Games is a tribute to the remarkable political and economic progress made in that country. We welcome the recent contacts between North and South: we hope that they will contribute to the improvement in atmosphere that will one day lead to the Korean people being properly represented with us here in this institution.
We can extend our co-operation into new areas to deal with new challenges to international peace and stability, challenges which postdate the creation of the United Nations itself.
The battle against international terrorism is one such. Following the hijacking of KU 422 in April, Britain launched an initiative which led to an agreement in the International Civil Aviation Organization on the detaining of hijacked aircraft so as to contain the spreading of a hijack crisis from one country to another. We must build on that measure to strengthen international protection against future hijackings.
The evil of drug-related crime also challenges us to a united response. In some parts of the world the malevolent forces of drug trafficking do as much damage as traditional armed conflict. Individually, many nations may feel they are victims of forces beyond their control. Together, the international community has a power immeasurably greater than the greatest threat. We must create powerful weapons for ourselves, above all by denying the use of the financial system to those that profit from this trade and by preventing funds from being ploughed back into that trade, through co-operation to seize drug traffickers' assets wherever they are. My own country has adopted legal powers to help do this. We cannot act alone. We urge the international community to consider similar action. 
With the terrorist, the hijacker, the drug trafficker, we have to find ways of directly attacking the environment which sustains him. We must deny him the life support of finance or the comfort of a bolt hole on the other side of a frontier. Drugs and terror are partners in crime. We must be partners within this Organization in fighting them.
We must be partners, too, in fighting afflictions which are not man-made but which require human resource to solve. When AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome) first started, there was a tendency to put up moral barricades, maximize blame and minimize action. Now we know better. In January, Ministers of Health from all over the world met in London to discuss the problem openly, compare our experience and co-operate in finding solutions. In the face of such disparate and complex issues it is not always easy for the international community to act. None the less, the greater the degree of unity we can display, the greater our chances of finding solutions.
In the face of such disparate and complex issues it is not always easy for the international community to act. None the less, the greater the degree of unity we can display, the greater our chances of finding solutions. I am convinced that we can go further together.
I began by speaking about my recent visit to Africa and of how different countries, helped by the international community, are coping with man-made as well as natural hazards. In each of the five African countries I visited I was enormously conscious of the economic problems with which they are grappling. Their experience is mirrored in other continents. 
So we warmly welcomed the positive conclusion last weekend of the meeting under United Nations auspices which reviewed the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990. We will continue to do all we can to help. We can now build further on our partnership with the countries concerned,
Disparities between rich and poor cannot be reduced overnight. It will be a long process. Aid can help. So, too, can the creation of more open conditions for international trade, and likewise internal economic reform, within the framework of structural adjustment and with adequate support from other countries. That is the importance of relieving the burden of debt on those least able to bear it. These are all matters in which Britain will continue to play a prominent, and in many respects a catalytic, role.
The proposals on debt relief which we launched over a year ago are now coming to fruition. This opens the way for a number of countries to benefit from rescheduling on concessional terms before the end of the year. But in the last resort it is the Governments and peoples of the countries concerned that must work out their own destiny. We support their own strong determination to that end and we will work to sustain our own partnership with them.
There is a new spirit throughout the world in seeking to live up to the undertakings which we have all given under the United Nations Charter. There is a new resolve to put this Organization to work for our common good. We must sustain that spirit and that resolve in the year ahead.
﻿
It gives me great pleasure that a distinguished son and eminent representative of a country with which my country has close and cordial relations is presiding over the General Assembly at its forty-third session. I extend to Ambassador Caputo our warm felicitations on his well-deserved election. We are confident that with his exceptional ability and experience the deliberations of the Assembly have already been assured success. I would like also to place on record our deep appreciation for the effective leadership that his predecessor, Mr. Peter Florin, provided to the General Assembly during its forty-second session.
In his report on the work of the Organization for 1988, the Secretary-General recalled that he was cautiously optimistic that "the sails of the small boat in which all the people of the Earth were gathered seemed to have caught a light but favourable wind". (Д/43/1, p. 2) I take this opportunity to pay a tribute to the man who has played no mean role in the careful and patient navigation by which the vessel has come within sight of large sections of the shore. The Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, has earned the admiration of all for his patience, his skill, his understanding touch and his grasp of the larger questions as well as the small details involved in the various issues dealt with by the United Nations. The decision to confer the Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International Understanding on our Secretary-General was a tribute to his exceptional contribution to the cause of peace.
This year, 1988, has been the year of the United Nations. In the past few months the patient and persistent diplomacy of the United Nations was capped with the signing of the Geneva Agreements on Afghanistan, the entry into force of a cease-fire on the Iran-Iraq border, the renewal of inter-communal talks in Cyprus and the creation of an environment conducive to the resolution of the problem of Western Sahara. Even those who tended to pass judgement on the United Nations purely on the basis of the criteria of the maintenance of international peace and security are happily acknowledging today that this is indeed an impressive record of which the United Nations can be justifiably proud. 
India welcomes this reaffirmation of faith in the United Nations. For an overwhelming majority of Members, support for the United Nations has always been an article of faith. The universalization of this support during 1988, which we applaud as we always did, will no doubt strengthen the capacity of the Organization, not only with respect to preserving peace but also, equally, to tackling other scourges facing humankind, such as poverty, hunger, ecological degradation, terrorism and narcotics. We trust that the United Nations will be reinvigorated, not only in political terms but also in terms of concrete financial support. Let the coming decades be the decades of the United Nations. Let the all-round support which the United Nations always deserved, but seems to have got this year, be always available to it hereafter.
India, along with the rest of the international community, rejoices in the transformation of the international climate during the past year. We are indeed living through historic times. The dramatic improvement in relations between the super-Powers, for which we salute the leadership of the two countries, has had a positive impact throughout the world. History, however, teaches us that good times, like bad times, do not normally last forever. But one may be forgiven on the present occasion for entertaining the belief that the principal players have by now made a realistic assessment of the long-term interests of mankind, along with their respective national interests, and that hence the current thaw may be more lasting than those of the past.
The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, since its inception, has worked tirelessly precisely for such a turn in the international climate. By taking principled positions on major issues of our times and by refusing to get entangled in the confrontation of competing military alliances, the non-aligned countries have helped in containing conflict, and have thus contributed to the peace process which has always inhered in the minds of the millions, although it had been rendered dormant and muted by the display of military might. Therefore, we the non-aligned can claim part of the credit for the improved state of affairs. But along with claiming the credit the Movement needs to redouble its efforts to make the peace process irreversible, no longer vulnerable to the braking mechanisms which operated earlier owing to motivations too well known to need recounting.
The new air of euphoria is totally understandable as it marks a welcome departure from the intense and often bitter rivalry between the major Powers which at times brought the world to the brink of a catastrophe. It seems to have been replaced now by healthy competition for presenting proposals for strengthening peace, supporting the United Nations, saving the world from ecologic disaster, among others. It is true that this long-awaited spirit of change unfortunately has not extended to the economic field. We would therefore be well-advised to remain watch full and alert, while pursuing determined efforts to make the transformation to peace final and all-pervasive so as to comprehend all facets of human life and activity on our planet. While the primary responsibility would remain with the major Powers, the rest of us and, of course, the United Nations, can and must play a very important role.
The ratification of the Treaty on the Elimination of Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles - INF Treaty - by the United States and the Soviet Union was a historic first step which must, within an agreed time-frame and in well-considered stages, lead to successive reductions and eventual elimination of all nuclear weapons. While we are fully aware of the complexities involved in disarmament negotiations, we find that political will has enabled the experts to find satisfactory answers to what were projected as almost un-resolvable difficulties of adequate verification. Similar political will would be needed in solving the whole gamut of disarmament questions, beginning with the reduction of strategic nuclear weapons by 50 per cent, which has already been agreed upon.
Those steps, each important in itself, have to be viewed in the perspective of a comprehensive scenario of total disarmament. Only thus do they make sense and become effective and beneficial. At the third special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament in June this year, my Prime Minister, Rajiv Gandhi, put forward a comprehensive action plan for the total elimination of all nuclear weapons by the year 2010. That action plan has received appreciation in the Non-Aligned Movement, among other Governments as well as non-governmental organizations. We put forward our proposal to give concrete shape to the desire of a large segment of world public opinion for a time-bound action programme to eliminate nuclear weapons. We should also take into account other related aspects including verification.
With regard to verification, delegates will recall that the delegations of countries participating in the six-nation initiative for peace and nuclear disarmament presented a concrete proposal at the third special session on disarmament the endorsement, in principle, of an international verification agency within the United Nations. It is the intention of the six countries to revive this initiative at this session of the General Assembly.
The linkage between disarmament and development is by now well-recognized. Hardly anyone can dispute the proposition that the resources being spent on armaments could be more profitably employed in peaceful developmental activities. The decisions taken by the United Nations Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development, held last year, need to be followed up and acted upon.
Regional conflicts have dominated discussions at the current session of the General Assembly. This is perfectly understandable. Success in achieving breakthroughs is most of these conflicts is attributed, and justifiably so, to the patient diplomacy of the United Nations, as well as to the rapprochement between the two super-Powers. There is, perhaps, a lesson for all of us in this, particularly for the non-aligned and developing countries. If the tendency to seek massive external military assistance and to pursue dangerous nuclear weapon policies in the illusory hope of strengthening one's bargaining position with one's neighbours were resisted, there would be fewer regional conflicts and consequently less dependence on outside Powers for the solution of such conflicts.
India rejoiced at the cease-fire between Iran and Iraq which came into effect on 20 August 1988. Thanks to the statesmanship of the leaders of the two countries and to the efforts of the Secretary-General, the international community has been spared witnessing the eighth anniversary of the war. The cease-fire is an important first step and must be consolidated. The negotiations between the two countries currently under way, under United Nations auspices, must be pursued. The issues involved are complex and highly emotional for both sides. India has been involved in discussing the issues in detail with the two countries as part of the efforts of the Non-Aligned Movement. That experience makes me feel confident that the issues, though complex, will eventually be solved. India has the closest of ties with Iran and Iraq, and we know that the two countries are anxious to get on with the stupendous task of reconstruction.
My country rejoices at the release of the Indian national, Mr. Mithileshwar Singh. We hope that all the other hostages will also be freed and reunited with their families at an early date.
India has welcomed the Geneva Accords on Afghanistan. We have had historical ties of deep friendship with the people of Afghanistan. The Geneva Accords have established & framework which would enable the Afghan people to decide on their future free from foreign interference or intervention. While the withdrawal of Soviet troops has proceeded on schedule, we are greatly perturbed at persistent reports of violations of the Geneva Accords and hope that they will be implemented faithfully by all the parties. In addition to restoring peace and stability to the region, the implementation of the Geneva Accords would also remove the ostensible cause for introduction of sophisticated arms into the area.
While positive developments have taken place in the Gulf as well as in Afghanistan, the continued great-Power naval presence in the Indian Ocean remains a factor contributing to tension and instability. We reiterate our call for the withdrawal of all military forces of outside Powers from the Indian Ocean so that it can emerge as a zone of peace.
There is more than a glimmer of hope for the resolution of the conflict situation in South-East Asia. The horrors suffered by the people of Kampuchea in the 1970s must not be allowed to revisit them ever. The dialogue at the Jakarta Informal Meeting was a welcome beginning, which we appreciate. We also applaud the initiative of the Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement to explore ways and means in which the Movement can assist the efforts to solve the Kampuchean problem. Given India's historical ties with the peoples of South-East Asia, we are ready and willing to contribute in whatever way we can to this process.
In our neighbourhood, we have watched with growing concern the trials and tribulations faced by the people of Burma, with whom the people of India are bound by close ties of history and culture. India has always scrupulously avoided interfering in the internal affairs of other countries. However, we cannot but sympathize with democratic aspirations. We are saddened by the growing number of innocent dead in Burma. We hope that a way will be found to end this tragic conflict as soon as possible.
There is renewed belief that the long-delayed solution to the Namibian question is at hand. Responsibility for the delay rests squarely with the South African Government, which has, with impunity, refused to comply with its international commitments and obligations. The world community is committed to the emancipation of the Namibian people engaged in a historic struggle for freedom under the leadership of the South West African People's Organization (SWAPO). Their sole and authentic representative. India was the first country to accord diplomatic recognition to the representative of it. We look forward to welcoming Namibia as the 160th Member of the United Nations at the General Assembly session next year.
While there is movement on the question of Namibia, the situation in South Africa itself shows no sign of improvement. The racist Pretoria regime continues its reign of terror, subjecting the people of South Africa to the most inhuman forms of oppression. The evil system of apartheid cannot be reformed, it has to be abolished in total. South Africa must open а dialogue with the genuine representatives of the oppressed people. Nelson Mandela, the universal symbol of courage and fortitude, whose state of health is a cause of concern to all of us, must be released immediately and unconditionally. Effective pressure in the form of comprehensive mandatory sanctions must be applied, without invoking unconvincing arguments regarding their effect on employment of the oppressed people, and so on.
The Action for Resisting Invasion, Colonialism and apartheid (AFRICA) Fund, established by the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, has received pledges and contributions from a third of the world community. Described at the recent meeting of the non-aligned in Nicosia, Cyprus, as an instance of the Movement's capacity for collective action, the Fund demonstrates an international commitment to the front-line States and liberation movements of southern Africa transcending geographical or political barriers.
The international 00tmunity should be opposed to racial discrimination no matter where it is practised. Last year my delegation referred to the unfortunate developments in Fiji, which had distinct racial overtones. He hoped that the groundswell of international public opinion would help restore the spirit of trust, harmony and concord which had prevailed in Fiji since its independence. As a Member of the United Nations and as a member of its Committee on decolonization, India had been in the forefront in the fight for Fiji's independence. It is a matter of great regret to us that the situation in Fiji has considerably deteriorated during the past year. There are clear indications that an attempt is being made to institutionalise racial discrimination in Fiji. We understand that there is to be a process of consultation with the various communities before the draft constitution is finalized. We hope that this process will enable all sections of the people to participate in it in a non-discriminatory manner. There was a time when Fiji used to be described as "what the world should be like". The racial harmony, peace and tranquillity in Fiji used to be a model for the world to follow. We hope that Fiji will return soon to those harmonious times.
India's support of the right of self-determination for the Palestinian people has its roots in our own struggle against colonial rule. Many changes have taken place in the region. What has remained constant, however, is the determination of the Palestinian people. The message of intifadah to the world is unambiguous, 20 years of occupation have utterly failed to suppress the fierce nationalism of the Palestinian people. It should also have made it clear to the world, including Israel, that territories illegally occupied cannot be retained forever. Israel must withdraw from the territories it has occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem. We reiterate the call for the convening of an international peace conference on the Middle East, with the participation of all the parties, including the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), on an equal footing. Such a conference, we believe, should facilitate the establishment of an independent homeland for the Palestinians and the creation of conditions in which all the States in the region can live within secure and recognized boundaries.
India has always supported the aspirations of the people of Cyprus to live together in ш independent and non-aligned country, with its territorial integrity intact. We deeply appreciate the resumption of dialogue between the two communities under the auspices of the United Nations Secretary-General. We urge both sides to spare no effort to find a solution to the problem within the time-limit envisaged by the Secretary-General.
Similarly, we ate heartened by the acceptance by the two sides concerned of the Secretary-General's proposals for finding a solution to the problem of Western Sahara. Here again, we hope that this question will be resolved satisfactorily so that the people of the territory, as well as other countries in the Maghreb, can live in peace and co-operation with one another.
In the Korean peninsula, which unhappily remains divided, there is an overwhelming sentiment in favour of peace, reconciliation and dialogue. We hops the aspirations of its people to peaceful reunification will find early fulfilment.
This year marks the fortieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The Declaration, which furnishes the philosophical basis for the human rights work of the United Nations, is of seminal importance. Like the Charter itself, it points to the interdependence of human rights, social and economic progress and international peace and security. Over the past four decades, the concepts embodied in the Declaration have been developed and enriched, particularly with regard to economic, social and cultural rights. It remains our firm belief that the inherent dignity of the human person requires full respect for his civil and political rights and, equally, for his economic, social and cultural rights.
While there; have been encouraging developments recently in the political sphere, the outlook in the area of international economic co-operation remains bleak. The low rates of growth of world trade and output in recent years will not suffice to resolve any of the major problems facing the world economy. In the industrialized countries high rates of unemployment persist, making it difficult for them to undertake the structural adjustments that ate necessary in the long term. The major imbalance, with its attendant uncertainties, continues to persist. For the developing countries the outlook is even worse. Inadequate resource flows, deteriorating terms of trade and the heavy burden of external debt have all but halted the development process of these countries. They have retarded attempts to address the fundamental problem of poverty and deprivation. The 1980s are being characterized as the lost decade of development.
The policies of the major developed countries constitute the essential determinants of the external environment for the developing countries. There has been no coherent and considered effort to fashion these policies on the basis of co-operative international action, taking into account their impact and consequences for the developing countries. Here it is useful to recall the proposals made by the developing countries for removing the structural deficiencies and fundamental failings of the international monetary, financial and trading systems. The underlying structural and systemic problems of the world economy have to be addressed by deliberate and co-operative international action that gives full recognition to global interdependence. Both the developed and the developing countries need to pursue convergent and mutually reinforcing policies in the interrelated areas of trade, money and finance.
The area of international trade is being increasingly characterized by an erosion of the accepted rules and regulations and by reliance on unilateral discriminatory action. Despite repeated affirmation of commitments on standstill and rollback, protectionism continues to grow unabated. Protectionist measures ate imposed in those areas where the developing countries have demonstrated their competitiveness and made investments for structural reforms. There has been little progress so far in the ongoing Uruguay Round on multilateral trade negotiations in areas of direct interest to the developing countries, such as safeguards, textiles, agriculture and tropical products. The Uruguay Round should provide an important opportunity for strengthening and preserving the multilateral trading system. It should also help to reduce the tensions and distortions that characterize the world trade system.
The proposals made in the new areas in the Uruguay Round have to be consistent with the right of developing countries to manage their economies in accordance with their national objectives and priorities, to regulate activities of transnational corporations and to channel investment into those desired sectors of their economies. Such proposals should promote the autonomous and self-reliant development of those countries.
Another area of concern is the stagnation or decline, in real terms, of resource flows to developing countries. The international financial system has failed to ensure the transfer of adequate resources on proper terms and conditions to developing countries and thus provide adequate financing for development activities. The alleviation of the current development crisis requires з more effective system that will guarantee an increasing flow of resources, in particular official development assistance resources, to developing countries and also guarantee access by international monetary and financial institutions to adequate resources.
Let us collectively recognize the need to evolve a more broad-based system for managing the world economy that reflects the interests of all groups of countries and provides an equitable and harmonious basis for the collective management of global interdependence. The seventh session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development was a small step in this direction. In the coming days we must make use of other opportunities for building a renewed consensus on development directed against the global problem of hunger and poverty. The formulation and elaboration of an international development strategy for the Fourth United Nations Development Decade provides such opportunity.
The virtual paralysis of the North-South dialogue makes it all the more important for the developing countries to redouble their efforts to collective self-reliance through the economic co-operation among developing countries. It has become imperative for developing countries to build on complementary in their economies. In this respect the conclusion in Belgrade earlier this year of the Agreement on the Global System of Trade Preferences was a significant achievement. It laid down for the first time among the signatory developing countries the legal and institutional foundation for trade expansion.
In our own region the formation of the South Asian Association of Regional Co-operation has provided a framework for wide-ranging economic and technical co-operation. Specific areas of mutually beneficial co-operation have been identified and practical measures are being implemented by member States.
One is, however, constrained to note that economic co-operation among developing countries has developed only partially and its full potential remains unexplored. What is needed is a hard look at concrete programmes to address, in the first instance and in the main, the elementary human needs of a large chunk of humanity. In these areas it is possible to make a better impact than has happened so far.
During the current year many developing countries have been hit by natural disasters requiring urgent international relief operations. Large areas in Africa have been afflicted by prolonged drought. Jamaica has been devastated by a hurricane of unprecedented magnitude, and Sudan by floods. Our own region, South Asia, has witnessed widespread havoc caused by floods, above all in Bangladesh, though we too have not been spared the ravages of floods. It was our privilege, as a friendly neighbour, to be the first to go to the assistance of the people of Bangladesh in response to an appeal from the Government of Bangladesh. A task force of experts from Bangladesh and India has been set up to study the Ganga and Brahmaputra waters jointly for flood management and the water flow thereof. 
Over the past two decades, drug abuse and illicit trafficking in drugs have assumed proportions of a major global problem, not only affecting consumers but also posing serious problems for transit States. We hope that the Plenipotentiary Conference scheduled to convene in Vienna later this year in order to finalize a draft convention on this question will meet with success.
The United Nations is dedicated to the pursuit of the twin goals of peace and development. It can claim credit for significant achievements in both these spheres, and in particular in recent months we have seen encouraging progress in the resolution of complex political issues. But in the sphere of economic and social development, its major successes belong to past decades; its achievements recently have been relatively modest. We must renew our commitment to the eradication of the evils of poverty, disease and illiteracy through concerted international action. This is a struggle that must be waged in common by all humankind. As Jawaharlal Nehru told the Assembly in 1963, "The only war we want is a war against poverty and disease and its brood".
Many centuries ago India's sages gave the calls "Let us move, together. Let us talk, together. Let us be of single common mind."
The renewed sense of community witnessed in the United Nations today gives hope that over the coming year, in time for its forty-fourth session, the world body can set before itself a viable specific agenda for the 1990s that would help render our planet ready for the century drawing in upon it. Such an agenda must assess and chart the means of fulfilment of the minimum needs of man. The world, as Mahatma Gandhi put it, has enough to fulfil man's need, but not his greed. This distinction between need and greed becomes all the more real and crucial at a time when geo-environmental, geo-economic and geo-political imperatives have to be fully harmonized in the interest of survival. Runaway desires of imprudent humans must be tailored so as to be compatible with the capacity to fulfil them. If we collectively determine to do that, this forum, the United Nations, is the place where we must begin, for the United Nations is as strong, and only as strong, as the will of its Members.
And when we talk of Members, let us not forget that behind the Member States represented in this Assembly are the men and women of the world. It is they that give this Organisation its flesh and its blood and should therefore legitimately dictate its aspirations and efforts. Their control over rulers who fall short of or go beyond their mandate is not as palpable as it should be, but that is part of man's constant aspiration, which the United Nations needs to be inspired by in order to give effective voice to the millions who cannot speak for themselves.
The United Nations should thus promote the ascendancy of peoples, translating into reality the relationships which the peoples would wish to have among themselves.
Invested with a popular dimension, rooted in a time when the process of peace can be rendered irreversible and man's scarce energies given a chance to better his own being, this is the moment for the United Nations which should endure until the mission for humanity is completed.
We must not fail.
﻿
Mr. President, I should like at the outset to congratulate you on your election to the esteemed post of President of the forty-third session of the General Assembly. I feel sure that the possibility of restoring to the United Nations the spirit of conciliation and peace for which it was founded will depend, in no small measure, on your wise and experienced guidance.
In a discussion of the Middle East, history should precede diplomacy. The region has known epochs of war and golden ages, military conquests and spiritual greatness. It was in the Middle East that an invisible divide saw frustration and promise prevail in an unpredictable, seemingly uncontrollable, cycle. Yet it was man who triggered waves of hope and despair. Thus it was man who determined the course of history.
Today, once again, the region faces a moment of human choice.
We are preparing for a better tomorrow. We are prepared with a vision of peace. It is the vision of an end to a futile, economically devastating arras race now sliding in the inhumane direction of chemical and biological warfare. Ballistic missiles know no boundaries, chemical warheads do not distinguish young from old. Those senseless enough to employ them must recognize that they are creating a danger to themselves as well.
It is a vision of an opportunity to concentrate on scientific and technological breakthroughs on Earth and in space, on civilian requirements rather than military needs where resources wasted on armaments are invested in creative enterprises from the greening of the land to the clearing of the waters, from educating young children to caring for the senior citizen.
It is a vision of a region whose stability is inviting, whose dwelling is hospitable, whose creativity is encouraging, whose needs are seriously addressed by those seeking to invest in promoting stability and in expanding economic potential.
It is a vision of a region come of age, a region cognizant of global rapprochement, a region ready to tackle the heretofore seemingly insoluble in order to offer a better future for all - Jews and Arabs alike - a region ready to respect differences among peoples without discriminating against any.
It is a vision that is a necessity. It is a vision that is within reach.
Yet the smoke of old fires is still in the air and new ones threaten to darken the horizon. 
Unless we take decisive action to change course belligerency will not be overcome. We have to do our utmost to ensure that never again will a young man or woman die in a war we failed to prevent.
What should be done to achieve this goal?
I shall start with Israel.
Three years ago Israel stood before this Assembly and pledged to dedicate its efforts to the pursuit of peace. That pledge rested not only on resolve, but also on a conviction: that in the north, war can be brought to an end; in the south, peace can be salvaged and nourished and, in the east, the ground can be laid to start meaningful negotiations.
In all three directions we laboured to fulfil the commitment.
In the north, we put an end to our involvement in Lebanon. We are out of Lebanon, its land and politics. Our sole concern is to see that Lebanon no longer serves as the base for hostile activities against us.
In the south, we have revived our relations with Egypt, which has since restored full diplomatic representation in Israel. We have witnessed Egypt, under the steady leadership of President Mubarak - dedicated to progress at home and peace in the region - reassume its central role in the Arab world without parting with its peace strategy.
In the east, we have experienced hope and frustration. Until less than a year ago, before things went awry, the West Bank turned from the centre of violent debate to the focus of diplomatic efforts. Most significantly, in April 1987, energetic and creative diplomacy produced a framework for negotiations. Known as "the London Document", it provided a non-imposing internationally supported setting for direct negotiations. 
Unfortunately, while still viable, the effort has not yet reached fruition. Sadly, the absence of progress was accompanied by an outbreak of violence. Wrongly, the Palestinians chose to knock on the door of the future with stones in their hands. Knocking with a message of peace would have triggered an entirely different situation.
Indeed, the Palestinians must recognize that it is possible to secure their legitimate rights - but not at the expense of Israel's security. Palestinian aspirations and Israeli security are not necessarily incompatible. 
Peace is an Israeli national interest. While we have confidence in the capacity of the Israeli Defence Forces to defend our country, by deterring any aggression and defeating it if need be, we consider the achievement of peace through diplomacy the greatest victory of all. My country has never surrendered to the pressures of war and will never yield to violence. In peace negotiations we shall stand firm on our security interests. Yet we stand ready for a historic compromise with our neighbours. For 40 years we have built our strength so as not to negotiate out of weakness. Today we are strong enough to negotiate for peace.
Israel has no intention of harming the Palestinian people. Israel has no desire to dominate their lives or to hurt their pride. We are prepared to negotiate with them, fairly, freely, as equals, a meeting-ground of needs, where Palestinians can enjoy their identity and Israelis security in peace.
We are prepared to conduct negotiations on the basis of the only framework, reaffirmed this week in the trilateral meeting chaired by President Reagan, with the participation of the Egyptian Minister for Foreign Affairs, and accepted by Arab countries as well as by all permanent members of the Security Council - that is. Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), calling for a territorial compromise and secure borders. They are the only existing common ground.
As we stand ready to live up to these commitments, we shall be as clear in addressing our expectations of our neighbours. For there can be peace, but not unilaterally; there can be accommodation, but only by mutual effort. We expect from the Arab world a clear voice for peace. For how long can a desire for peace be treated as a secret password as though we were living in clandestine surroundings? Commitment to peace must emerge loud and clear, for sceptics to witness, for the hopeful to respond. 
We expect the Arab world to realize that there is no indirect peace. Peace is meant to reinforce, not to undermine, freedom and security for all involved.
We expect the Arab world, including the Palestinians, to do away with the contradiction of sweet promises and bitter violence. A policy of "no war, no peace", much like a policy that claims to combine both, is an exercise in evasion. A choice must be made: to pay the price of peace or to be resigned to the costs of war.
All of us must recognize changing realities. That which was rejected when offered, that which was doomed by war, that which could have been possible, belongs to the past. In the realities of 1988 the lines of 1947 no longer exist. After the Six-Day War Israel should not be expected to return to the lines from which it attacked. Readiness for a territorial compromise does not include readiness to compromise security.
A breakthrough requires the understanding that peace is a matter of choice; it is the outcome of decisions; it is the product of a historic compromise. No vague formulation can replace a clear strategy to part with the past. The turn to a so-called Government-in-exile, the return to General Assembly partition resolution 181 (II), represents yet another escape to the realm of self-illusion. Any attempt to add to or subtract from the only commonly accepted basis for negotiations is bound to destroy the existing framework without creating a new one. Fuelled by a commitment to no war and no violence, no terrorism and no pressure, we can travel the distance towards accommodation.
To the Palestinians I must say with candour that violence does not pay off. By avoiding negotiations they are depriving themselves of their hope. For there is hardly a chance for a compromise to emerge in the absence of, or prior to, a free negotiating process. 
Although we cannot agree in advance on the outcome of negotiations  we can agree on the process by which to go forward - negotiations as an open-ended effort, free of pressure, imposition or threat. In those negotiations, Jordanians and Palestinians, much like ourselves, may present expectations and demands as they labour to balance contradictory aspirations so as to answer the call of peace. We are ready to enter into negotiations with Jordan and with authentic representatives of the Palestinian people who ate men of peace and not men of violence, in order to solve our differences with Jordan and to resolve the Palestinian problem in all its aspects. We are ready to negotiate with a joint Jordanian-Palestinian delegation. Yet, as peace is unlikely to be achieved in one leap, we are prepared to start negotiations without prior conditions with a Jordanian delegation or a Palestinian one. We hope that the Palestinians will not postpone the prospects of peace; and we hope that Jordan, regardless of its relations with them, will not postpone negotiations either.
I wish to express the gratitude of my people to the United States, its leaders and its institutions for their firm and consistent support. The United States has enabled us to guarantee our security. It has encouraged us, as it has our neighbours, to enter into political negotiations.
The Shultz initiative calling upon the parties to enter into direct negotiations and negotiate a just and fair solution calls also on the permanent members of the Security Council to avoid imposing solutions, refrain from applying pressure and serve as supporters of peace. This initiative, which provides for direct negotiations launched in a non-coercive international setting - remains available for consideration.
When we had an opportunity to review the prospects for peace earlier this week we were reassured by the unanimity among the host. President Reagan, and his guests from Egypt and Israel that there is no substitute for an ongoing, uninterrupted effort towards peace, and that all those attending are resolved to fill the next few months with relevant content.
I wish to express my hope that the policies adopted by the Soviet Onion under the leadership of Mikhail Gorbachev will lead to a world of more ploughshares and fewer swords. Moscow has undertaken some steps, which, though partial and limited, are yet of importance. Zionist prisoners have been released. The number of Jewish emigration permits has grown. Consular groups have been stationed in the Soviet Union and Israel respectively. We have taken note of statements from Moscow calling on all sides in the Middle East to adopt realistic positions with the objective of demilitarizing international relations. 
I wish to express the hope of my people that the cultural autonomy announced by the Soviet leadership will enable our Jewish brethren to pray to our Lord in their own synagogues, to teach their children the history of the Jewish people, to express themselves in the language of their forefathers, and to set sail to the shores of the promised land.
As we watch with wonder and respect the People's Republic of China rearrange its own destiny, we hope it will find this the occasion to support a non-coercive setting for Arab-Israeli negotiations, as well as to normalize its relations with the State of Israel.
There is nothing in our region's history or in its present that rules out a different future. In an era of peace and co-operation, the industrial dynamics of the Far Fast, the Economic Community of Europe, the free enterprise and the enterprise of freedom of the United States, and the Soviet capacity to introduce an air of glasnost can all apply to the Middle East. We can draw on the experience of others. We can add that which is unique to us and offer our young generation the dawn of prosperity in peace.
In order to prepare the ground for the launching of our region on the long road to peace, may we suggest that all relevant parties undertake the following: those interested in the promotion of peace and stability in the Middle East undertake a moratorium on all threats or acts of violence; those interested in promoting Arab-Israeli peace negotiations undertake to encourage and facilitate the early convening of such negotiations in a non-coercive setting, free of a renewed arms race and free of external pressure; and those committed to the cause of peace in the Middle East reaffirm their adherence to ,the only commonly accepted basis for such negotiations - Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) - the renunciation of violence and terror and recognition of the right of all peoples and States in the region to freedom, dignity, peace and security.  
Before I conclude I wish to refer again to yet another issue that is very close to our hearts. As we have pointed out so often in the past, in Yemen, in Syria, in Iran and elsewhere our brethren are today permitted neither the free pursuit of our common heritage nor free departure to Israel. We call upon the Governments of those countries to respect basic human rights. We also call upon the Governments to reject the shameful assertion that Zionism is racism, a statement that shows no understanding of Zionism and a dangerous misunderstanding of racism.
Forty years ago the founder of our State, David Ben-Gurion, against the background of the turmoil of war and revival, introduced our Declaration of Independence, which stated:
"We extend our hand in peace and neighbourliness to all the neighbouring States and their peoples, and invite them to co-operate with the independent Jewish nation for the common good of all."
Israel at 40, proud of its accomplishments at home, confident about its future, today reiterates that very call; we extend our hand in peace to all our neighbours, peoples and States, as we stand ready to alter the course of Middle East history. At the all-too-familiar crossroads of hope and despair we are convinced that the choice is ours to make.
Most appropriately, this week our people celebrate the holiday of Succoth, the Feast of Tabernacles, as we pray together "Spread over us the Tabernacle of Thy peace ..."
"He who maketh peace in heavens, may He make peace for us ..."
We need it; we can help to achieve it. 
﻿Sir, I congratulate you on your election to the presidency of this forty-third session of the General Assembly. I say, with the benefit of my personal acquaintance with you, that it is an honour that you truly deserve. This Assembly is in good hands as it begins to tackle the work on its agenda. 
This forty-third session of the General Assembly carries more than the usual sense of occasion. I am not alone in detecting here a feeling of purpose and o  achievement that has not always been evident in recent years. I take great satisfaction in being able to address the Assembly at a time when the standing of the United Nations is higher than it has been for some time. Even the fountain works. The mood has changed distinctly since the fortieth commemorative session, because, despite the difficulties and uncertainties it has faced, the Organization has pursued its diverse agenda while tackling a major programme of administrative reform. The record in recent times has been one of solid achievement.
The changing international climate has helped this process. In this Hall on Monday, President Reagan in his valedictory address spoke to us of his satisfaction at the movement towards a more constructive relationship between his country and the Soviet Union. Foreign Minister Shevardnadze pursued the same theme. In certain regions of the world there has been welcome progress in resolving conflicts that had been festering for some time„ Many of the signs are favourable.
That will be a matter of particular satisfaction to the smaller members of the international community, including my own country. We have always attached importance to the principle that the collective effort of that community should above all be applied to the task of keeping the peace. That was the central purpose of those who founded the Organization. Today it remains a goal of no less importance. Thus far 1988 has been a year of significant peacemaking, from which the world can take heart and upon which it can build. As one who stood here to address the fortieth anniversary session, I am pleased that we are now seeing renewed recognition of the value of the role and achievements of the United Nations.
Recent developments have highlighted the continuing value of this Organization's efforts in the settlement of international conflict. The accords reached on Afghanistan and the cease-fire in the devastating Gulf War required the co-operation of those directly involved. But a particular tribute must go to the dedication of the Secretary-General. The people who ate saved from further threat or have the hope of peace are indebted to his patience, skill, perseverance and unquenchable optimism. We welcome the role he has played.
There are other situations that still need the resources the United Nations can offer by way of mediation or assistance with peacemaking. Western Sahara, Namibia, Cyprus and Cambodia are all affected by unresolved conflicts. But even here the auguries are promising.
In this age regional tensions cannot be isolated from the mainstream of international life. There are dangers for all of us in conflict wherever it occurs. It follows that we share a responsibility to do all that we can to eliminate the conditions in which conflict breeds and to restore the peace if it is broken. At times the principle of collective security has commanded more support than the practice. I hope the success of current peace-keeping efforts under United Nations auspices will reinvigorate the principle of collective security and lead to its wider application.
My Government pledged last year to expand our practical contribution to the United Nations peace-keeping efforts. I am pleased that we have been able to give effect to that undertaking. Our existing commitment to the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization has been maintained. In the past month we were pleased to be able to respond to the Secretary-General's request for a contribution to the United Nations Iran-Iraq Military Observer Group (UNIIMOG). A contingent of New Zealand army officers was deployed to UNIIMOG following the cease-fire. Earlier this week a Royal New Zealand Air Force Andover transport aircraft with flight crews and maintenance personnel left New Zealand to become an important national contribution to UNIIMOG's air capacity. We stand ready to assist in a practical way if, as we hope, solutions are found to other long-standing conflicts.
I have already welcomed the signing of the Geneva Accords on Afghanistan. Noteworthy as they were, the Accords did not put a final end to the conflict in Afghanistan nor did they bring into being a fully representative government enjoying the confidence of the people of Afghanistan. New Zealand hopes that the withdrawal of the remaining Soviet forces will be accompanied by real progress in addressing those unresolved problems. As Mr. Shevardnadze said:
"The Geneva Accords" [should be] "the first step in a chain reaction leading to a healthier world." (A/43/PV.6, p. 66)
The values of tolerance and respect for the dignity and worth of human beings can be seen by us all in the current Olympic Games. They are a sign of that healthier world and we congratulate the Republic of Korea on its role as host. But it is a matter for regret that divisiveness has persisted on the Korean peninsula for so long. We look for an easing of tensions and an improvement in relations between the Koreas.
Cambodia, too, has been a tragic source of international tension for many years. That impasse has come to seem rather less intractable during 1988. In each of the past nine years, this Assembly has rightly emphasized Vietnam's violation of the Charter of the United Nations by its invasion and occupation of Cambodia. That remains a fundamental issue.
But we must insist also on a settlement there which will prevent a return to power by the Khmer Rouge. The international community was slow to accept the evidence of genocide committed by the Pol Pot Government and we have had to deal with the consequences ever since. We have a responsibility to ensure that such atrocities are never again committed against the peoples of Cambodia. 
Harrowing images of mass persecution, unfortunately not confined to a single country or continent, remain fresh in our memories as we commemorate the fortieth anniversary of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Much has nevertheless been achieved in the intervening years. But it cannot be denied that gross and massive abuses of human rights continue.
The problem of human rights is more and more the focus of the attention of the Members of the United Nations. All of us are bound to speak up and, if we do not, we bear a responsibility for continuing and future evils. The authority of this Organization as it deals with human rights must rest on a commitment by all to objectivity. South Africa's system of apartheid is an abuse in a category of its own. Events of the last year have shown the South African Government clinging tenaciously to its course, in spite of the international community's abhorrence of its apartheid policies.
It has so far spurned all the voices of reason and moderation. Nelson Mandela, the most respected leader in South Africa, remains incarcerated. The Sharpeville Six are still under sentence of death. The intercessions of the Security Council have been ignored. The country lives in a continuing state of emergency; it experiences increasing repression. The South African response to protests from neighbouring States is to make repeated terrorist attacks on them and to undermine their economic stability - all totally unacceptable.
New Zealand has implemented wide-ranging sanctions against South Africa. We believe that such sanctions are an effective means of changing the attitude of the white minority. New Zealand is ready to implement further measures. Our goal is non-violent progress to a non-racial, democratic and just society in South Africa.
There has been an encouraging movement recently towards peace in Angola. In Namibia, the United Nations has faced an enormous task. At last α settlement there appears tantalizingly close. We trust that Namibia's independence can be secured peacefully and soon in accordance with Security Council resolution 435 (1978). That would present a further major achievement in the work of the United Nations on decolonization.
On the initiative of the seven South Pacific member countries of the United Nations, New Caledonia was re-inscribed in 1986 on the United Nations list of Non-Self-Governing Territories, thus invoking a United Nations responsibility for the future of the progress of the Territory to self-determination. The tragic events at Ouvea in New Caledonia earlier this year demonstrated the consequences of ignoring United Nations principles and also the aspirations of a major communal group. New Zealand therefore welcomed the decision in June by the new Prime Minister of France and the leaders of the loyalist and independence movements in New Caledonia to move together on a plan for political development. That plan rightly takes account of the interests of all genuine New Caledonians.
That development was recognized last month by the Special Committee on Decolonization in a resolution which was adopted by consensus and has since been endorsed by the South Pacific Forum at its annual meeting last week. No one should underestimate the difficulties that may lie ahead, but everything is looking better. We look forward to a free and genuine act of self-determination in New Caledonia which is consistent with United Nations principles and leads to a settlement safeguarding the rights of all New Caledonians, including the indigenous Kanak people. 
Some argue that while the United Nations has a vital role in dealing with regional issues of the kind I have mentioned, the scope for its involvement in the balance between the super-Powers is a limited one. I do not accept that. We have seen how the super-Powers inevitably become involved in the troubles of the world's regions. Equally, issues of disarmament - including those which vitally involve the super-Powers cannot be considered as anything but questions involving all members of the international community for we are all affected, by choice or otherwise.
The issue of nuclear disarmament has taken on new urgency. Nuclear weapons technology no longer remains the exclusive preserve of the five permanent Members of the Security Council. The capacity to build a nuclear weapon is now possessed by a larger number of countries, and soon even more will have it. There are indications that some of those countries have nuclear ambitions. Whatever their motivation, such ambitions have to be curtailed.
There is a real risk here. Regional conflicts, and their tendency to attract external intervention, are dangerous enough as it is. But the prospect of nuclear weapons being deployed in such situations must now be taken into account. In that event, the dangers we would all face would be appalling.
This is an added reason why the efforts of the United States and the Soviet Union to agree on further reductions in their nuclear arsenals are so important. What prospect is there of blocking the spread of nuclear weapons if these two nations cannot stop their relentless drive to develop and deploy new nuclear weaponry? In the course of last year's general debate, New Zealand applauded the United States and the Soviet Union for their decision to eliminate their land-based intermediate-range nuclear missiles. The resulting treaty is now for the first time leading to a real reduction in the world's stock of nuclear weapons. With an agreement in the strategic arms reduction talks, the super-Powers would truly have shown the way to the other nuclear weapons States and those which have nuclear ambitions. It is not too much to hope that a corner would be turned and the threat of vertical and horizontal proliferation would no longer hang over us all. 
New Zealand believes that achieving reductions and balances in conventional forces will be central, in the search for nuclear disarmament, to the nuclear-free world seen by President Reagan and General Secretary Gorbachev at Reykjavik. In Europe and many other parts of the globe the accumulation of conventional forces, often without regard to actual defensive requirements, has heightened tensions and led some to look for other mote dangerous means of deterring aggression; so the processes of nuclear and conventional disarmament must take place in step, and must involve all States.
Yet, at the third United Nations special session devoted to disarmament, when we had an opportunity to set up a multilateral disarmament agenda to take us up to the beginning of the next century, we could not take advantage of it. But our failure then does not mean it cannot be done. Instead we have the task now, beginning at this session of the Assembly, to pick up where the special session left off.
Rather than confess disappointment at the special session's results, or conclude that the job is too difficult, we must try all the harder to broaden the areas of international agreement. The search for consensus on the prevention of an arms race in outer space must go on. The campaign must continue unabated to convince those few remaining States which yet doubt it that a comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty is an essential measure to end the proliferation of nuclear weapons.
The world community must at last bring to conclusion the negotiations on a comprehensive chemical-weapons convention. The Secretary-General has been called on time and time again to investigate allegations of chemical weapons use. He should never again have to issue a finding confirming such a charge. These hideous weapons must be outlawed once and for all, so that the world will never again be a horrified witness to chemical warfare. The main elements of a multilateral agreement have now been elaborated by the Conference on Disarmament. It is time to finish the job.
New Zealand has taken substantial disarmament initiatives. We are proud to have been part of the regional drive to create the South Pacific Nuclear-Free Zone, a significant multilateral arms-control measure.
The Treaty of Rarotonga makes a decisive contribution to the stability of the region. The majority of South Pacific Forum members have become parties to the agreement. Two of the nuclear Powers, the Soviet Union and China, have ratified the protocols to the Treaty. We look to the other nuclear Powers to do the same. The Treaty covers a wide area of the region, bordering the Latin American nuclear-weapon-free zone to the east, and the demilitarised Antarctica to the south. We support ongoing co-operation with the Latin American patties to the Treaty of Tlatelolco so that we can each benefit from our mutual experience.
For nearly 30 years the Antarctic Treaty and its associated instruments have provided the framework for effective and peaceful co-operation in Antarctica, keeping that vast area free of all military activities. The Treaty, which is open to all States, has been the basis for a unique programme of scientific research and for the adoption of measures to protect the fragile environment.
A further element was added to the treaty system with the adoption in June this year of the Convention on the regulation of Antarctic mineral resource activities. New Zealand was pleased to host the final session of the negotiation. The Convention provides a strong mechanism for protecting the Antarctic environment if mineral resource activities ever take place. It is a significant strengthening of international co-operation under the Antarctic Treaty. A peaceful Antarctica is of the highest importance for New Zealand. We look for a consensus at this session of the Assembly to preserve the Antarctic Treaty. New Zealand is strongly opposed to any efforts to undermine it.
The world economy offers us little cause for satisfaction or confidence. Trade growth is uncertain. The economic difficulties facing many developing countries seem almost intractable. Indebtedness and underdevelopment are threats to global economic stability. Much is at stake for developed and developing countries alike in the present round of multilateral trade negotiations. New Zealand calls on all member countries of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade to go to the forthcoming mid-term review in Montreal in a positive mood, determined to achieve real progress.
New Zealand places special important on achieving from the Uruguay Round a liberalization of world agricultural trade and the elimination of domestic and international policies which distort such trade. There would be no better single way of solving the menacing problems of indebtedness and underdevelopment of which I have spoken.
There have been significant moves recently towards regional free-trade areas, including an agreement between New Zealand and Australia to establish a single trans-Tasman market by 1990. It is vital, however, that the international community should continue at the same time to move along the road to an open, market-oriented, multilateral trading system. We must look for strong leadership here from the major economies, which have a special responsibility to apply, fairly and across the board, the principles of comparative advantage and fair competition. Smaller countries like my own, dependent on primary production, require the reassurance that we will not continue to be subjected unreasonably to artificial restraints on trade. 
It is a paradox that the United Nations is demonstrating renewed vitality and relevance at a time when it faces major financial uncertainties. It is unacceptable that Member States should fail to carry out their legal obligations to contribute their assessed financial dues in good time.
We must recognize, nevertheless, that constraints on available resources are likely to remain while at the same time the demands upon the Organization continue to grow. Accordingly, there is no choice but to maintain the worthwhile progress already achieved towards administrative reform; otherwise, the Organization will be incapable of meeting the critical challenges as they arise.
I speak here as the representative of the Fourth New Zealand Labour Government. The First New Zealand Labour Government, and its Prime Minister Mr. Peter Fraser, played a deeply committed role in the discussions leading to the adoption of the Charter in 1945. New Zealand's hopes of those early days have been exceeded by some of the Organization's achievements - in its economic and social work, for example, and in its human rights and decolonization activities. By contrast, our high hopes for the United Nations peace-making and disarmament roles have yet to be fully realized, but we are optimistic that the log-jam has started to move in those areas.
New Zealand continues to set high store on the work of the United Nations - particularly in its tasks of promoting world peace, preserving the global environment, combating world hunger, removing racial discrimination everywhere and creating equal opportunities for men and women throughout the world. We are determined to maintain New Zealand's strong support in the years ahead.
﻿
As my first duty, permit me, Sir, to congratulate you on your election to the important and honourable post of President of the General Assembly at the current session.
We are meeting at a remarkable time. Though it may appear quite unremarkable on the working calendar of our Organization, it is a time filled with extraordinary events - events that can become the norm for the life of mankind if we succeed in turning them into a trend. Such, in our view, should be the main thrust of the current session, which in many respects is a watershed for the world community. I am referring to a new world calendar which is being created by the efforts of States and peoples, by the efforts of the United Nations. 
A character in the classical comedy "Woe from Wit" exclaims, "Calendars all lie". However, the calendar that has taken shape today does not deceive us. It tells of change in the world; change that is a product of reason. We find on that calendar the Moscow summit meeting, at which Mikhail Gorbachev and Ronald Reagan exchanged the instruments marking the entry into force of the Treaty on the elimination of intermediate- and shorter-range missiles; the conclusion of the Geneva Accords on political settlement around Afghanistan; the first ever public destruction of nuclear missiles; and the cease-fire in the Iran-Iraq war. 
All this is a product of reason, of a new political intellect, which has superseded the dark legacy of the past. It is destroying the reciprocal "enemy images" that have existed and is shaping the image of co-operative partners. 
It has made it possible to discuss a world without arms in the emerging context of real disarmament, as was recently demonstrated at the third special session of the General Assembly on disarmament. It offers us a chance for the successful conclusion of the Vienna meeting, which is a major milestone in the process of the Helsinki Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) .
All that has occurred in the year 1988, which has witnessed many other remarkable events. This year has witnessed the four-party talks on southern Africa; the movement towards a political settlement around Kampuchea; contacts to resolve problems existing on the Korean peninsula; dialogue between the leaders of the two communities in divided Cyprus that were until recently irreconcilable; and the positive response to the initiative of the United Nations Secretary-General concerning a settlement of the problem of Western Sahara. I shall permit myself to include among the year's landmark events the Party Conference in my own country. Its main conclusion was that perestroika is irreversible. It is irreversible in both our domestic and our foreign policy. Radical change in our own house - and here I am quoting Mikhail Gorbachev - has engendered new approaches by us to international affairs too. In a sense, the calendar that I have brought to your attention is one of the consequences of that process.
Two years ago we said here that group, bloc or ideological considerations were beginning to give way to an understanding of peace as the supreme value. Only peace, translated from the language of declarations into practical action, can give mankind a chance of survival. The Soviet Union has grasped this world-wide trend and coupled it with its own perestroika, its process of renewal.
Today the world is changing along new lines. Through the joint efforts of States and by implementing the principles of the new political thinking, it has become possible to avert the threat of war. To a large extent this is due to the political will demonstrated by the leaders of States, and here I can only agree with President Reagan's remarks yesterday about the beneficial impact on that process of Soviet-American political dialogue.
We are now moving further ahead - towards comprehensive security. This requires truly international co-operation. This universal international alliance must rise above differences, which, to use the words of Albert Einstein, are infinitely small compared to the danger that threatens us all.
The formation of this alliance is being facilitated by the emergence of mechanisms of interaction among States and peoples, first and foremost through the United Nations and its institutions. Its main working unit, its engine, its heart, is here, in our house of peace, as are the people who have found way to increase the power of the instruments of peace-making, and we thank them for that. There is however, no better way of expressing gratitude than by a collective effort to enhance the role of the United Nations and make it stronger not only as a unique international forum but also as an equally unique global centre for ensuring universal and regional security and the security of each country. 
In this capacity the United Nations should, in our view, play a more active and direct role in eliminating the main threat to mankind - the threat of a nuclear catastrophe. We would like to see greater involvement by the United Nations in the process of nuclear disarmament, in reaching a global agreement on the cessation and prohibition of nuclear-weapons testing, and in creating nuclear-free zones in various parts of the world.
Space should become an area for the priority attention of the United Nations. The international community has a vital interest in preventing it from becoming an arena for military rivalry. Today this can still be done; tomorrow will be too late.
The Soviet Union has made the case for setting up a world space organization, which could include a centre for international co-operation in the peaceful uses of outer space, to be established on the basis of the Krasnoyarsk radar, as proposed by Mikhail Gorbachev.
We call upon the Government of the United states to follow that example, and thus allay our concern with respect to United States radar facilities in Greenland and Great Britain. By doing that, we would not only lay the material groundwork for international co-operation in space but also strengthen the ABM Treaty regime.
This Organization could become involved, in practical terms, in resolving the issue of conventional arms limitation. The Soviet Union supports the idea of setting up, within the United Nations, a register of conventional arms sales and transfers, and is ready to take part in developing the parameters of such a register. 
The arms race cannot be curbed without putting under control the use of scientific and technological achievements for military purposes. We support the proposal by India and other countries to set up a group, under the United Nations Secretary-General, to provide assessments and forecasts in the area of new technology.
The United Nations will measure up to all these tasks if we take a fresh look at the practical aspects of our work. First of all, the General Assembly, as one of the principal bodies of the Organization, should substantially increase its contribution towards finding ways and means of solving international problems, inter alia, through renewing and improving its methods and procedures.
There is but one criterion here - that decisions be productive and democratically worked out and adopted. A first step in this direction would he to adopt an increased proportion of United Nations decisions by consensus, though it is important that General Assembly resolutions adopted by a vote should not be devalued.
It is also necessary to reinvigorate the work of the Security Council, and to ensure closer interaction among its members. At consultations among the five permanent members of the Council, attended by the Secretary-General, it would be useful to hold periodic reviews of situations in areas of conflict and to identify priority measures to improve the situation. It is felt that there is a need for periodic meetings of the Security Council at the foreign-minister level, as envisaged by the Charter.
The idea of convening special expanded Security Council meetings in regions of tension is worthy of consideration. Such meetings could also be held in the capitals of the Council's permanent members. The Soviet Union confirms its readiness to host such a meeting in Moscow. We all owe a debt to the United Nations, and it is in our common interest to repay our debts. We can repay them in full if, in addition to dollar contributions, we invest innovative thought in the activity of the Organization's institutions, if we revive its main function - as a centre for the settlement of international conflicts through united efforts.
Let there be no lament, then, over the sacred national prerogatives. The Soviet Union is a firm advocate of strengthening national sovereignty, particularly wherever infringements of it are most keenly and painfully felt. We regard as highly objectionable the anomaly of foreign military presence - military bases in other States' territories - as well as violations of national sovereignty by the undeclared arrival of nuclear arms in, or their transit through, ports of other countries. We have stated clearly what we believe: that any military presence must be confined within national borders.
But what we are speaking of now is voluntarily delegating a portion of national rights in the interests of all - paradoxically enough, to strengthen national security, while at the same time strengthening universal security.
The interrelationship of events in an interdependent world increasingly compels us to delegate some national prerogatives to an international organization. In fact, this is happening already. Military activity is ceasing to be taboo. Having cleared the verification barrier, and having initiated the process of real nuclear disarmament, the Soviet Union and the United States, the German Democratic Republic and Czechoslovakia, the United Kingdom, the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, Belgium and the Netherlands gave up some of their rights when they permitted the inspection of facilities in their territories. This was done in the interests of universal security. By establishing new, previously inconceivable, rules of openness in the military sphere, the world is undoubtedly moving towards the creation of a common sovereign right - the right to survive. When the United States Secretary of Defence sits at the controls of a top-secret Soviet bomber, and the Chief of the General Staff of the Soviet armed forces tours an equally secret United States base, that is something more than a mere exchange of protocol courtesies in the spirit of the times; it indicates that the elimination of secrecy is becoming a factor of security.
We draw this conclusion from the conviction that, today, it is no longer possible to achieve political goals by means of war. To put it simply, war is ceasing to be - indeed, it has already ceased to be - an instrument of rational policy.
Let us consider this from the perspective of regional conflicts, while they flare up and develop in different ways, they still have one feature in common - they drag on intolerably long, without delivering positive political results.
However, positive political results are not slow in coming when interference in regional conflicts gives way to the efforts of the world community to promote their settlement. No one should hinder this process. In this context we have to speak of Afghanistan.
The Geneva Accords are not just an isolated local instance of the settlement of a regional conflict. They ate the first step in a chain reaction leading to a healthier world. They are a new promising beginning in world politics, attesting to a qualitative change in political thinking. They are a message of good news to other regions. Any violation of the Geneva Accords undermines those achievements.
The Soviet Union and the Republic of Afghanistan are observing their obligations under those Accords faithfully, to the letter. There is no need to prove that. However attempts are being made arbitrarily to alter the formula established by the Geneva Accords, thus significantly changing its meaning.
As soon as the Soviet troops began to withdraw, a non-stop production line of violations was set in motion. The list of them would totally refute the assertion heard here yesterday that bloodshed has diminished in that region. On the contrary, terror has been mounting sharply and is increasingly directed against civilians.
In the circumstances, the fact is that faithful compliance by some with their obligations creates conditions for others to commit new crimes, of which the most heinous is the destruction of hard-won hopes. This must not be allowed to happen. The chain of conflict settlement generated by Afghanistan must not be allowed to break.
We are not complaining to anyone. We have the means to make things fall into place. But we are responsible to the United Nations, and therefore we are appealing to it. We are proposing that a meeting of the permanent members of the Security Council, hosted by the United Nations Secretary-General, discuss the question of compliance with the Geneva Accords. It would also be appropriate to invite to such a meeting representatives of the parties directly concerned. 
The deep involvement of the United Nations in the resolution of major international problems has spotlighted the acute need for new mechanisms of verification and control. We propose that consideration be given to the idea of an international monitoring and verification agency within the framework of the United Nations.
That body's terms of reference could be very broad. Disarmament and security in all its aspects are becoming an increasingly multilateral and truly international process. The institution for monitoring and verification should also be international.
Many countries feel the need for it. Thus Japan is proposing an interesting idea for the world-wide seismic monitoring of nuclear explosions. France has what we regard as the reasonable idea of setting up an international satellite monitoring system.
These are interesting ideas, but how could they be implemented? Naturally, the most sensible way is to make their, part of a universal monitoring and verification mechanism that would operate under United Nations auspices or within its structure.
Verification is no longer a preference but an imperative of our time. It is an imperative of our time to search for forms and methods for the development of societies that would be in keeping with modern requirements. Certainly this is true with respect to socialism, but with equal certainty it applies to other socio-political systems. While we are changing in both our own and international interests, we are entitled to expect the same kind of perestroika from others.
Separating the wheat from the chaff, distinguishing the right choice from the wrong, and achievements from deterioration, we are unforgiving in judging the past. To be self-critical is the canonical rule for politicians who believe in their people and want the people to believe them. But we expect certain leaders of States who address the international community to be equally self-critical in assessing the past.
It is appropriate to mention this in the year that marks the anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which some are marking by reasserting the supremacy of law, and others by preaching their own faultlessness. We could list numerous international instruments on human rights that have not been ratified by the countries represented here by some speakers. We could talk of the continuous practice of violations of civil rights in those countries. But we prefer to speak of ourselves.
The supremacy of law is the corner-stone of political renewal in our country. Creating a State based on the rule of law also has a direct bearing on our foreign policy.
A constitutionally authorized mechanism for working out and adopting strategic foreign-policy decisions is being put in place in our country. Questions such as military budgets, the use of troops outside the country, and innovations in the development of the armed forces will also be subject to constitutional and legal scrutiny.
For us, the principle of the supremacy of law and the policy of democratising our society ace indivisible. The emergence of a State based on the rule of law links with the world-wide will to assert the primacy of international law as the standard for mankind's existence. Among politico-military, economic, humanitarian and environmental guarantees of universal security, we view its legal guarantees as paramount.
From States based on the rule of law to a world based on the rule of law - such is the logic of the movement. A starting-point on this path could be the elaboration of a major long-term programme for the development of international law. Its thrust could be expressed in the motto "Security, trust and co-operation through law". 
We must also work persistently to enhance the effectiveness of the International Court of Justice on the basis of developing a common approach by all States to that main judicial body of the United Nations. Completion of the preparation of a code of crimes against peace and the security of mankind would be a major step.
Probably nowhere is the role of law so important as in ensuring freedom of choice, which is the linchpin of the new political thinking. For how can there be any freedom to choose one's own course in situations in which international law is constantly violated - as in southern Africa, the Middle East, Central America and elsewhere?
Freedom of choice defies confinement within ideological borders or geographical zones. It cannot be stopped by "crusades"; it can only be recognized. It is absolute, and equally -resolute is our respect for it, regardless of the orientation of any particular country.
By defining freedom of choice as the key link in the new political thinking, we hope to use that key to open many doors that until now have been tightly locked. Recognition of the diversity of interests, the priority of universal human values and the supremacy of political means in solving international problems, and replacing confrontation with dialogue - those and other components of the new political thinking have resulted in substantial and, we trust, irreversible positive changes. Yet, the fires of political inquisition ace still blazing in the world, and some would try to bring to the stake entire nations and movements accused of the heresy of having freely chosen their own course. Ideology in the shape of missile projectiles crushes them with the cruelty of a medieval axe. I should like to stress that our sympathy is on the side of those who seek to achieve freedom of choice.
Why, for instance, can the great American people have their own great dream, and why should the Cuban or the Nicaraguan, the Angolan or the Vietnamese people, the Ethiopian people be deprived of the right to have their own ideals? Why cannot the Palestinian people have their homeland? Why should other nations, countries and movements be humiliated by great Power arrogance? While not renouncing any of our values or denying to others the right to have their own, while continuing to respect the yearning of peoples for national self-assertion and liberation from economic subjugation and political dependence, the Soviet Union supports the de-ideologization of international relations and the exclusion of the overwhelming component of ideological differences from foreign policy and diplomacy. It expects and hopes that others will do likewise.
It expects the problem of how to pool our efforts to be recognized as commensurate with the problem of the survival of mankind. It expects the force of peace-making policy to prevail over the policy of force which has run its historical course.
The division of mankind into great and small countries is something which has also run its historical course. And, if the term "great Powers" is to be kept at all, it is only in the sense of great responsibility towards the rest of the world. Divisions and re-divisions of the world into spheres of influence are historically pointless. Today, we must all have only one sphere of influence – our planet. It will perish if our influence on the threatening course of destructive developments is divided and fragmented into blocs and systems. Therefore, the Soviet leadership has attempted to reinterpret more profoundly the idea, originally inherent in Marxism, of the interrelationship between class and universal human values, according priority to the interests shared by all nations. In our vision of peaceful coexistence as the universal principle of international relations, it does not emerge as a special form of class struggle.
A rigid polarization of the world, which is becoming increasingly diverse, must give way to its consolidation, which allows the rivalry of two different systems to take on non-confrontational forms. This, if you will, is also a choice, the freedom of which is born of the new political thinking and of its dialectics- which makes it possible to put policies to the test of real life.
But it would appear that not everyone measures up to this freedom. Obstinately clinging to divisive fetishes, some would try to put a brake on the action of the centrifugal forces. As a result, any red-letter days have not appeared on the new calendar of peace this year. For example, it does not include the date marking the completion of a treaty on 50 per cent reductions in strategic arms. The pace of real disarmament set by the Treaty on the Elimination of Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles is slowing down as negotiations proceed.
We seemed to have dealt once and for all with the issue of verification, but it has arisen again because of the negative position of our negotiating partners. It looks as if the Russian proverb "Trust but verify" is good only when applied to the Soviet Union but is not applicable to the United States.
Once again we call on the United States of America to reconsider its attitude to verification of the process of reducing and eliminating nuclear arsenals. For verification is something more than the technical checking on the parties compliance with their obligations. It is the material expression of sincerity and honesty, without which it is impossible to make policy today. It is also regrettable that an agreement barring weapons from outer space has not been concluded in 1988.
We had every reason to hope that 1988 would see the signing of a history-making global convention on the complete prohibition and destruction of chemical weapons. Indeed, most of the complex fundamental issues have either been settled already or ace close to agreement. But once again, the sticky quagmire of procrastination is thwarting the final step towards victory. Meanwhile, in the absence of progress an alarming trend towards the spread of chemical weapons and what I would call chemical permissiveness is surreptitiously beginning to develop.
We do not object to the exploration of alternative ways. The Soviet Union takes a positive view of the proposal made yesterday by the President of the United States to convene a conference of the parties to the 1925 Geneva Protocol. At the same time we, of course, assume that the drafting of the convention banning chemical weapons will be continued and, of course, completed.
The beginning of the process of nuclear disarmament has brought into sharper focus the problem of conventional armed forces and armaments, including naval armaments. Here, too, great hopes were being pinned on this year. The programme of radical reductions in the military capabilities of the two opposing political-military alliances proposed by Warsaw Treaty countries has put the problem on the track of practical solution.
We have a clear goal - to achieve a situation in which the two sides would . have only the forces and capabilities sufficient for defence but insufficient for launching a surprise attack or conducting offensive operations. 
There is also another priority problem. Access to conventional weapons in their most modern modifications is expanding. Their technological sophistication makes it easier to use them. There is now no need to spend much time or money on special training, and anyone can easily operate those infernal devices. In other words, conventional weapons are becoming part of everyday life, a common tool in the hands of too many people. This dangerous situation, which is particularly typical of regional conflicts, calls for joint efforts to constrain international arms markets.
Working out a mandate for the future negotiations is also a collective undertaking. Jointly with our allies, we have been finding solutions which bring general agreement closer.
On the question of unfulfilled hopes, we must mention the lack of progress in settling some of the most pressing problems, such as those of the Middle East, Central America, and certain others.
Today, it is clearer than ever what needs to be done. Elementary common sense enjoins that consolidation of forces must be placed above their fragmentation, and constructive dialogue must be placed above destructive scepticism. None of us can any longer waste our time on mutual fault-finding, on mutual recrimination and reproaches. The growing physical destruction of our planet is the verdict against the existing division of the world. It is because of that division that so many pages in the 1988 calendar have not been filled. It is foe the same reason that this year has had such a generous supply of sombre dates.
It is perhaps for the first time that we have seen the stark reality of the threat to our environment - a second front fast approaching and acquiring urgency equal to that of the nuclear and space threat. For the first time we have seen clearly that, in the absence of any global control, man's so-called peaceful constructive activity is turning into global aggression against the very foundations of life on earth. For the first time we have understood clearly what we had guessed: that the traditional view of national and universal security, based primarily on military means of defence, is now totally obsolete and must be urgently revised.
Faced with the threat of environmental catastrophe, the dividing lines of the bipolar ideological world are receding. The biosphere recognizes no division into blocs, alliances or systems. All share the same climatic system and no one is in a position to build his own isolated and independent line of environmental defence.
Man-made "second nature" - the technosphere - has turned out to be dangerously fragile. The consequences of many of its breakdowns are becoming international and global.
The environmental crisis is being exported on an increasing scale, with toxic technologies, facilities, products and wastes spreading, overtly or covertly, through the channels of economic relations.
Quite deliberate attempts are being made to turn densely populated areas of the third world into toxic waste dumps.
In a situation like this it is suicidal to try economically to rein in progressive national developments, to wear down an imaginary enemy by economic pressure. That is the kind of thinking that belongs to the Stone Age.
It is unreasonable to impede the economic reconstruction of countries that seek to restructure the energy industries and to introduce resource-saving and waste-free technologies, thus making the world less dangerous.
How much more sensible it is, as we ate proposing to the United States and other countries, to abolish some planned or ongoing military programmes and channel the funds thus released towards instituting an international regime of environmental security.
All the environmental disasters of this year have placed in the forefront the task of pooling and co-ordinating efforts to develop a global strategy for a rational management of the environment.
All of us - and I emphasize this, all of us - need an international programme to manage the risks involved in economic activities and to shift to alternative technologies that spare both man and nature.
We need resources to save our planet, instead of destroying it. I believe that the world community possesses such resources. But they have to be supplemented, first, by the will and readiness to act and, secondly, by an effective mechanism for international ecological co-operation.
It is quite clear that in this area, too, nothing can be done without the tools of the new political thinking. In this area, too, it must emphasize the factor of time. We have too little of it - very little - and problems are piling up faster than they can be solved.
Even the implementation of the positive decisions already adopted could take years and years. Just the physical elimination of intermediate- and shorter-range missiles will take three years of continuous daily work and the Treaty's entire sequence of implementation will take 13 years. This makes it incumbent upon us to take responsible decisions today.
What are our liabilities? Tens of thousands of nuclear warheads and hundreds of thousands of tons of toxic agents; mountains of conventional armaments; holes burnt in the ozone layer and the eroding biosphere; the greenhouse effect and the depletion of non-renewable sources of energy; acid rains and deserts devouring the green world; forest fires-and floods; drying up seas and dying fauna; terrorism against the peoples and aggression against nature.
What are cur assets? The world's growing maturity which makes it possible to raise and solve global problems on a planetary scale; a growing world-wide "Green Peace" movement; shared perceptions of environmental scientists and policy-makers who are becoming increasingly active as environmentalists, as demonstrated by the document of the States Parties to the Warsaw Treaty and the recent appeal issued by the peace movement; the report entitled "Our Common Future", prepared by the World Commission headed by Mrs. Brundtland, and the United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP) models of environmental renascence to counter environmental apocalypse; the experience of the past three years which attests to the possibility of removing corrosive growths from the body of the earth; the experience of pooling the efforts of States in the use of advanced technology, such as thermonuclear fusion and superconductivity, in the interests of human survival.
This year's calendar has also included another event; the inauguration of the Centre for the development of an international experimental thermonuclear reactor by scientists from very many countries who will chart the way towards inexhaustible sources of energy for the coming century and at the same time develop a model for concerting efforts in the interests of all peoples. 
Among our assets is the realization that a monopoly of a small number of countries over advanced technologies and attempts at all costs to keep others on the sidelines of the emerging science-and-information world may boomerang against the monopolists.
Among our assets is the United Nations, whose high efficiency has been so graphically demonstrated by the events of 1988. They have also highlighted a simple but very profound truth; when nations, particularly the great Powers, begin to co-operate, the United Nations gains in influence and strength, once again recapturing the spirit of its initial objectives.
It is true that the fable about two elephants stamping our grass is still popular. President Reagan's statement yesterday would seem to indicate that this grass is not being threatened.
We do not want to fight, and love is still a remote possibility.
But speaking seriously, the world community has gained much from the improvement in Soviet-American relations.
In this regard I am pleased to cite a remark by Mr. Perez de Cuellar.
The meeting between Gorbachev and Reagan, he said, has shown the world community an example of voluntary dialogue. Governments have suddenly realized that the United Nations is an entirely appropriate place for negotiations and solving problems. Precisely, but I would say "the most appropriate place". If in the past it has not always been that, the Organization itself is least to blame.
Let us speak frankly and say that many of us, including particularly the permanent members of the Security Council, are to blame for the fact that at some point certain fundamental values of our Organization embodied in its Charter were devalued. Now that they are regaining their initial level, it is our duty to learn the bitter lessons of the past for the sake of the future.
Today, for instance, the Soviet Union is reconsidering its previous attitude to the Organization's economic institutions. In particular, we attach great importance to the activities of the United Nations Economic and Social Council and would like to contribute to enhancing its effectiveness.
No country stands to gain by remaining aloof from the international forums of our Organization. Having drawn this more than obvious conclusion, we are asking: should not some of our partners take a fresh look at their attitude to the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)?
The permanent members of the Security Council should set an example in strengthening the authority of the united Nations, enhancing its role and expanding and enriching its peace-making functions. All of us here are witnesses to the beginning of the renaissance of our Organization. At the same time we are architects of this process. We shall enhance the role of the United Nations even more by concerted efforts to combat the threats to our environment. It is, we believe, precisely within the framework of the United Nations that international machinery should be established to formulate urgent decisions on pressing global problems, above all economic and environmental problems. 
The Soviet Union proposes a discussion on the question of how to turn the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) into an environmental council capable of taking effective decisions to ensure ecological security. It proposes that a three-event series of emergency meetings be held - of course, under the auspices of the United nations - to co-ordinate efforts in the field of ecological security; a consultative meeting of experts to discuss the health of the Earth, in 1989? a summit meeting of the leaders of, say, 15 or 20 States representing all continents, and the influential force of our time, the Non-Aligned Movement, in 1992 the holding of the second United Nations international conference on the environment, as planned, in 1992, or even earlier, but in any event at summit level.
We have been speaking of a calendar of real achievements, a calendar of ideas as yet unrealised, a calendar of hopes and plans for the future. The review of this year that we have undertaken is not an end in itself. What can be an end in itself is the inner moral objective of achieving progress and acceptance of the political need to identify the moment of truth, which from time immemorial has tended towards movement, towards overcoming inaction.
This year has been full of both movement and slow-downs. It has shown that Mikhail Gorbachev was right when he said;
"A complex and in many respects unusual situation is developing in the world. We are at the beginning of a new, long road that offers new prospects and new problems" Which tendency will prevail? What will gain the upper hand - the tendency towards further movement ahead or the inertia of stagnation?
The answer is to be found in abandoning certain dogmas, even though cast in the form of eternal truths. We have to write a new catechism of international existence, in which the beginning will be thought and reason, followed by deeds for the sake of our common salvation and development. We must stop sermonizing from lofty international rostrums and recognize the principle of equality in international dialogue.
As for the dogma of "peace through strength", let us leave it to those who worship the faded commandments of the past. The keynote of history is peace through reason, and this, too, is a commandment foe the future.
The past has great power over us, but although that is true, the future has an even greater gravitational pull. The poetic metaphor, "to win the affection of space, to heed the call of the future", takes on a lofty political meaning.
Let us not be deaf to that call. Let us respond to it by really uniting to save life on our Earth.
Let us begin now.
﻿
Half a world away from this place of peace, the firing, the killing, the bloodshed in two merciless conflicts have for the first time in recent memory diminished. After terrible new names, names such as Halabja, Maidan Shahr and Spin Buldak, have been added to the toll-call of human horror, there is today hope of peace in the Persian Gulf and Afghanistan.
So too, in the highlands and coastal cities of southern Africa, places of civil war, places of occupation by foreign troops, talk of peace is heard, peace for the tortured nation of Angola. Sixty-five hundred miles east, in the South-East Asian country of Cambodia, there is hope now of a settlement and the removal of Viet Nam's occupying forces. Finally, in this hemisphere, where only 12 years ago one third of the people of Latin America lived under democratic rule, some 90 per cent do so today. And especially in Central America, nations such as El Salvador, once threatened by the anarchy of the death squad and the spectre of totalitarian rule, now know the hope of self-government and the prospect of economic growth. 
Another change, a change that if it endures may go down as one of the signal accomplishments of our history, a change that is cause for shaking the head in wonder, is also upon us; a change going to the source of post-war tensions and to the once seemingly impossible dream of ending the twin threats of our time - totalitarianism and thermonuclear world war.
For the first time, the differences between East and West - fundamental differences over important moral questions dealing with the worth of the individual and whether Governments shall control people or people control Governments - for the first time these differences have shown signs of easing, easing to the point where there are not just troop withdrawals from places such as Afghanistan, but also talk in the East of reform and greater freedom of the press, of assembly and of religion. Yes, fundamental differences remain, but should talk of reform become more than that, should it become reality, there is the prospect of not only a new era in Soviet-United States relations but a new age of world peace; for such reform can bring peace. History teaches, and my country has always believed that, where the rights of the individual and the people are enshrined, war is a distant prospect. For it is not people who make war; only Governments do that.
I stand at this rostrum, then, at a moment of hope; hope not just for the peoples of the United States and the Soviet Union, but for all the peoples of the world, and hope too for the dream of peace among nations, the dream that began the United Nations. Precisely because of these changes, today the United Nations has the opportunity to live and breathe and work as never before.
Already, Mr. Secretary-General, you, through your persistence, patience and unyielding will, have shown in working towards peace in Afghanistan and the Persian Gulf how valuable the United Nations can be. We salute you for these accomplishments. In Geneva at this very hour there are numerous negotiations under way: multilateral negotiations at the Conference on Disarmament, as well as bilateral negotiations on a range of issues between the Soviets and ourselves. These negotiations, some of them under United Nations auspices, involve a broad arms-control agenda: strategic offensive weapons, strategic defence and space, nuclear testing, and chemical warfare - whose urgency we have witnessed anew in recent days.
And the negotiators ate busy. Over the last few years they h iv/e been engaged in more than an academic exercise. There is movement; the log-jam is broken. Only recently, when the United States and the Soviet Union signed the intermediate-range nuclear forces (INF) agreement, an entire class of United States and Soviet nuclear missiles was eliminated for the first time in history. Progress continues on negotiations to reduce strategic weapons in massive number, with effective verification, and talks will begin soon on conventional reductions in Europe.
Much of the reason for all this goes back, I believe, to Geneva, to the small chateau beside the lake where I and the Soviet General Secretary had the first of several fireside chats - exchanges characterized by frankness, but friendliness too. I said at the first meeting in Geneva that this was a unique encounter between two people who had the power to start a third world war or to begin a new age of peace among nations. I also said that peace conferences, arms negotiations and proposals for treaties could make sense only if they were part of a wider context, a context in which we sought to explore and resolve the deeper underlying differences between us. I said to Mr. Gorbachev then, as I have said to the Assembly before, that nations do not mistrust each other because they are armed; they are armed because they mistrust each other. 

In that place, by that peaceful lake in neutral Switzerland, Mr. Gorbachev and I did begin a new relationship based not just on engagement over the single issue of arras control but on a broader agenda about our deeper differences, an agenda of human rights, regional conflicts and bilateral exchanges between our peoples. Even on the arms-control issue itself we agreed to go beyond the past, to seek not just treaties that permitted building weapons to higher levels, but revolutionary agreements that actually reduced and even eliminated a whole class of nuclear weapons.
What was begun that morning in Geneva has shown results: in the INF Treaty? in my recent visit to Moscow; in my opportunity to meet there with Soviet citizens and dissidents and speak of human rights; and to speak too, in the Lenin Hills of Moscow, to the young people of the Soviet Union about the wonder and splendour of human freedom. The results of that morning in Geneva are seen in peace conferences now under way around the world on regional conflicts and in the work of the United Nations here in New York as well as in Geneva.
But history teaches caution. Indeed, that very building in Geneva, where important negotiations have taken place - those on the Geneva Accords on Afghanistan, and the Iran-Iraq negotiations, for example - we see today as stone-like testimony to a failed dream of peace in another time. The Palais des Nations was the headquarters of the League of Nations, an institution that was to symbolize an end to all war. Yet that institution and its noble purpose ended with the Second World War; ended because the chance of peace was not seized in the 1930s by the nations of the world, ended because humanity did not find the courage to isolate the aggressors, to reject schemes of government that served the State, not the people. We are here today determined that no such fate shall befall the United Nations. We are determined that the United Nations shall succeed and serve the cause of peace for humankind.
So we realize that, even in this time of hope, the chance of failure is teal, but this knowledge does not discourage us: it spurs us on. For the stakes are high; do we falter and fail now, and bring down upon ourselves the just anger of future generations? Or do we continue the work of the founders of this institution, and see to it that, at last, freedom is enshrined and humanity knows war no longer, and that this place, this floor, shall be truly "the world's last battlefield"?
We are determined that it shall be so. So we turn now to the agenda of peace. Let us begin by addressing a concern that was much on my mind when I met with Mr. Gorbachev in the Kremlin as well as on the minds of Soviet citizens I met in Moscow. It is also an issue that I know is of immediate importance to the members of this Assembly who, this fall, commemorate the fortieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
That Declaration says plainly what those who seek peace can forget only at the greatest peril that peace rests on one foundation; observance of the "inalienable rights of all members of the human family". In a century where human rights have been denied by totalitarian governments on a scale never before seen in history, with so many millions deliberately starved or eliminated as a matter of State policy - a history, it has been said, of blood, stupidity and barbed wire - few can wonder why peace has proved so elusive.	
Well, let us understand. If we would have peace, we must acknowledge the elementary rights of our fellow human beings, in our own land and in other lands. If we would have peace, the trampling of the human spirit must cease. Human rights is not for some, some of the time. Human rights, as the Universal Declaration adopted by this Assembly in 1948 proclaims, is "for all peoples and all nations". And for all time.
This regard for human rights as the foundation of peace is at the heart of the United Nations. Those who starve in Ethiopia, those who die among the Kurds, those who face racial injustice in South Africa, those who still cannot write or speak freely in the Soviet Union, those who cannot worship in the Ukraine, those who struggle for life and freedom on boats in the South China Sea, those who cannot publish or assemble in Managua - all of these are more than just an item on your agenda. It must be a first concern, an issue above others. For when human rights concerns are not paramount at the United Nations - when the Universal Declaration of Human Rights is not honoured in these halls and meeting rooms - then the very credibility of this Organization is at stake, the very purpose of its existence in question.
That is why, when progress is made in human rights, the United Nations grows stronger and the United States is glad of it. For example, following a two-year ¡ effort led by the United States, the United Nations Commission on Human Rights took a major step towards ending the double standards and cynicism that had characterized too much of its past. For years, Cuba, a blatant violator of its citizens' human rights, has escaped United Nations censure or even scrutiny. This year, Cuba has responded to pressure generated by the Commission on Human Rights by accepting an investigation into its human rights abuses. Fidel Castro has already begun to free some political prisoners, improve prison conditions, and tolerate the existence of a small, independent national human rights group.
More must be done. The United Nations must be relentless and unyielding in seeking change, in Cuba and elsewhere. And we must also see to it that the Universal Declaration itself is not debased with episodes like the resolution "Zionism is racism". Respect for human rights is the first and fundamental mission of this body, the most elementary obligation of its members. Indeed, wherever one turns in the world today, there is a new awareness, a growing passion for human rights. The people of the world become united: new groups, new coalitions form, coalitions that commit: government, that work against discrimination, that fight religious or political repression, unlawful imprisonment, torture or execution. As those I spoke to at Spaso House said to me last June: Such movements make a difference.
Turning now to regional conflicts, we feel again the uplift of hope. In the Gulf War between Iran and Iraq - one of the bloodiest conflicts since the Second World War - we have a cease-fire. The resolution and the firmness of the allied nations in keeping the Persian Gulf open to international shipping not only upheld the rule of law, it helped prevent further spread of the conflict and laid the basis for peace. So, too, the Security Council's decisive resolution in July a year ago has become the blueprint for a peaceful Gulf. Let this war - a war in which there has been no victor or vanquished, only victims - let this war end now. Let both Iran and Iraq co-operate with the Secretary-General and the Security Council in implementing resolution 598 (1978). Let peace come.
Moving on to a second region, I would recall that when I first addressed the United Nations General Assembly in 1983, world attention was focused on the brutal invasion and illegal occupation of Afghanistan. After nearly nine long years of war, the courage and determination of the Afghan people and the Afghan freedom fighters have held sway - and today, an end to the occupation is in sight. On April 14, the USSR signed the Geneva Accords, which were negotiated under United Nations auspices by Pakistan and the Kabul regime. We encourage the Soviet Union to complete its troop withdrawal at the earliest possible date, so that the Afghan people can freely determine their future without further outside interference.
In southern Africa, too, years of patient diplomacy and support for those in Angola who seek self-determination are having their effect. We look forward to an accord between the Governments of Angola, Cuba, and South Africa that will bring about a complete withdrawal of all foreign troops - primarily Cuban - from Angola. We look forward as well to full implementation of United Nations Security Council resolution 435 (1978) and our longstanding goal of independence for Namibia. We continue to support a growing consensus among African leaders who also believe there can be no end to conflict in the region until there is national reconciliation within Angola.
There are new hopes for Cambodia, a nation whose freedom and independence we seek just as avidly as we sought the freedom and independence of Afghanistan. We urge the rapid removal of all Vietnamese troops and a settlement that will prevent the return of the Khmer Rouge to power, permitting instead the establishment of a genuinely representative government - a government that will, at last, respect fully the rights of the people of Cambodia and end the hideous suffering they have so bravely and needlessly borne.
In other critical areas, we applaud the Secretary-General's efforts to structure a referendum on the Western Sahara. In the Mediterranean, direct talks between Greek and Turkish Cypriot common ties hold much promise for accord in that divided island nation. Finally, we look to a peaceful solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict. So, too, the unnatural division of Europe remains a critical obstacle to Soviet-American relations. 
In most of these areas, then, we see progress and, again, we are glad of it. Only a few years ago, all of these and other conflicts were burning dangerously out of control. Indeed, the invasion of Afghanistan and the apparent failure of will among democratic and peace-loving nations to deter such events seemed to cause a climate where aggression by nations large and small was epidemic, a climate the world had not seen since the 1930s. Only this time, larger war was avoided - avoided because the free and peaceful nations of the world recovered their strength of purpose and will. And now the United Nations is providing valuable assistance in helping this epidemic to recede.
And because we are resolved to keep it so, I would be remiss in my duty if I did not now take note here of the one exception to progress in regional conflicts. I refer here to the continuing deterioration of human rights in Nicaragua and the refusal of the tiny elite now ruling that nation to honour promises of democracy made to their own people and to the international community. This elite - in calling itself revolutionary - seeks no real revolution; the use of the term is subterfuge, deception for hiding the oldest, most corrupt vice of alls man's age-old will to power, his lust to control the lives and steal the freedom of others.
That is why, as President, I will continue to urge the Congress and the American public to stand behind those who resist this attempt to impose a totalitarian regime on the people of Nicaragua; that the United States will continue to stand with those who are threatened by this regime's aggression against its neighbours in Central America.
Today, I also call on the Soviet Union to show in Central America the same spirit of constructive realism it has shown in other regional conflicts; to assist in bringing conflict in Central America to a close by halting the flow of billions of dollars worth of arms and ammunition to the Sandinista regime; a regime whose goals of regional domination, while ultimately doomed, can continue to cause great suffering to the people of that area and risk to Soviet-American relations unless action is taken now.
With regard to the arms reduction agenda, I have already mentioned the importance of the INF Treaty and the momentum developed in the strategic arms reduction talks (START). The draft START treaty is a lengthy process filled with bracketed language designating sections of disagreement between the two sides. But through this summer in Geneva, those brackets have diminished; there is every reason to believe this process can continue. I can tell this Assembly that it is highly doubtful such a treaty can be accomplished in a few months, but I can tell you that a year from now is a possibility - more than a possibility. But we have no deadline. No agreement is better than a bad agreement. The United States remains hopeful, and we acknowledge the spirit of co-operation shown by the Soviet Union in these negotiations. We also look for that spirit to be applied to our concerns about compliance with existing agreements.
So, too, our discussions on nuclear testing and defence and space have been useful. But let me here stress to the General Assembly that much of the momentum in nuclear-arms-control negotiations is due to technological progress itself, especially in the potential for space-based defensive systems. I believe that the determination of the United States to research and develop and, when ready, deploy such defensive systems - systems targeted to destroy missiles, not people - accounts for a large share of the progress made in recent years in Geneva. With such systems, for the first time, in case of accidental launch or the act of a madman somewhere, major Powers will not be faced with the single option of massive retaliation, but will instead have the chance of a saner choice: to shield against an attack instead of avenging it. So, too, as defensive systems grow in effectiveness, they reduce the threat and the value of greater and greater offensive arsenals. Only recently, briefings I have received in the Oval Office indicate that progress toward such systems may be even more rapid and less costly than we had at first thought. Today, the United States reaffirms its commitment to its strategic defence initiative and our offer to share the benefits of strategic defences with others.
And yet, even as diplomatic and technological progress holds out the hope of at last diminishing the awful cloud of nuclear terror we have lived under in the post-war era, even at this moment another ominous terror is loose once again in the world, a terror we thought the world had put behind, a terror that looms at us now from the long-buried past, from ghostly, scarring trenches and the haunting, wan faces of millions dead in one of the most inhumane conflicts of all time.
Poison gas; chemical warfare: the terror of it; the horror of it! We condemn it. The use of chemical weapons in the Iran-Iraq war, beyond its tragic human toll, jeopardizes the moral and legal strictures that have held those weapons in check since the First World War. Let this tragedy spark reaffirmation of the Geneva Protocol outlawing the use of chemical weapons. I call upon the signatories to that Protocol, as well as other concerned States, to convene a conference to consider actions that we can take together to reverse the serious erosion of this treaty. We urge all nations to co-operate in negotiating a verifiable, truly global ban on chemical weapons at the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva.
It is incumbent upon all civilized nations to ban, once and for all - and on a verifiable and global basis - the use of chemical and gas warfare.
Finally, we must redouble our efforts to stop further proliferation of nuclear weapons in the world. Likewise, proliferation in other high-technology weapons such as ballistic missiles, is reaching global proportions, exacerbating regional rivalries in ways that can have global implications. The number of potential suppliers is growing at an alarming rate, and more must be done to halt the spread of these weapons. This was a matter of discussion last week between Secretary Shultz and Foreign Minister Shevardnadze. Talks between American and Soviet experts begin on this today; and we hope to see a multilateral effort to avoid having areas of tension like the Middle East becoming even more deadly battlegrounds than they already are.
Rut in most of these areas we see not only progress but also the potential for an increasingly vital role for multilateral efforts and institutions like the United Nations. That is why now more than ever the United Nations must continue to increase its effectiveness through budget and programme reform. The United Nations already is enacting sweeping measures affecting personnel reductions, budgeting by consensus, and the establishment of programme priorities. These actions are extremely important. The progress on reforms has allowed me to release funds withheld under congressional restrictions. I expect that the reform programme will continue and that further funds will be released in our new fiscal year.
Let me say here that we congratulate the United Nations on the work it has done in three areas of special concern. First, our struggle against the scourge of terrorism and State-sponsored terrorism must continue; and we must also end the scourge of hostage-taking. Second, the work of the World Health Organization in co-ordinating and advancing research on AIDS is vital. All international efforts in this area must be redoubled. The AIDS crisis is a grave one; we must move as one to meet it. 
So, too, is the drug crisis. We are moving now toward a new anti-drug-trafficking convention. This important treaty will be completed in December. I am confident that other strong United Nations drug-control programmes will also follow. The American people are profoundly concerned and deeply angered. We will not tolerate the drug traffickers. We mean to make war on them - and we believe this is one war the United Nations can endorse and participate in. Yes, the United Nations is a better place than it was eight years ago - and so, too, is the world. But the real issue of reform in the United Nations is not limited to fiscal and administrative improvements; it includes also a higher sort of reform, an intellectual and philosophical reform, a reform of old views about the relationship between the individual and the State. 
Few developments, for example, have been more encouraging to the United States than the special session on Africa that this body held two and a half years ago - a session at which the Members of the United Nations joined in calling as one for free-market incentives and a lessening of State controls to spur economic development. 
At one of the first international assemblies of my presidency, in Cancun, Mexico, I said that history demonstrates that, time and again, in place after place, economic growth and human progress make their greatest strides in countries that encourage economic freedom; that individual farmers, labourers, owners, traders and managers are the heart and soul of development. Trust them, because where they are allowed to create and build, where they are given a personal stake in deciding economic policies and benefiting from their success, societies become more dynamic, prosperous, progressive and free. We believe in freedom; we know that it works.
This is the immutable lesson of the post-war era: that freedom works; that, even more, freedom and peace work together. Every year that passes, everywhere in the world, this lesson is taking hold - from the People's Republic of China to Cameroon, from Bolivia to Botswana, and, yes, in the citadel of Marxism-Leninism itself. No, my country did not invent this synergy of peace and freedom, but, believe me, we impose no restrictions on the free export of our more than two centuries of experience with it. Free people, blessed by economic opportunity and protected by laws that respect the dignity of the individual, are not driven towards war or the domination of others. Here, then, is the way to world peace. But we Americans champion freedom not only because it is practical and beneficial but because it is also just, morally right.
Here I should like to note that I have addressed this assemblage more often than any of my predecessors and that this is the last occasion on which I shall do so. Therefore I hope that I may be permitted some closing reflections.
The world is currently witnessing another celebration of international co-operation. At the Olympics we see nations joining together in the competition of sports, and we see young people, who know precious little of the resentments of their elders, coming together as one.
One of our young athletes, from a home of modest means, said that she drew the strength for her achievement from another source of wealth. "We were rich as a family" she said about the love she was given and the values she was taught. I dare to hope that in the sentiment of that young athlete we see a sign of the rediscovery of old and tested values; values such as family - the first and most important unit of society, where all values and learning begin, an institution to be cherished and protected·, values, too, such as work, community, freedom and faith, for it is here we find the deeper rationale for the cause of human rights and world peace.
Our own experience on this continent, the American experience, though brief, has had one unmistakable encounter, an insistence on the preservation of one sacred truth: it is a truth that our first President, our founding father, passed on in the first farewell address made to the American people; it is a truth that I hope you will permit me to mention in these remarks of farewell, a truth embodied in our Declaration of Independence: that the case for inalienable rights, the idea of human dignity, the notion of conscience above compulsion, can be made only in the context of higher law, only in the context of what one of the founders of this Organization, Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjöld, called "devotion to something which is greater and higher than we are ourselves."
This is the endless cycle, the final truth to which humankind seems always to return - that religion and morality, faith in something higher, are prerequisites for freedom, and that justice and peace within ourselves is the first step toward justice and peace in the world and for the ages.
Yes, this is a place of great debate and grave discussion. Yet I cannot help but note here that one of our founding fathers - the most worldly of men, an internationalist, Benjamin Franklin - interrupted the proceedings of our own constitutional convention to make much the same point.
I cannot help but think this morning of other beginnings - of where and when I first read those words "and they shall beat their swords into ploughshares" and "your young men shall see visions and your old men shall dream dreams". This morning, my thoughts go to her who gave me many things in life but whose most important gift was the knowledge of the happiness and solace to be gained in prayer. It is the greatest help I have had in my presidency, and I recall here Lincoln's words when he said
"Only the most foolish of men would think he could confront the duties of the office I now hold without turning to someone stronger, a power above all others. "
I think, then, of her and others like her in that small town in Illinois, gentle people who possessed something that those who hold positions of power sometimes forget to prize. No one of them could ever have imagined that the boy from the banks of the Rock River would come to this moment and have this opportunity. But, had they been told that it would happen, I think they would have been a bit disappointed if I had not spoken here for what they knew so wells that when we grow weary of the world and its troubles, when our faith in humanity falters, it is then that we must seek contort and refreshment of spirit in a deeper source of wisdom, one greater than ourselves.
So, if future generations do say of us that in our time peace came closer, that we did bring about new seasons of truth and justice, it will be cause for pride. But it will be a cause of greater pride still if it is also said that we were wise enough to know that the deliberations of great leaders and great bodies are but an overture, that the truly majestic music, the music of freedom, justice and peace, is the music made in forgetting self and seeking in silence the will of Him who made us.
Thank you for your hospitality over the years. I bid you now farewell, and God bless you.
﻿
May I begin by congratulating you warmly, Sir, on your election to the presidency of this session of the General Assembly. I am sure that, with your remarkable ability and rich experience and the concerted efforts of representatives from various countries, this session will be a success. I also wish to take this opportunity to express my heartfelt thanks to your predecessor, Mr. Peter Florin, for his outstanding contribution in fulfilling the high mission of President of the last session.
When the forty-second session of the General Assembly opened here a year ago people already saw signs of relaxation in the prolonged international tension. Now, a year later, when we look at the world situation again, the trend towards relaxation is definitely gaining greater momentum. Some problems that have long been a cause of concern are heading towards solution. The Soviet-United States Treaty on the Elimination of Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles - the INF Treaty - signed last December after many years of negotiations, is being implemented. 
Agreement was finally reached in April tills year on the Afghan question, which has been a cause of grave concern to the international community for more than eight years, and the Soviet troop withdrawal is now under way.
Another issue of grave international concern is the eight-year-long war between Iran and Iraq, but the situation has at last taken a Favourable turn thanks to acceptance of Security Council resolution 598 (1987) by the two sides. The two countries have agreed to a cease-fire and are on the way to a negotiated peace. In south-west Africa, after long years of war and upheaval, the parties concerned have reached agreement in principle on the withdrawal of foreign troops from Angola and on the initial steps to implement Security Council resolution 435 (1978) regarding the independence of Namibia. There have also been positive developments in the Horn of Africa, Western Sahara and the eastern Mediterranean. Efforts towards a settlement of the Middle East and Central American questions are also being made.
Dialogue is playing an increasingly prominent role in improving the international situation. There has been frequent dialogue between the United States and the Soviet Union, and also fairly active dialogue between the parties concerned on questions of regional conflicts. In various regional organizations and conferences in Asia, Africa and Latin America, in the Non-Aligned Movement and in many bilateral contacts, countries are seeking settlement of international, regional or bilateral issues through dialogue. This year saw the first meeting of Foreign Ministers of the Balkan region, which was aimed at boosting co-operation among the Balkan countries. In order to ease the situation on the Korean peninsula and promote the peaceful reunification of Korea, the north and the south of Korea are making contacts. Facts show fully that in today's world dialogue is taking the place of confrontation, and the tendency to seek the peaceful settlement of international disputes is growing. This is a striking feature of the present international situation. Obviously, it is the outcome of the common efforts of all countries and is deeply rooted in the events of the time.
In the past 40 years or more since the Second World War history has made giant strides forward. The colonial system is now a thing of the past. Former colonies and, dependencies have become sovereign States one after another and stand on their own feet in the family of nations. Respect for each other's independence and sovereignty and opposition to foreign aggression and oppression has become a most important feature in the international politics of the day. The power politics that prevailed in former days are becoming less and less operative. Facts have shown time and time again that even the super-Powers, which possess strength unmatched anywhere in the world, cannot conquer weaker and smaller nations by force and impose their will on others. All their attempts have inevitably failed because of the resolute resistance of the peoples subjected to aggression and the widespread condemnation by the international community. This is thought-provoking.
While the danger of war still exists, the forces of peace are steadily growing. People all over the world have voiced an increasingly strong demand for peace and against war. None of the third-world. East European or West European countries or other developed countries want to go through the holocaust of another world war. Even the super-Powers, which possess sufficient nuclear armaments to destroy the Earth several times over, do not believe that they could win a nuclear war. All these factors have helped to check the outbreak of another world war.
Problems among developing countries ought to be settled through negotiation. Unfortunately, some differences have given rise to armed conflicts. There is a growing trend in developing countries towards seeking the peaceful settlement of disputes through dialogue. This indicates that they are becoming more and more aware that their major historical task is to develop their national economies and improve the quality of people's lives, and that armed conflicts among themselves can only deplete their national strength, to the detriment of their fundamental interests. War means mutual disaster, while peace brings mutual benefit. If the third-world countries handle their relations in this spirit, it will greatly hasten their development and enable them to play a more effective role in the cause of maintaining regional and global peace. 
Rapidly developing science and technology, which is being translated into unprecedented great productive forces, spurs the development of the economy and is changing the face of human society. This is a salient feature of the present era. The aggregate strength of a country depends more and more on its economic, scientific and technological level. A review of post-war history clearly indicates that countries which practise hegemonism and engage in the arms race, foreign expansion and military conflicts have found their national strength seriously weakened, while those countries which devote themselves to the development of science, technology, the economy and education have rapidly grown strong. Some have even risen in the world as great economic Powers with advanced science and technology. Meanwhile, the third world is very active in the international arena as a growing political force. Many regional political and economic organizations are also playing an ever more important part in international affairs. With the combination of these elements, the world is moving from bipolarization to multipolarization, which, in our view, is conducive to peace.
It is against such a backdrop that there emerges the trend of dialogue replacing confrontation and of the peaceful settlement of international disputes. These developments are a source of encouragement to the people of all countries.
However, is the present world free from troubles? Obviously it is not. The root cause of turbulence in the world has not yet been removed. The peoples of all countries must make unremitting efforts to safeguard world peace.
The world's peoples are faced with the common task of halting the arms race and striving for disarmament in order to preserve peace. The recently concluded third special session of the United Nations General Assembly devoted to disarmament represented a major effort by the international community to push forward the process of disarmament. Although the special session failed to achieve specific results because of the rigid positions taken by one or two countries, in disregard
  

of the reasonable demand of the vast majority of countries, the statements made by representatives of many countries and non-governmental organizations and the suggestions and propositions that they put forward mirrored the universal desire of the international community for peace and disarmament. The powerful public opinion arising there from has a positive impact on the promotion of the disarmament process. The special session enabled people to have a clearer picture of the present state of the arms race and the correct orientation of and approach to disarmament. On the question of disarmament, the Chinese delegation deems it necessary to expound the following three points at this session of the General Assembly.
First, it is a welcome development that the United States and the Soviet Union have taken a step forward on the road to disarmament. However, we cannot but note that the huge nuclear arsenals they possess still pose a threat to world peace. The arms race between them is still going on. They are trying greatly to improve and upgrade the quality and function of their respective nuclear weapons, vying with each other to develop high-tech weaponry and extending the arms race to outer space. Hence, the disarmament task remains arduous and formidable.
Secondly, countries across the world have repeatedly reaffirmed the important principle that the super-Powers, which possess the largest and most sophisticated arsenals, bear a special responsibility for disarmament and should take the lead in drastically cutting their arms. This is a correct direction and an effective approach for the realization of disarmament. We hope that the super-Powers will, in conformity with the trend of the times, quicken their pace on the road to disarmament and reach agreement on a drastic reduction of nuclear weapons at an early date, starting with a 50 per cent cut in strategic nuclear weapons. Their talks on conventional disarmament should also be speeded up and the arms race in outer space, in all its forms, should be halted. 
Thirdly, the question of disarmament concerns the security interests of all countries. Countries, big or small, strong or weak, all have the right to participate in the discussion and settlement of the disarmament question on an equal footing, and can each play a positive role. The super-Powers should respect and take seriously into consideration the reasonable demands and propositions set forth by the small and medium-sized countries. The United Nations and other multilateral disarmament agencies are important venues for the discussion and solution of this question by all parties on an equal basis. Their role should be strengthened. Multilateral and bilateral disarmament negotiations should complement and promote each other.
The third special session of the United Nations General Assembly devoted to disarmament showed that most countries have identical or similar views on the aforementioned questions. We hope that the current session of the General Assembly will give full expression to the strong desire of these countries, and make significant progress towards disarmament. While there is greater effort to seek the peaceful settlement of regional conflicts through dialogue, the Flames of war in quite a Few conflict-ridden areas are yet to be extinguished. Dialogue on a number of issues has failed to make substantive progress. On some other issues, although agreements have been reached, the successful implementation of those agreements requires continued efforts by the parties concerned. In international relations the Chinese Government has all along advocated the observance of the five principles of mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence. As regards regional conflicts, it has always stood for a fair and reasonable political settlement; therefore aggression must be stopped, foreign troops withdrawn and the sovereignty of all countries respected. Differences among developing countries should all the more be settled appropriately through peaceful negotiations on mutually acceptable terms.
The Chinese Government has consistently opposed Israel's policy of aggression and expansion and supported the just struggle of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples and the efforts of the Arab countries and the Palestine Liberation Organization (РLO) to seek a solution to the Middle East question. We hope to see an early, fair and comprehensive solution to the question and an end to the turmoil caused by four decades of war, so that the people of the Middle East may enjoy peace again.
We are concerned about peace and stability on the Korean peninsula. China supports the reasonable proposition of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea for the independent and peaceful reunification of the country through consultation and dialogue and opposes any action that adds to tension on the peninsula.
Following the decision of the Soviet Union to pull out lt4 troops from Afghanistan, the international community has voiced an even stronger demand for Vietnamese troop withdrawal from Kampuchea and for an end to the war of aggression. Regrettably, however, what the Vietnamese authorities have been doing runs counter to the desire and demand of the international community. While professing their readiness to withdraw their troops, they have put forward unreasonable demands in an attempt to delay their troop withdrawal and legalize the results of their aggression, so as to get what they have failed to achieve in their 10-year war of aggression. It should be stressed that on the Kampuchean question Viet Nam is the aggressor and the Vietnamese troops are the only foreign troops on Kampuchean territory. It is explicitly and solemnly stated in the very first Article of the United Nations Charter that to maintain international peace and security it is essential to take effective measures for the suppression of acts of aggression. Since the Vietnamese invasion of Kampuchea, the General Assembly has for nine successive years adopted resolutions calling for the withdrawal of foreign troops from Kampuchea so as to facilitate the settlement of the Kampuchean problem by the Kampuchean people themselves, free from outside interference. All this shows that the international community brooks no legalization of the results of aggression. The Chinese Government considers it necessary for the current session of the General Assembly to reiterate those just demands and to uphold the sanctity of the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter.
The Chinese Government has for the past decade worked hard towards a fair and reasonable settlement of the Kampuchean question. Recently it has further elaborated its position on the question, which can be summed up in the following five points.
First, a complete withdrawal by Viet Nam of its troops from Kampuchea is the key to a settlement of the Kampuchean question. The Vietnamese side should produce, as soon as possible, a timetable for its troop withdrawal from Kampuchea within a short period of time. 
Secondly, we favour the establishment, with Prince Norodom Sihanouk in charge, of a provisional quadripartite coalition government in Kampuchea as Viet Nam withdraws its troops from the country. Each faction's candidates for the provisional government should be proposed by the faction itself but should be acceptable to the other parties concerned. We stand for a quadripartite coalition in Kampuchea. We are against the exclusion of any of the four factions from it or the exercise of power by any one faction alone.
Thirdly, upon the establishment of the provisional quadripartite coalition government of Kampuchea, a freeze should be imposed on the activities of the Kampuchean armed forces of all factions. They should refrain from becoming involved in politics and interfering in the general election, so that the Kampuchean people may conduct a free election in the absence of outside interference and the threat of force. To prevent a civil war in Kampuchea the existing armed forces of all factions might be disbanded, to facilitate the creation of a unified national defence force composed of an equal number of officers and men from each of the four factions, under a unified command.
Fourthly, practical and effective international supervision should be instituted over Viet Nam's troop withdrawal, the maintenance of peace in Kampuchea and the conduct of a free election there. To that end the Chinese Government supports the proposition for the sending to Kampuchea of an international peace-keeping force and an international control committee.
Fifthly, when the parties concerned have reached agreement on a political settlement of the Kampuchean question, China will be ready to join other countries in an international guarantee for an independent, neutral and non-aligned Kampuchea.
It must be clear to all that China seeks no self-interest in Kampuchea as in any other region of the world. The Chinese Government's position is based entirely on the principle of opposing aggression, upholding justice and safeguarding the United Nations Charter and the norms governing international relations. It is our hope that the international community will continue to work under this principle for a fair and just settlement of the Kampuchean question.
We should attach adequate importance to world economic problems while paying attention to the international political situation. The current world economic development is extremely uneven, despite the presence of a few positive factors. Worrisome problems still exist and some have even gone from bad to worse. While developed countries have enjoyed economic growth for six successive years, developing countries have suffered severe economic setbacks. Many of them have witnessed increasing signs of stagnation in the process of development. The economic difficulties of African countries have aroused wide concern. The heavy debt burden, reduced inflow of funds, worsening trade terms and growing protectionism have all seriously hampered the economic growth of developing countries. All this demonstrates that present international economic relations are becoming increasingly out of accord with the needs of economic growth in the world and of developing countries in particular.
In the present-day world there is even greater economic interdependence among countries. Developed countries will find it difficult to sustain their economic growth if developing countries long remain in difficulties and their economies cannot move ahead. It is an urgent task in the international economic sphere to improve, by effective measures, the external environment of developing countries in such fields as commodities, trade, debt, capital, currency and finance. That would contribute not only to resumed growth and development of developing countries but also to the stability and growth of the world economy. Recently the Group of 77 has proposed the convening of a special session of the United Nations General Assembly devoted to economic matters. The United Nations Secretary-General, Mr. Perez de Cuellar, has also proposed a summit meeting similar to the Cancun Meeting. The Chinese Government seconds those proposals and hopes to see increased North-South co-operation through dialogue and the invigoration of the world economy.
Over the past few years, regional economic co-operation has increased markedly, which is an important trend in international economic relations. We believe that regional co-operation based on equality and mutual benefit is of positive significance, for it helps the development of different regions. At the same time I should like to emphasize that in the present world economic conditions neither a country nor a region can achieve development and prosperity behind closed doors. It has to open itself to the outside world. Trade protectionism, while harming others, is in the final analysis detrimental to the initiator as well. It is our hope that countries and regions across the world will open up to and complement one another, to the benefit of their common development and prosperity.
As there is growing regional co-operation in the world, co-operation and development in the Asia-Pacific region have attracted more and more attention in recent years. This region is indeed making rapid economic progress and has tremendous potential. However, the development level varies with different countries in the region, where many countries remain underdeveloped or even impoverished. As a large country in the region, China supports regional economic co-operation. China's development is closely linked with that of the Asia-Pacific region. We hope to see closer co-operation and the common prosperity of all countries in the region. 
China will implement unswervingly the policy of deepening reform and wider opening to the outside world. It is opening itself to the whole world, including the developed and developing countries, countries whose social systems are similar to or different from the system of China. Recently, we have adopted new measures in an effort to restructure our foreign trade and improve our investment environment. Most important, we have mapped out an economic development strategy for China's coastal regions. Those regions, which cover an area of about 320,000 square kilometres with a population of 160 million, boast a better infrastructure, greater economic and technological strength and higher quality of labour force. Accelerating their opening-up and strengthening their multi faceted, multi channel and multiform economic and technological co-operation with the Asia-Pacific region and the rest of the world will not only speed up China's economic development but also make positive contributions to the prosperity of the Asia-Pacific region and that of the world as a whole.
This year marks the fortieth anniversary of the adoption by the United Nations of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Forty years ago the people and Governments of various countries that had suffered from the catastrophe of the two world wars worked out and adopted that Declaration through their joint efforts. It is the first international instrument that systematically and specifically sets forth respect for and protection of fundamental human rights. Despite its historical limitations, the Declaration has exerted a Far-reaching influence on the development of post-war international human rights activities and has played a positive role in that regard. In the past four decades the concept of human rights has continuously developed, and its content has been enriched and its theory improved. A series of subsequent declarations and conventions concerning human rights has further developed and stipulated in detail the specific content of each human right. In this connection particular mention should be made of such important items as the right to national self-determination, the right to racial equality, the permanent sovereign right over natural wealth and resources and the right to development. All those are of great significance to the fight for equality, freedom and liberation waged by the nations and peoples under the apartheid system of foreign aggression and oppression, to the efforts made by countries newly independent in the post-war period to preserve their sovereignty and territorial integrity and to the demands of the developing countries for restructuring the irrational international economic situation. The Chinese Government has always appreciated and supported the United Nations efforts to promote and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms, in accordance with the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter.
Three years ago, from this solemn rostrum, the Chinese leader Zhao Ziyang pointed out that the world needs the United Nations, while the United Nations needs the support of the world. Events have repeatedly testified to that important thesis. With the passage of time the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter, which are increasingly recognized as norms governing international relations and as an embodiment of the lofty ideals of mankind, are playing an ever greater role in the international community.
Despite its inadequacies the United Nations is irreplaceable in its role as the most broadly representative and most influential international organization in the world. Gone are the days when a few big Powers could manipulate world affairs. The United Nations is the proper forum in which countries meet to discuss world affairs. It has proved itself capable of doing important work, and it has great potential for solving questions facing mankind, questions such as those of the environment, population, public health and scientific and technological development. Above all, it should be pointed out that in recent years the Security Council and the Secretary-General, with the support o£ Member States, must be credited with achievements in promoting the settlement of major international disputes. Here, I want to present my compliments to the Secretary-General, Mr. Perez de Cuellar, and to wish him continued successes in his peace mission. The importance of the United Nations role is on the rise, in keeping with the expectations of our time. The people of the world expect the United Nations to play a greater role in maintaining world peace, in spurring development and in strengthening international co-operation. As a permanent member of the Security Council, China is ready to continue to work with other Member States for the realization of the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter.
﻿
Please convey, Sir, my warm congratulations to the President on his election to preside over the forty-third session of the General Assembly. I wish him luck and success in his high office.
As in previous years, my delegation will do everything possible to help the General Assembly achieve positive results.
I wish to thank the President of the forty-second session, Ambassador Peter Florin, for his successful contribution. He guided the Assembly's proceedings circumspectly and pragmatically and with a view to getting results.
This session begins in encouraging circumstances. When we met here 12 months ago the war between Iraq and Iran was claiming countless victims day after day. In Afghanistan an end to the human suffering was not foreseeable. In southern Africa, too, there was no cause for hope.
Today the weapons in the Gulf are silent. Negotiations have been begun between the warring parties. A year after its unanimous adoption by the Security Council, resolution 598 (1987) has been accepted by both parties to the conflict as a basis for a cease-fire. In Afghanistan the Geneva agreements, likewise achieved with the decisive assistance of the United Nations, created the conditions for the withdrawal of the Soviet troops. Fifty per cent of those troops have already left the country in accordance with the terms of the agreements.
Following his talks in southern Africa the Secretary-General has expressed his confidence with regard to the implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978).
None of this progress has simply fallen into the world Organization's lap. These achievements are the outcome of a favourable change in the international climate and are the product of the manifold efforts of the principal organs of the United Nations, above all its Secretary-General, Mr. Perez de Cuellar.
The Secretary-General has said that serving the cause of peace is worth the maximum personal endeavour. He is making that endeavour and we all, the Members of the United Nations, are grateful to him for it. He has proved wrong those who had doubts about the United Nations. He encourages all who seek to strengthen its peace-promoting role.	.
The Federal Republic of Germany has actively supported the United Nations and its Secretary-General.
As a non-permanent member of the Security Council, we have worked constructively for the implementation of Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 598 (1987). After the adoption of resolution 598 (1987) we kept in touch with both parties to the conflict, calling upon them to accept and implement it. I appeal to Iraq and Iran to conduct the negotiations with a will to make compromises and to achieve a comprehensive, just and honourable peace settlement. 
In Afghanistan the withdrawal of the Soviet troops opens up the possibility of a new political beginning in that country. This opportunity should be seized by all concerned, like the European Community, the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany is ready to provide substantial humanitarian assistance in the process of repatriating and reintegrating the millions of refugees and, given the right domestic conditions, to contribute to Afghanistan's reconstruction.
Major progress has also been achieved towards a settlement of the conflicts in southern Africa. Important forward steps have been taken. The South African troops have left Angola. Negotiations are under way for the withdrawal of the Cuban troops. We have come a good deal closer to Namibia's independence. Security Council resolution 43S (1978) has always been and remains the only viable route to this goal. As a member of the Contact Group, my Government offers its good offices in seeking the implementation of that resolution.
Developments have also been favourable in other parts of the world.
In Cambodia the contours of a peace settlement are beginning to appear.
Talk between the Governments of South Korea and North Korea now seem to be within the realm of the possible.
In Central America the continuing cease-fire can facilitate dialogue between the conflicting parties so that democracy may be firmly established.
A peaceful settlement of the conflicts in Western Sahara and between Libya and Chad is moving nearer.
Representatives of the two ethnic groups in Cyprus are negotiating on the island's future.
 · 
The Middle East is still a source of concern. Negotiations are still not in sight, although the Palestinian uprising in the occupied territories shows that the status quo is untenable. An international conference on the Middle East is and remains the appropriate framework for the necessary negotiations on a peace settlement that will enable the Palestinian people to exercise their right to self-determination and guarantee the right of all States in the region, including Israel, to exist within secured borders.
We wish sorely-tried Lebanon a peaceful solution to its problems based on sovereignty, unity and national reconciliation.
If we want to secure peace world-wide once and for all we must strengthen the forces of peace. This means, first of all, that we must strengthen the United Nations. To achieve this we must continue the successful endeavours to bring about internal reforms. What we need above all is full implementation of the Charter. We are prepared to consider seriously proposals aimed at enhancing the peace-promoting powers op our Organization. This is also the objective of our initiative for preventing conflicts which has been put before this session of the General Assembly for final approval. We deem it essential that the United Nations be in a position to act before a conflict actually breaks out.
The kind of peace we pursue can be based solely on the rule of law. It must derive from the right of self-determination of nations and from the civil, economic and social human rights enshrined in the International Covenants on Human Rights adopted by the United Nations. There is a growing awareness that all public power comes up against its absolute limit in human rights. Respect for human rights is not only an internal affair, within the framework of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe ÍCSCR) process those rights have become a central issue.
One of the most blatant mockeries of human rights and manifestations of disregard for those rights is the system of apartheid in the Republic of South Africa. We demand the abolition of this un-reformable system. We demand the release of Nelson Mandela, Eric Molohi and all other political prisoners in South Africa. We demand the lifting of the ban on the African National Congress of South Africa (ANC) and all other organizations of the black
majority so as to open the way for a peaceful national dialogue. Let there be no doubt about it; we will not be prohibited from helping anti-apartheid organizations.
The chairman of the largest single trade union in the world, the Metal Workers' Union in the Federal Republic of Germany, has drawn up a catalogue of minimum standards for labour relations to be respected by the South African subsidiaries of German companies. They afford South African unions and workers, irrespective of their colour, the same claim to social justice as their colleagues in the Federal Republic of Germany. Large German companies have promised to apply these minimum standards in South Africa. From this rostrum I appeal to all trade unions and all firms to follow this example.
The rule of law implies absolute respect for international law. That respect is the foundation of policies that are geared to negotiation and agreements rather than to the threat or use of force. The rule of law implies protection of and respect for minorities, be they religious, national or ethnic minorities. All such minorities have a right to develop their identity, to cultivate their language and to live according to their cultural traditions and to exercise their religion, while enjoying equal political and legal rights.
The rule of law is menaced by international terrorism. The international community must oppose terrorism, which is hostile to human dignity and any human order, with still greater determination.
The rule of law implies joint efforts to combat drug trafficking. This is an increasingly urgent international problem which can only be solved through the joint efforts of all governments. My Government hopes that the deliberations of the forthcoming diplomatic conference in Vienna will lead to a United Nations convention to combat illegal drug trafficking. This could mean considerable progress. 
We can look to the future with confidence. The community of nations is showing greater respect for the rule of law. There is a growing willingness to resolve even the most serious differences by negotiation. This indicates a fundamental change in international relations. The core of these changes is in the attempts by West and East to place their relations on a new foundation. One of the reasons why the world Organization has been able to achieve progress in the peaceful settlement of conflicts is that West and East have increasingly been co-operating to this end. It has become obvious that West-East confrontation must not be carried over into the third world but must, where it arises, be defused step by step and, as far as possible, be resolved through dialogue and co-operation.
The progress of the European Community is one of the promising world trends. By creating a community of 12 European democracies we have won a victory over national egoism, power politics and prejudice. It is the greatest and finest victory in the history of Europe. It has not cost a single human life, yet it is winning us the future.
Franco-German friendship and co-operation are at the core of this future-oriented development. The European Community is the most advanced association of sovereign States to date. The dynamism and attractiveness of our Community are growing constantly. The European Community has committed itself to free world trade and world economic co-operation. It is becoming a driving force of growth not only for ourselves but for the world economy as a whole. This makes us resolute opponents of protectionism.
The growth potential of the single market and of the common social and monetary area will make the European Community even more capable of developing a world economic partnership with the North American democracies and Japan. By increasing our economic strength we can also increasingly promote the development of the third world. The larger European market will be able to absorb even more products from the third world.
As the Lomé Conventions, our agreements with the Mediterranean area and our co-operation agreements with the Association of South-East Asian Nations, the States of Central America and the Gulf Co-operation Council show, the European Community is already a major partner of the countries of the third world. This co-operation takes place on the basis of equal rights.
The powerful growth of the European Community creates a considerable opportunity for the development of West-East relations. The task now is to plan the architecture of the whole of Europe, from the Atlantic to the Urals. The more the Soviet Union pursues the process of opening itself internally and externally, the more capable it will become of co-operation with the West and the East. We want this reform policy to prove successful. Europe's future lies not in hoping for, let alone seeking, the destabilization of the other side, but rather in co-operation and productive competition.
The manifold forms of co-operation will determine the architecture of the peaceful order in Europe or, as it also can be termed, the common European house.
The ensuing interdependence will enhance mutual confidence and make for greater stability. This new order must not be characterized by fences, but by open doors, by freedom of movement for people, for ideas and goods, as well as respect for human rights.
One of the pillars of the European structure is and will remain the European Community oriented towards openness and co-operation. We know that Europe is more than the European Community. President Mitterrand put this most impressively in his historic speech in Aachen in 1987. As a result of increasing co-operation, of genuine détente and of disarmament, the military elements will lose significance in the West-East relationship, whereas political, economic, ecological and cultural co-operation will gain in importance.  Thanks to this development. West and Fast will derive a fresh potential which can he used not for disarmament but for the advancement their own societies and for co-operation with the developing countries.
The change for the better in the whole of Europe derives energy from the revival of our continent's identity. That identity emanates from our common European history, Europe's glories and aberrations, its common culture - to which all European nations have made major contributions, and from the awareness of our mutual responsibility for the future of our continent and for peace and development in the world. Decades of separation have not made two Europes out of one Europe; decades of separation have not made two German nations out of one German nation. The German people in the heart of Europe, having often been in conflict with its neighbours, has learned its lessons from history. Both German States are meeting their responsibility for peace in Europe, including through mutual co-operation. 4hat benefits all Europeans.
Through our membership of the European Community and the Atlantic alliance, we Germans in the Federal Republic of Germany have responsibly used the freedom we regained after the Second World War. We have established the strongest imaginable bond States can have: the bond of common values. Our commitment to peace in Europe also led us to conclude treaties with the Soviet Union, the Polish People's Republic and Czechoslovakia, and to conclude the Basic Treaty with the German Democratic Republic, united, too, to our active participation in bringing about the Final Act of Helsinki and in the process of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE). We regard the development of our relations with the Soviet Union, which are of crucial importance to us, as playing a key role in improving the overall West-Fast relationship. Chancellor Helmut Kohl's forthcoming visit to the Soviet Union will serve that purpose. 
We have been nailing for a peaceful order in Europe ever since the Atlantic alliance presented its Harmel report in 1967. For a long time we received no answer to this proposed grand design for a better Europe. The policy initiated by General-Secretary Gorbachev in the Soviet Union can turn the design contained in the Harmel report into reality. This new policy in the Soviet Union meets not merely with a favourable but with a constructive response from us. We all have a responsibility to use every opportunity to bring about a change for the better. The distinct improvement in United States-Soviet relations indicates the opportunities arising there from.
The Final Act of Helsinki marks the course towards a peaceful order in Europe in which states with different political and social systems can live together in peaceful competition without fear of one another. By seeking to establish such a peaceful order in Europe, the Federal Republic of Germany is complying with the mandate of its Constitution, the Basic Law, which is to serve the cause of peace in Europe and to overcome the separation of our indivisible nation. Our efforts to achieve the early conclusion of the Vienna follow-up meeting with the adoption of a substantive and we11-balanced final document should bring us another step forward towards a European peaceful order.
We are today confronted with the task of protecting mankind from the dangers which man himself has created. Technological development leaves in our hands the decision whether we create a better and more humane world or we perish. The responsibility not only for ourselves but for all future generations must determine our policies, our thinking and our actions. 
In view of the danger of nuclear annihilation, the disarmament process had to begin with nuclear disarmament. In this connection the Treaty on intermediate-range nuclear forces represents a breakthrough of fundamental importance since till now arms have only been limited. Now, for the first time, a whole class of weapons is being eliminated. The global elimination of Soviet and United States intermediate-range nuclear weapons must be followed by radical measures with regard to nuclear, chemical and conventional weapons. Reducing the strategic nuclear forces of both super-Powers by half must become a reality.
The shocking pictures of the consequences of the use of chemical weapons prompt me to appeal to all participants in the Geneva Conference on Disarmament to bring the now-far-advanced negotiations on a global ban on such weapons to the earliest possible conclusion. Only a world-wide convention ensuring the verifiable prevention of the manufacture, storage, transfer and use of chemical weapons can free mankind from the scourge of these cruel weapons for all time. My Government is playing an active part also in efforts to strengthen all instruments which can be utilized to prevent the use and proliferation of chemical weapons even before a global ban is in force. We welcome President Reagan's initiative calling for a conference of the signatories of the 1925 Geneva Protocol. While pursuing all these efforts, we must devote our entire energy to the task of achieving a global ban as the priority objective.
In the field of conventional arms our aim is to remove superiority and imbalances by means of asymmetrical disarmament. We want to create conditions in Europe in which neither side will still be capable of launching an attack on foreign territory. Large-scale offensive options do not feature in our Western concept. True conventional stability and further confidence-building require also consensus on the question of the defence philosophy underlying the policies. We seek а consensus on the functions to be given to both sides' forces. This must cover their size, equipment and command principles. I appeal to all concerned, to all the participants in the CSCE, to adopt before the end of October 1988, together with this final document of the Vienna CSCE follow-up meeting, a mandate for the commencement of negotiations on conventional stability. The time is ripe; all must now live up to their responsibility. 
Unlimited armaments do not create unlimited security, but balanced and mutual disarmament can help create more security. That is why disarmament and arms control are just as much an integral part of the security policy of the Atlantic Alliance as our defence efforts.
In the nuclear age war must be made un-wageable once and for all. New thinking requires that over the net of deterrence - the safety net of the ultimate ratio - an additional net of new, co-operative structures of military security be created which will reduce the enormous risks of exclusive reliance on deterrence.
Being realists, we know that we cannot base today's security on hopes for tomorrow. But, being men of action, meeting our responsibility for the future, we must today already create the foundations for our future security, foundations which must be broader, more solid and stronger than the ones on which peace has been based up to now.
Mankind's future is not threatened by war alone. There is a growing danger of man's destroying his own sources of life on this planet. We are faced with the task of preserving our natural sources of life and pressing ahead with the development of the third world. The two are closely intertwined. At present the world's population is more than 5 billion; soon it will be 6 billion. According to the World Bank statistics, about one billion people live in absolute poverty.
The industrial countries - all industrial countries; not only those in the West but also the socialist States - have a duty to act together. We must use our economic, scientific and technological potentials in order to render development possible and to preserve the world's natural sources of life. This presupposes the development of new forms of transport, new sources of energy, new materials and new production methods. It is on this and not on the development of new and ever more terrible weapons of mass destruction that the energy and the technology of industrial countries must he concentrated. What the nations of the third world need from industrial countries is not weapons but help for their development. I repeat my proposal that the United Nations record exports of weapons in a register. I welcome the Soviet Union's support for this proposal as expressed yesterday.
The purpose is also to satisfy the basic needs of hundreds of millions of people in the developing countries. Time and again, at ever shorter intervals, catastrophic food shortages occur which pose a challenge to mankind's solidarity and willingness to help. But humanitarian assistance alone cannot solve the problem. In spite of some favourable trends this year - the world economic situation having improved more than expected - we must admit that poverty in the third world is growing and the debt burden is growing. True, the gross domestic product increased in the developing countries as well last year, bat in many instances this improvement is being negated by population growth. Investments for the future are impeded by debt-servicing commitments.
In 1987 the debt-servicing payments of developing countries exceeded incoming funds by $15 billion. In such circumstances it is impossible for these countries to increase their economic potential.
The situation is particularly serious in the sub-Saharan countries. My Government supports the programme of action adopted at the special session of the General Assembly on Africa. 11 had previously cancelled about 2.9 billion marks of the debt owed by 20 of these countries. It has also announced its readiness to write off debts worth about 2.3 billion marks for six more African countries that are not among the least developed countries and are prepared to implement adjustment and reform programmes in collaboration with the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. 
All donors should include in their official aid to the poorest countries a large grant element. We intend to increase the grant element of our financial co-operation with the developing countries overall. Our development assistance to the least developed countries is already being provided in grant form
My Government also proposes that initial, tangible debt-servicing relief should be afforded within the scope of the Paris Club rescheduling operations. It has also decided to broaden and considerably ease the terms of our bilateral financial co-operation with our partners in the third world.  We expect the commercial banks too to increase their commitment in the developing countries. Many of the newly industrializing economies as well are suffering from the consequences of their heavy foreign debts. Here, too, the commercial banks in particular are urgently called upon to provide the funds necessary to ensure the economic development of these countries. Such funds will not bring any long-term benefits, however, unless the recipients carry out effective adjustment programmes which create suitable conditions. We hope that the new Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency will also be conducive to this process.
It remains indispensable to secure free access for developing countries to the markets of industrial countries. The main problem here lies in non-tariff trade barriers. These must be removed in the course of the ongoing Uruguay Round if the concept of free world trade is not to lose its credibility. In the first six months of this year our imports from developing countries increased by over 5 per cent, while corresponding exports are down by more than 8 per cent.
In their joint efforts to promote development the industrial and developing countries must make sure that those very efforts do not themselves become one of the factors causing the destruction of the environment. The principle still to be observed is that the industrial countries, when investing in developing countries, should submit to the standards that apply at home.
The idea of introducing an international criminal law for crimes against the environment, which is being considered by the Committee on Crime Prevention and Control, is right. We must prevent large parts of the third world being turned into poison-garbage depots of the northern over-consumption societies as a result of criminal transport practices, but also as a result of exploitation of the financial distress of some developing countries. The political and economic colonialism of the past must not now be followed by poison-garbage colonialism.
There is more to the relationship between development and ecology than that, however. Many developing countries, owing to their economic plight, are compelled to over-exploit their natural resources. 
The economy-ecology relationship must be made one of the main items of the agenda in the North-South dialogue. The violation and destruction of nature is much the same as the violation of human rights. The damage caused in one country is the concern of all- Who would still dispute that this has long since become a task of world domestic policy? For this reason, all German development projects are thoroughly examined as to their compatibility with the environment. Such a review should be carried out as a matter of course in the context of all development co-operation between North and South.
The extent of the danger to which we are all exposed is obvious from the changes in the world's climate. The gap in the Earth's ozone layer is constantly widening. A commission appointed by the German Federal Republic Parliament came to the conclusion that a catastrophic deterioration of the Earth's climate can be avoided only if the present international agreements are drastically tightened up in the next few years and if the aerosols causing the damage to the ozone layer have been almost completely removed by the year 20Ü0,
Over the past 20 years more than 3 million people have lost their lives as a result of natural disasters all over the world. More than 800 million people have suffered as a result of such disasters and damage to property has exceeded $23 billion. The forty-second session of the General Assembly quite rightly proclaimed the last 10 years of the century the decade for disaster prevention.
The number of disasters afflicting mankind that do not have natural causes but are nature's reaction to its maltreatment by man is increasing all the time. The repair of damage resulting from such disasters must be complemented by preventive measures designed to ensure their early detection and mitigate their consequences. We already have the science and technology to achieve this, if only we can pool our efforts. This is a dictate of political and economic reason and applies to all members in the community of nations. The international community as a whole is responsible for the state of the Earth, which has been entrusted to us for safekeeping. The consequences of any aberrations affect us all.
Genetic engineering will soon give man the power to change himself. This poses the question of our self-perception as human beings, a question which no congress of biogenetic engineers, no State, but only mankind itself can answer. It therefore needs to be dealt with by the United Nations. Let us bring together the best and the wisest citizens of all nations so that they may tell us where man should set his own limits if he is not to betray himself, if he is not to abandon his dignity, his uniqueness.
We must set our minds to that task. It, too, calls for a new approach. The scientist accepts as a matter of course that there is a complex interdependence, an interaction of different elements and processes. Similarly, politics too must now be understood as the interaction of quite different people, States and systems with but one framework for their actions, the biosphere in which we live, and with one dimension of responsibility, which extends far beyond our age, embracing the survival of mankind and the fate of the whole of creation.
Let us erect a barrier against the maltreatment and destruction of creation. Because we all depend on the success of these efforts, we all depend on one another. While dependence compels all of us to desist from trying to dominate others, to desist from an arms race and to reject the arrogance of power and the egoism of the stronger.
West and East, North and South, must channel their energies into a new responsibility for this planet and for the future of mankind. We must no longer ask what our neighbours are doing to protect the Earth. We must ask what we ourselves can do, what can we do together. We need not despair in the face of this responsibility, which is unique in the history of mankind. We have no reason to be faint-hearted or despondent. As we face up to our responsibility for the future our best allies are the nations themselves. The people wish to live, they wish to live without fear; they wish to live without want. They will no longer allow themselves to be made objects of exploitation, oppression and power politics. They demand the chance to exercise their human rights, their civil, economic and social rights. The people are determined and inspired by the idea of their inalienable human dignity, the idea of freedom and the idea of peace. Nothing is more powerful than an idea whose time has come. The time has come. We must act now.
﻿I begin by paying tribute to the wisdom of the members of the General Assembly at its forty-third session, who, in electing you President, Sic, have made clear both the deservedly high esteem in which they hold you and the prominent place held by Argentina and, beyond Argentina, by Latin America in today's world.
I wish to add that I deeply appreciate the great honour of having this opportunity to address the Assembly again.
Having just learned, as the Assembly has, the news about the Nobel Peace Prize, I wish immediately to convey my congratulations to the United Nations on the award of the Prize to the United Nations peace-keeping forces.
When I came to this rostrum five years ago the world was dominated by the East-West confrontation, the proliferation of regional conflicts, the deepening of the gulf between North and South and repeated violations of human tights and the rights of peoples. Have those realities now disappeared? Is our planet decisively turning towards unity and peace? I shall not claim that that is so. In spite of the passing years, I seem to hear too often the same words, the same vain incantations, and to see too often the same hopes being aroused only to end in the  same disillusionment. The expectations of too many peoples remain unfulfilled. Two centuries after the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen there are still many Bastilles to be taken, many liberties to be won, many rights to be safeguarded. But here and there some progress is being seen. What had seemed for ever immovable has begun to move. Will hope come into its own again in the society of men?
We know how much we owe to Mr. Reagan and Mr. Gorbachev, who have had the intelligence and the courage to have done with the arms race and the escalations of confrontation.
Similarly, the adversaries engaged in some regional conflicts - whether they have taken stock of the limits of their action and the attrition of their strength, have changed their appraisal of their people's interests, or have wanted to contribute to the general movement towards the easing of tensions - are trying to disengage themselves from the tragedy they have been living through.
I wish to express my gratitude to peace-loving men and women everywhere who have worked ceaselessly to bring about such a result. Among them I should mention the name of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Perez de Cuellar. Without his skill, his persistence, his constant readiness to serve and his cultural resources, we should not have come this far.
For the first time since the last World War the two greatest Powers have begun to explore the path of disarmament. It must be stated that their agreement on the elimination of United States and Soviet intermediate forces in Europe is a good agreement. On behalf of France, I unhesitatingly approved it from the very first day. It is now my expectation that the United States and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics will make progress in the reduction of their strategic nuclear armaments, as they have planned to do. If the negotiations they are conducting lead to agreements consistent with the imperative rules of balance and verification this will do much to strengthen the security of all.
These questions are, of course, of tremendous importance. But it will be readily understood that, as the head of a European State, I attach priority to the reduction of the conventional armaments which are stockpiled in Europe, and stockpiled unequally, to the disadvantage of Western Europe. It is my earnest hope that the 35 participants in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe will take up the substance of these negotiations as soon as possible.
We have been offered an opportunity, unprecedented in the past half century, to ensure the establishment of a stable balance at a lower, sufficient and reasonable level of armaments. Will this balance be achieved? That will depend on the political will of the States involved. But who could assume the responsibility of rejecting this chance out of hand?
The objective is easy to formulate: that everyone should be able to defend himself, as is his right, without threatening anyone else. But how shall we go about this? I venture to suggest some elements of an answer.
First, by ensuring that no army and no coalition of armies in the area where East and West are facing each other has the means for the sudden launching of a surprise attack, nor for waging a prolonged war. To that end, it would be desirable to arrange measures in that area for the reduction, withdrawal and de-concentration of troops and equipment - tanks, armoured vehicles, artillery, portable bridges and all other techniques for crossing water barriers - and measures for the limitation of reserves and stockpiles.
Secondly, by preparing procedures for verification and inspection to prevent any violation of treaties. These new measures of transparency and confidence would usefully supplement the arrangements arrived at in Helsinki.
My country has taken a number of initiatives concerning the definition of the area in which these constraints would be applied, the ratio between new military equipment and foreign equipment and the ceiling to be set on the basis of an individual country in relation to the whole. It would also be my wish that at the end of the next two years the status of negotiations should be examined. If nothing had been achieved, there would be nothing to prevent people from exercising their freedom. However, a favourable outcome would open vast new prospects for the future of Europe. All of us, Europeans both in the East and in the West, belong to the same continent and derive our heritage from the same culture. History and geography invite us patiently to overcome, by every possible means, for the security of all, the confrontation of hostile blocs.
As for chemical weapons, whose ravages we have unfortunately observed in the recent past, we must eliminate them as quickly as possible. What President Reagan said last Monday about this subject was quite right. He expressed himself in lofty and urgent terms, which echoed our own concerns, and in a manner that is all the more timely because his country possesses such weapons. 1 noted with equal interest that the Soviet Union, which also possesses chemical weapons, had supported this proposal.
The proposals put forward by France, which has no chemical weapons, are of three Hinds. First of all, my country, the depositary of the Geneva Protocol of 1325, naturally favours a meeting of the 110 signatories to that agreement. The purpose of such a meeting, in our view, would be to solemnly reaffirm the commitment not to use chemical weapons, to prevent their proliferation to encourage new accessions to the Protocol, to improve investigative procedures - in short, to indicate a common desire for the success of the work currently being carried out at Geneva within the context of the Conference on Disarmament. .
Secondly, my country wants to increase the role of the United Nations in the struggle against the proliferation and the use of chemical weapons. In 1982 Prance was the originator of the resolution enabling the Secretary-General to arrange investigations in those parts of the world where chemical weapons had reportedly been used. This procedure has already confirmed that such weapons have in fact been used. Let us go further: let us create a situation that would make it impossible for any State to use chemical weapons with impunity to settle its external or internal problems. If any State should use them, I think it would become necessary, among other measures, to impose an embargo on all deliveries of products, technologies and, more generally, weapons to that State. For its part, France is ready, after consultation with its partners, to submit a draft resolution to this effect. This would be without prejudice to any sanctions decided upon by the Security Council.
The third and last point is the one I particularly wish to stress: we must prohibit not only the use of chemical weapons but also their manufacture. The risks of the normalization and the proliferation of chemical weapons compel us to accelerate our efforts to bring about the destruction of stockpiles, as well as to maintain close supervision of the means that would make it possible to rebuild them.
In signing the convention, each State possessing stockpiles of chemical weapons would undertake to destroy them. In the view of experts, this will take several years, and in the meantime the chemical threat will continue to exist. This is why I believe that chemical-weapons factories should be closed as soon as the convention enters into force and, like stockpiles, should b© subjected to international surveillance before they are dismantled. France declares its readiness, as of this moment, to renounce under the same conditions - that is to say, as soon as the future convention enters into force - any possibility of producing chemical weapons.
0£ course, the banning of chemical weapons could not be imposed on some if others, including the nuclear Powers, retained a clear field for themselves and did not persevere in their desire for nuclear disarmament.
In this connection, I recall that in September 1983, speaking from this rostrum, I stated the conditions under which my country would agree to participate, at the proper time, in a nuclear-disarmament conference among the Powers that possess nuclear weapons: a decisive narrowing of the gap between the arsenals of the great Powers and our own·, a halt in the anti-missile, anti-satellite and anti-submarine weapons race; and correction of the Imbalances In conventional armaments. Today I maintain what I said at that time.
I would add that limiting the disarmament effort must be extended to space, the common heritage of mankind. That is why France is opposed to an arms race in space but supports the use of space-borne means of control.
Before the INF treaty, the importance of which is becoming more apparent every day, and the on-site verification for which it provides - a clause the Importance of which can never be over-emphasized - disarmament negotiations had stalled over this problem. At the special session of the United Nations last June - the third special session devoted to disarmament - my country advocated control by satellite and by automatic surveillance, as well as the so-called routine or challenge on-site inspections. We can now define, on a case-by-case basis, a combination of means of control adapted to each disarmament agreement. But nothing can be done without the political will of States.
Coming now to regional conflicts, I can only welcome the developments in the Gulf, what has been initiated in Afghanistan, and what is expected in the Western Sahara, Cambodia and, perhaps, Cyprus. This is the easier for me because France has always refused to recognize the fait accompli, has ceaselessly condemned terrorist or military intimidation, and has tirelessly pleaded for settlement of conflicts by peaceful means. Far be it from me to underestimate the scope of the progress made in the past few months. I have noted, however, that while the rapprochement between the United States and the Soviet Union has contributed to the cessation of fighting, it remains insufficient to restore lasting peace, for the underlying causes persist. In this connection, I have noted that this period of diplomatic calm has not reached several parts of the globe; the Middle East, Central America, despite the Arias Plan and the action of the Contadora and Lima Groups, which France supports; and, while there may be some respite now and again, southern Africa, a direct consequence of the intolerable policy of apartheid.
It is the responsibility of the international community to consolidate what has been achieved and help extinguish the last retraining pockets of violence. When weapons have fallen silent, so much will remain to be done agreements to guarantee, wounds to staunch, adversaries to reconcile, economies to be rebuilt.
It will do no good to shower the work and the person of the Secretary-General with praise, if we are going to withhold our support from him tomorrow. For peace has its prices sending armed troops there, organizing a referendum here, and elsewhere setting up aid for reconstruction. All this has to be financed. I would hate to think that after being so lavish in their war efforts, States, particularly the most powerful, would be tight-fisted when it comes to peace efforts.
In Afghanistan no one can ever be satisfied with replacing an international conflict by a civil war. The withdrawal of foreign troops should normally open up the way for the restoration of the sovereignty of that country, the return of refugees and economic reconstruction. But this can only come about with extreme vigilance.
It is my wish that the cease-fire between Iraq and Iran will lead, as quickly as possible, to a genuine peace, a settlement of conflicts, the reconstruction of  disaster-stricken areas and the restored freedom of navigation in the Gulf and the Strait of Hormuz.
Peace is contagious and everyone, the States and the peoples of the region, will reap the benefits. At this time, how can we be unmindful of the fate of a minority which has suffered in a two-fold way, such as the Kurdish people? I hope that renewed conciliation in Western Sahara will prevail. We could believe it today. This will remove an obstacle to the construction of the Greater Maghreb, bringing with it peace and prosperity, a plan of which Prance approves. Here we count upon the wisdom of leaders.
In the Middle East, the uprising of Palestinian youth and the decision of King Hussein of Jordan have shown once again that the status quo no longer protects those who are subject to it, those who seek to benefit from it, and that it is increasingly deadly for those who are subjected to it.
Let us go back to the basic principles of a lasting settlement, as defined by the United Nations. All members are familiar with them. For my part, I outlined them both in the Knesset in Jerusalem and in the Arab capitals. Israel has the right to exist within safe and recognized borders; the Palestinian people are entitled to aspire to a homeland and to take charge of their own destinies.
In order to arrive at a peace settlement, which would enshrine these rights, there must be dialogue between the parties. Each side, Israelis and Palestinians, must do its share. Each must be willing to accept for the other what it demands for itself, and each must be able to say this in no uncertain terms. I do understand how difficult it is to take the first step.
In order to facilitate dialogue and break down the walls of distrust, the international community must clearly act as an intermediary. A procedure exists: the international conference. It is the only framework within which teal partners can meet and establish bilateral contacts between them. The international conference has become a reference point. Let us make it a reality. I proposed some time ago that a preparatory committee earnestly go about laying the groundwork. Mr. Gorbachev was in agreement with me on this idea. Now the time has come to revive this. I suggest that a diplomatic arrangement be made among the five permanent Members of the Security Council in conjunction with the Secretary-General. This preparatory work should result in recommendations on the organization and calendar of the future conference and recommendations about who its participants will be.
France, of whose ties to Lebanon need not remind the Assembly, will not resign itself to watching that country's independence and unity disintegrate. We call upon the United Nations as a witness to the obstacles which have been placed in the way of the free exercise of the sovereignty of the people. We appeal to the sense of reason of the neighbours of that country. A peaceful, reconciled Lebanon is no threat to anyone. A Lebanon dismembered and the object of conflict and dispute will remain an area of insecurity for us all. Let us urge the Lebanese to draw upon their national pride and patriotism to summon the strength and courage to have faith in their country. I can assure the General Assembly, in any case, that France will remain at the side of those who, in mutual respect, are fighting for a democratic future for Lebanon, as well as its territorial integrity and sovereignty.
Farther away, towards the Far East, an end to the sufferings of Cambodia is in sight. The decision announced by the Government of Viet Nam to end its intervention, the initiatives of the countries of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), the actions of such leaders as Prince Norodom Sihanouk may bring us closer to the hour of a political settlement. My country, which facilitated the initial meeting between the Cambodian partners, will continue to work even harder at this, and soon, I hope. We stand ready, if they so wish, to invite the parties involved to meet in Paris in due course.
At this point in my address, I wish to tell the General Assembly that nothing seems more important to me, whatever the importance of the subjects I have touched upon this morning - disarmament and the settlement of regional conflicts - nothing, I stress, is more important to me than closing the ever-widening gap between developed and developing countries. The causes of this disparity, as the General Assembly knows, are many: political, social, economic, demographic, financial, and so on. They have become so serious that many are tempted to dismiss all remedies as futile. 
That is not the case with France. For seven years now - and I am certainly not the only one - I have been repeating that it is in the interests of the North to help the South; that there is no such thing as fate; that man can always master the course of events and that it is urgently necessary to do so. I see in the persistence of the current imbalances the most damaging cause of tremendous unhappiness, a misfortune which, more assuredly than any other danger, will drive the world towards the endless chaos of war, or something even worse.
Nevertheless, International multilateral or bilateral aid is stagnating or receding. France - which, of all the industrially advanced countries, allocates the highest percentage of its gross national product to development aid - believes that it has not yet done its duty. The target of 0.7 per cent remains its ambition. In particular, the debt burden calls for immediate action. Ά number of very Interesting Initiatives have been launched by one country or another. For ray part, I suggested to the major industrialized countries at their Toronto meeting this year that they make the terms of repayment considerably easier for the poorest countries. As for France, It has chosen to cancel one third of the debt owed to it by these countries. This significant step is but a beginning.
For other heavily indebted countries, particularly In Latin America and Africa, debt also represents an intolerable burden, and in certain cases a threat to democracy. In the face of this situation the International community must show that it can be more realistic and more imaginative. All debts Incurred must be repaid, but the cost of this can be reduced without passing on the burden to the taxpayers of creditor countries.
Thus, last year the United States, in a bold move, guaranteed a proportion of the principal of Mexico's commercial loans. Several countries and many experts have thought of creating a multilateral fund which would lower the cost by guaranteeing interest payments. Various methods of financing this fund have been put forward.
In the view of France, the best technique would be to create a fund in the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to guarantee the payment of interest charged on certain commercial loans converted into bonds. This fund would lower significantly the finance charges payable by debtor countries and would involve them more actively in world trade.
In order to finance this, the developed countries would set aside their share of a new issue of special drawing rights for use by the developing countries. I realize that the implementation of this project would represent a significant legal and financial innovation. It would require lengthy preparatory work and many consultations among creditors and with their debtors. However, this alone would seem to be equal to the challenge.
But development requires many other things.  I  would mention the following: stabilizing the export earnings of countries in the southern hemisphere and diversifying and increasing the value of their production - and the Uruguay Round must take these into account; environmental protection, which only a short time ago was endangered by industrial wastes from the North being disposed of in the South - and the international community will have to agree to regulations and the necessary precautions; a massive transfer of technology and know-how from the North to the South - and I would like in this regard to suggest a new approach, modelled on what is known as Europe's EUREKA project, in which Government stimulus, together with initiatives freely undertaken by companies and universities, leads to co-operation on an equal footing. I continue ray brief list: launching major programmes of universal interest which can mobilize our energies to bring help to regions facing catastrophes due to natural causes or the folly of men. I cite as an example the stabilization of the rivers that have been flooding Bangladesh, the cause of a terrible catastrophe, as an appropriate beginning for a project of this kind. France, for its part, is ready to contribute.
Two centuries ago France began a revolution that changed the course of history throughout the universe. In doing so, France took a position in the battle which has yet to be won, and is still necessary, for a greater measure of freedom, equality and brotherhood. As we prepare to celebrate this bicentenary, let us defend human rights more fiercely than ever before, from the earliest recognized to the latest: human rights, the rights of peoples, the rights of mankind. Today, in certain emergency situations, in situations of distress or extreme injustice, we should affirm the right of humanitarian assistance.
Economic and social progress is the only solid foundation on which to build democracy; the moral weight of public opinion and unflagging vigilance will be its best guarantee.
So many people are still being denied their most elementary tights and for so many men, women and children poverty is the only world they know, and the absence of eights is their only horizon.
Surely the time has come to acknowledge that rights of mankind exist and should be defined. I am thinking of the protection of our natural environment in the face of the sometimes irresponsible requirements of our economy. I was happy to hear the representative of the Soviet Union asking for a plan to be worked out before 1992 on this subject. I am also thinking of the protection of the human species, the ravages of drugs, and the extraordinary possibilities of science, in particular genetics. 
The conference of Nobel Prize-winners which I convened in 1988 in Paris elected us to the dangers of this. It is not knowledge in itself that is dangerous; it is rather the applications of science that must be controlled, that we must master. Since we are accountable in proportion to the power we now possess in transmitting a natural and genetically intact heritage to our descendants, we must lay the foundations for the ethics of the third millennium.
I must stop here. Since, with you, I have been looking at the future, I dream of the day when Europe, as it is trying to take shape, will be able to speak here with a single voice, using, as I have just done, the language of peace among nations and confidence in the destiny of humanity.
﻿
Sir, may I offer you my congratulations on taking up the presidency of the General Assembly and send my warm thanks to the outgoing President, the Deputy Foreign Minister of the German Democratic Republic.
This has been a year of unprecedented natural disaster. No outsider can fully share the tragedy of the flooding in Bangladesh. The hurricane devastation in the Caribbean and Mexico has horrified us all. From South Asia, through Africa, to the Caribbean and even to the grain belt of America, we have seen destruction on a scale rarely equalled before.
Last week I was in Africa. I went first to the Sudan. I saw there the devastation caused by the recent floods and the brave efforts of the Sudanese Government and people to cope with that crisis. I visited a refugee camp of 500 tents supplied by Britain, made in Malta. Alongside them were tents from Saudi Arabia and Kuwait. Nations from all over the world had come to Sudan's aid. The following day I flew to Kenya, where pictures of the famine and suffering in southern Sudan were front-page news in the Nairobi press.
The tragedies that have been occurring this year are seen and felt by people in towns and cities around the globe, and the world community has responded with rarely equalled sympathy and generosity. My own country alone has this year contributed some £80 million to disaster relief around the world. The total contributed by the Western democracies is likely to have been at least 10 times that amount.
These immediate natural disasters are a poignant reminder of the need to tackle an issue that is of longer term but crucial for us all; the health of our planet as a whole. Some of its present transformation is good. Its resources are being better used for the benefit of mankind. But other elements are leading to a progressive pollution of the land, the sea and the air.
There has already been some disruption of natural patterns. Damage to the ozone layer, first identified by the British Antarctic Survey in 1985, caused instant international alarm. That concern has already led to agreement to limit the production of certain industrial chemicals.
The possibility of climatic change caused by the increase in the greenhouse gases, leading to a global heat trap, has become a real concern. The increases predicted in global temperatures would have substantial effects, within the next few decades, on life and human society. Even small variations would have great consequences in a crowded world.
We are totally dependent on climate. Damage it beyond repair, and the earth becomes a Lifeless desert spinning in space. We cannot leave a problem of this magnitude to technical bodies. Britain is among those who have pressed for a serious debate on the subject within the United Nations. Last year we welcomed the Brundtland report, the report of the World Commission on Environment and Development. We want to carry forward its work. So we welcome the forthcoming discussion in the Second Committee. The problem must command an urgent place on the world agenda.
It is in the face of natural disaster that we are made most vividly aware of the fragility and interdependence of human existence. Faced with the enormity of the difficulties, the speed and universality of response are extraordinary. Yet sadly, in the face of man-made disasters we have not so far been able to respond in such a United and effective way. Their causes are more complex, their effects are equally devastating, and they too demand our utmost and our urgent energy and ingenuity. This year we have broken the pattern of the past by applying the principles of the Charter to the resolution of a lengthy and bloody dispute, the conflict between Iran and Iraq.
Each one of us here is committed, bindingly committed, to the Charter of the United Nations; not just to words on a page, but to fundamental principles of·' justice and international law. It was those principles that I had in mind when I spoke here a year ago at the height of the Iran-Iraq war. I said then: "The blunt truth is that the way in which the United Nations handles the conflict between Iran and Iraq must have a decisive effect upon its reputation in the eyes of all the peoples whom we represent." (A/42/PV.8, p. 58) I called then for a degree of unity which the international community had rarely been able to achieve, and a year later the scene that then seemed so dark and hopeless has been lighted by the united efforts of the international community.
Many factors have helped to foster this change; the realization by Iran and Iraq that war to the death would mean mutual destruction the spirit and resolve of the Secretary-General and his dedicated staff; and, perhaps above all, the part played by the Security Council and its five permanent members.
The permanent members are given a unique power under the Charter. That power, the power of veto, carries with it a special responsibility, a responsibility that has rarely been exercised. But the last year has witnessed the development of a new co-operation among the five. It began tentatively; it was pursued pragmatically; but it was born of principle as well as pragmatism, of a combined determination to do all we could together to bring an end to the devastation of a senseless war.  
That determination, coupled with the skill, patience and persistence of the Secretary-General, culminated in the successful achievement of a cease-fire. Now the action has switched from the battleground to the negotiating table, from the banks of the Tigris to the banks of the East River. The Secretary-General must be allowed to build on the cease-fire so as to arrange the withdrawal of forces and the repatriation of prisoners of war. The framework for peace is Security Council resolution 598 (1987), which provides for negotiations under the auspices of the Security Council. Britain will do all in its power to sustain the spirit of co-operation and to contribute to a peaceful settlement.
If the international community can find a way forward on the dispute between Iran and Iraq it cannot ignore the plight of the Kurds, driven from their homes not by natural disaster but by unnatural force and brutality. The containment of conflict in one form must not lead to its prosecution in another.
The charge that Iraq has used chemical weapons against the Kurds adds gravity to the situation. Under Security Council resolution 620 (1988), the Secretary-General can conduct a prompt and independent inquiry. The need for such an inquiry is evident. The refusal of Iraq to co-operate in such an inquiry is all the more to be deplored, because the spread of chemical weapons is one of the most disturbing of recent developments.
As more countries develop a chemical-weapons capability, the risk of the increased use of these weapons as an instrument of war and terror multiplies. It is for that reason that Britain has taken a lead in preparing an international convention for the world-wide suppression of chemical weapons and in pressing the crucial case for greater openness in this field. Nowhere is glasnost more necessary. At the special session in June I made important proposals to strengthen the international standards of the 1925 Geneva Protocol. So today I welcome President Reagan's proposal to reconvene the 1925 Geneva Conference to mobilize the international community behind the search for a convention on chemical weapons which would outlaw their use.
Co-operation on the resolution of the Iran-Iraq conflict has been unique. But it must not be the only example of the constructive exercise of shared responsibility among the permanent members of the Security Council. There are grounds for hoping that will not be the case, for we have also been witnessing this year a change in the atmosphere which increases the scope for such co-operation.
East-West relations themselves have moved on to a new footing. The Treaty on the Elimination of Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles - the INF Treaty - the Washington and Moscow summits and the Moscow Party Conference have all been remarkable in their separate ways.
Perhaps just as significant has been the recent acknowledgement by Mr. Shevardnadze that foreign policy is no longer to be seen in Moscow as a special form of class struggle. "The struggle between the opposing systems", he said, "is no longer a determining tendency of the present era". I believe that most of the members of this Assembly will say "amen" to that. No longer, to paraphrase Clausewitz, need foreign policy be the continuation of class warfare by other means.
Even so, progress on arms-control talks would not have been made without the constant and united determination of the members of the North Atlantic alliance. Of course we want to see success in the negotiations between Washington and Moscow for a reduction in strategic weapons, but we want to see early progress as well in cutting the conventional imbalances in Europe, which prejudice the security of millions of people. 
Arms-control negotiations no longer bear the full burden of East-West relations. They remain a vital component in the creation of a climate of confidence. So too does the search for a world-wide pattern of respect for human rights and freedom. In Europe we look for further progress in this regard from an early conclusion of the Vienna Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. The fundamental principle, which we have long proclaimed and which Mr. Shevardnadze endorsed in his statement yesterday, is that the rule of law and the right of the individual to determine his own future are inseparable.
More widely than that, if we can establish confidence in East-West relations we can harness energies which have too often pulled in different directions, and put them to constructive work. The place to do that is the United Nations.
There are many tasks, many regional conflicts, but also growing signs that progress is possible.
Recent developments over Afghanistan are one example. Eight years after its forces invaded Afghanistan the Soviet Union has finally begun to take them home. Over half have now left. This may well reflect a new realism in Moscow, but it is also a consequence of the courage and determination of the Afghan people and of the sustained and overwhelming support of this General Assembly. Tens of thousands of Afghans have died. Millions have been driven from their homes. That is why we now look forward to the complete and prompt withdrawal of Soviet troops. The Afghan people as a whole must then be given the chance to select a truly representative government by a genuine act of self-determination. Only then can Afghanistan start to live again.
It is possible now to perceive as well that universal condemnation of Viet Nam's illegal occupation of Cambodia is also having its effect. Britain was among the first to insist that Viet Nam must withdraw from Cambodia unconditionally and quickly. Viet Nam cannot by itself sustain its occupation; its own economy is in ruins. 
One consequence of Viet Nam's policy has been the huge exodus of its own people in boats to Hong Kong and other destinations. It is time for this tragic migration to cease, time for Viet Nam to take back its own people in humane fashion. Hong Kong's policy of seeking to return those people who are not genuine refugees is the only way to cope with what would otherwise be an unmanageable influx.
We also think the time is now right to look closely at ways of promoting a settlement in Cambodia. The aim should be to secure the early and unconditional withdrawal of Vietnamese forces and a political settlement to give Cambodia a stable and secure Government, that must by definition preclude a return to the horrors of the Pol Pot regime.
Just as in the Gulf one resolution of the Security Council offers the prospect of peace, so in southern Africa another resolution offers similar hope of a peaceful end to an old dispute. Ten years ago tomorrow Security Council resolution 435 (1978) was adopted. It remains the best framework for independence for Namibia.  The first crucial step has been taken in South Africa's withdrawal from Angola and the establishment of an effective cease-fire. The next task is to achieve the withdrawal of South African forces from Namibia; and all Cuban forces from Angola and free- elections in Namibia, leading to independence. That will require enormous ingenuity, perseverance and compromise.
It will require from South Africa a new respect for the integrity of its independent neighbours. We hope the recent reaffirmation of the Nkomati accord represents a commitment by South Africa to the stability of the region as a whole.
It will require from Angola a determined effort to achieve reconciliation within Angola, where the Cuban presence has helped to make an international issue of what is essentially a matter for internal resolution.
Just as Security Council resolution 435 (1978) has stood the test of time, so too has the British Government's commitment to act in its support. We long ago offered to provide a signals unit to the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG). We remain ready to play our part, and are ready, with our partners in the European Community, to offer assistance to an independent Namibia.
A settlement in Angola and the independence of Namibia would not in themselves resolve the intractable problems of South Africa. The principle at stake there is a simple one; the liberty and dignity of the individual. We are committed to the abolition of the system of apartheid, which stifles liberty and denies dignity. We have to find the lever that will effect that change. We do not believe that comprehensive sanctions are that lever. Some see sanctions as a political gesture which should be made almost for its own sake, but it would be an empty gesture. It would be a gesture with too high a price attached; too high a price in terms of the millions of black jobs, black livelihoods, which would be at stake. Our goal is the same as that of our friends in Africa. We are doing all we can to bring apartheid to an end.
Our aid to South Africa's neighbours since 1980 is worth well over £1 billion. We supply defence assistance to Mozambique and Zimbabwe. The Limpopo railway is being repaired with British help and defended by Mozambican troops trained in Zimbabwe by British army officers.
We give aid to black groups and individuals within South Africa so that they can educate themselves, build their own enterprises and free themselves from the oppression of apartheid.
In southern Africa, the parties to a longstanding dispute seem at last to be seeking agreement within the framework of a Security Council resolution.
The principles of a settlement in the Middle East were similarly laid down in a Security Council resolution 21 years ago. They are no less valid today. Israel and the Palestinians have a historic sense of injustice. That injustice is aggravated, not alleviated, by terrorist attacks against Israel. And the violent suppression of Palestinian aspirations jeopardizes the search for a peaceful settlement.
The international community cannot afford to give up the search for peace. The need for an international conference involving the five permanent members of the Security Council is more vital than ever. We shall be persistent in our efforts to help create the conditions in which such a conference can be held.
In Western Sahara, we have been the two sides to a dispute brought together by the commendable efforts of the Secretary-General. They have accepted that a referendum is the only way of resolving their differences. 
I hope that this new willingness to seek peaceful solutions will prove contagious. Regarding one dispute with which Britain itself is concerned, let me just say one thing; the right of the Falkland islanders to self-determination cannot be compromised, hat my country will continue energetically to seek ways of restoring more normal relations with Argentina.
Regional disputes around the world are by no means all or even the worst of our problems today. Conflicts within a nation pose some of the most complicated and intractable problems facing the international community. Often they are at a level deeper than a dispute between one nation State and the next. Often they escape the procedures and the mechanisms by which we are accustomed to operate. Yet the way in which they dislocate the very fabric of nationhood is itself a cause of tension and a challenge for the international community.
The tragedy of the Lebanon is an example of such sub-national conflict that divides a country down the middle and at the same time extends beyond its borders. We can think of other examples. Earlier this month, in Sudan, I saw the tragic consequences of an internal conflict unresolved. And the conflict in Ethiopia has exacerbated the horrors of famine and starvation in that country.
In Burma, we have been appalled at the killing of unarmed demonstrators, women and children, which has taken place over the past three months. Such violence will solve nothing. The Burmese authorities must recognize that the only way to a lasting solution to the country's internal crisis lies in meeting the desire of the Burmese people for greater freedom and multi-party democracy.
This type of internal problem poses particular difficulties for the international community. We must work hard to find answers.
I welcome the resumption of the peace process in Cyprus. The Secretary-General has met the leaders of the two communities on the island. Agreement has been created on negotiating a just and lasting settlement by 1 June next year. As we meet here, another international event is under way on the far side of the world. In Seoul, in Korea, the hosting of the Olympic Games is a tribute to the remarkable political and economic progress made in that country. We welcome the recent contacts between North and South: we hope that they will contribute to the improvement in atmosphere that will one day lead to the Korean people being properly represented with us here in this institution.
We can extend our co-operation into new areas to deal with new challenges to international peace and stability, challenges which postdate the creation of the United Nations itself.
The battle against international terrorism is one such. Following the hijacking of KU 422 in April, Britain launched an initiative which led to an agreement in the International Civil Aviation Organization on the detaining of hijacked aircraft so as to contain the spreading of a hijack crisis from one country to another. We must build on that measure to strengthen international protection against future hijackings.
The evil of drug-related crime also challenges us to a united response. In some parts of the world the malevolent forces of drug trafficking do as much damage as traditional armed conflict. Individually, many nations may feel they are victims of forces beyond their control. Together, the international community has a power immeasurably greater than the greatest threat. We must create powerful weapons for ourselves, above all by denying the use of the financial system to those that profit from this trade and by preventing funds from being ploughed back into that trade, through co-operation to seize drug traffickers' assets wherever they are. My own country has adopted legal powers to help do this. We cannot act alone. We urge the international community to consider similar action. 
With the terrorist, the hijacker, the drug trafficker, we have to find ways of directly attacking the environment which sustains him. We must deny him the life support of finance or the comfort of a bolt hole on the other side of a frontier. Drugs and terror are partners in crime. We must be partners within this Organization in fighting them.
We must be partners, too, in fighting afflictions which are not man-made but which require human resource to solve. When AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome) first started, there was a tendency to put up moral barricades, maximize blame and minimize action. Now we know better. In January, Ministers of Health from all over the world met in London to discuss the problem openly, compare our experience and co-operate in finding solutions. In the face of such disparate and complex issues it is not always easy for the international community to act. None the less, the greater the degree of unity we can display, the greater our chances of finding solutions.
In the face of such disparate and complex issues it is not always easy for the international community to act. None the less, the greater the degree of unity we can display, the greater our chances of finding solutions. I am convinced that we can go further together.
I began by speaking about my recent visit to Africa and of how different countries, helped by the international community, are coping with man-made as well as natural hazards. In each of the five African countries I visited I was enormously conscious of the economic problems with which they are grappling. Their experience is mirrored in other continents. 
So we warmly welcomed the positive conclusion last weekend of the meeting under United Nations auspices which reviewed the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990. We will continue to do all we can to help. We can now build further on our partnership with the countries concerned,
Disparities between rich and poor cannot be reduced overnight. It will be a long process. Aid can help. So, too, can the creation of more open conditions for international trade, and likewise internal economic reform, within the framework of structural adjustment and with adequate support from other countries. That is the importance of relieving the burden of debt on those least able to bear it. These are all matters in which Britain will continue to play a prominent, and in many respects a catalytic, role.
The proposals on debt relief which we launched over a year ago are now coming to fruition. This opens the way for a number of countries to benefit from rescheduling on concessional terms before the end of the year. But in the last resort it is the Governments and peoples of the countries concerned that must work out their own destiny. We support their own strong determination to that end and we will work to sustain our own partnership with them.
There is a new spirit throughout the world in seeking to live up to the undertakings which we have all given under the United Nations Charter. There is a new resolve to put this Organization to work for our common good. We must sustain that spirit and that resolve in the year ahead.
﻿
It gives me great pleasure that a distinguished son and eminent representative of a country with which my country has close and cordial relations is presiding over the General Assembly at its forty-third session. I extend to Ambassador Caputo our warm felicitations on his well-deserved election. We are confident that with his exceptional ability and experience the deliberations of the Assembly have already been assured success. I would like also to place on record our deep appreciation for the effective leadership that his predecessor, Mr. Peter Florin, provided to the General Assembly during its forty-second session.
In his report on the work of the Organization for 1988, the Secretary-General recalled that he was cautiously optimistic that "the sails of the small boat in which all the people of the Earth were gathered seemed to have caught a light but favourable wind". (Д/43/1, p. 2) I take this opportunity to pay a tribute to the man who has played no mean role in the careful and patient navigation by which the vessel has come within sight of large sections of the shore. The Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, has earned the admiration of all for his patience, his skill, his understanding touch and his grasp of the larger questions as well as the small details involved in the various issues dealt with by the United Nations. The decision to confer the Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International Understanding on our Secretary-General was a tribute to his exceptional contribution to the cause of peace.
This year, 1988, has been the year of the United Nations. In the past few months the patient and persistent diplomacy of the United Nations was capped with the signing of the Geneva Agreements on Afghanistan, the entry into force of a cease-fire on the Iran-Iraq border, the renewal of inter-communal talks in Cyprus and the creation of an environment conducive to the resolution of the problem of Western Sahara. Even those who tended to pass judgement on the United Nations purely on the basis of the criteria of the maintenance of international peace and security are happily acknowledging today that this is indeed an impressive record of which the United Nations can be justifiably proud. 
India welcomes this reaffirmation of faith in the United Nations. For an overwhelming majority of Members, support for the United Nations has always been an article of faith. The universalization of this support during 1988, which we applaud as we always did, will no doubt strengthen the capacity of the Organization, not only with respect to preserving peace but also, equally, to tackling other scourges facing humankind, such as poverty, hunger, ecological degradation, terrorism and narcotics. We trust that the United Nations will be reinvigorated, not only in political terms but also in terms of concrete financial support. Let the coming decades be the decades of the United Nations. Let the all-round support which the United Nations always deserved, but seems to have got this year, be always available to it hereafter.
India, along with the rest of the international community, rejoices in the transformation of the international climate during the past year. We are indeed living through historic times. The dramatic improvement in relations between the super-Powers, for which we salute the leadership of the two countries, has had a positive impact throughout the world. History, however, teaches us that good times, like bad times, do not normally last forever. But one may be forgiven on the present occasion for entertaining the belief that the principal players have by now made a realistic assessment of the long-term interests of mankind, along with their respective national interests, and that hence the current thaw may be more lasting than those of the past.
The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, since its inception, has worked tirelessly precisely for such a turn in the international climate. By taking principled positions on major issues of our times and by refusing to get entangled in the confrontation of competing military alliances, the non-aligned countries have helped in containing conflict, and have thus contributed to the peace process which has always inhered in the minds of the millions, although it had been rendered dormant and muted by the display of military might. Therefore, we the non-aligned can claim part of the credit for the improved state of affairs. But along with claiming the credit the Movement needs to redouble its efforts to make the peace process irreversible, no longer vulnerable to the braking mechanisms which operated earlier owing to motivations too well known to need recounting.
The new air of euphoria is totally understandable as it marks a welcome departure from the intense and often bitter rivalry between the major Powers which at times brought the world to the brink of a catastrophe. It seems to have been replaced now by healthy competition for presenting proposals for strengthening peace, supporting the United Nations, saving the world from ecologic disaster, among others. It is true that this long-awaited spirit of change unfortunately has not extended to the economic field. We would therefore be well-advised to remain watch full and alert, while pursuing determined efforts to make the transformation to peace final and all-pervasive so as to comprehend all facets of human life and activity on our planet. While the primary responsibility would remain with the major Powers, the rest of us and, of course, the United Nations, can and must play a very important role.
The ratification of the Treaty on the Elimination of Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles - INF Treaty - by the United States and the Soviet Union was a historic first step which must, within an agreed time-frame and in well-considered stages, lead to successive reductions and eventual elimination of all nuclear weapons. While we are fully aware of the complexities involved in disarmament negotiations, we find that political will has enabled the experts to find satisfactory answers to what were projected as almost un-resolvable difficulties of adequate verification. Similar political will would be needed in solving the whole gamut of disarmament questions, beginning with the reduction of strategic nuclear weapons by 50 per cent, which has already been agreed upon.
Those steps, each important in itself, have to be viewed in the perspective of a comprehensive scenario of total disarmament. Only thus do they make sense and become effective and beneficial. At the third special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament in June this year, my Prime Minister, Rajiv Gandhi, put forward a comprehensive action plan for the total elimination of all nuclear weapons by the year 2010. That action plan has received appreciation in the Non-Aligned Movement, among other Governments as well as non-governmental organizations. We put forward our proposal to give concrete shape to the desire of a large segment of world public opinion for a time-bound action programme to eliminate nuclear weapons. We should also take into account other related aspects including verification.
With regard to verification, delegates will recall that the delegations of countries participating in the six-nation initiative for peace and nuclear disarmament presented a concrete proposal at the third special session on disarmament the endorsement, in principle, of an international verification agency within the United Nations. It is the intention of the six countries to revive this initiative at this session of the General Assembly.
The linkage between disarmament and development is by now well-recognized. Hardly anyone can dispute the proposition that the resources being spent on armaments could be more profitably employed in peaceful developmental activities. The decisions taken by the United Nations Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development, held last year, need to be followed up and acted upon.
Regional conflicts have dominated discussions at the current session of the General Assembly. This is perfectly understandable. Success in achieving breakthroughs is most of these conflicts is attributed, and justifiably so, to the patient diplomacy of the United Nations, as well as to the rapprochement between the two super-Powers. There is, perhaps, a lesson for all of us in this, particularly for the non-aligned and developing countries. If the tendency to seek massive external military assistance and to pursue dangerous nuclear weapon policies in the illusory hope of strengthening one's bargaining position with one's neighbours were resisted, there would be fewer regional conflicts and consequently less dependence on outside Powers for the solution of such conflicts.
India rejoiced at the cease-fire between Iran and Iraq which came into effect on 20 August 1988. Thanks to the statesmanship of the leaders of the two countries and to the efforts of the Secretary-General, the international community has been spared witnessing the eighth anniversary of the war. The cease-fire is an important first step and must be consolidated. The negotiations between the two countries currently under way, under United Nations auspices, must be pursued. The issues involved are complex and highly emotional for both sides. India has been involved in discussing the issues in detail with the two countries as part of the efforts of the Non-Aligned Movement. That experience makes me feel confident that the issues, though complex, will eventually be solved. India has the closest of ties with Iran and Iraq, and we know that the two countries are anxious to get on with the stupendous task of reconstruction.
My country rejoices at the release of the Indian national, Mr. Mithileshwar Singh. We hope that all the other hostages will also be freed and reunited with their families at an early date.
India has welcomed the Geneva Accords on Afghanistan. We have had historical ties of deep friendship with the people of Afghanistan. The Geneva Accords have established & framework which would enable the Afghan people to decide on their future free from foreign interference or intervention. While the withdrawal of Soviet troops has proceeded on schedule, we are greatly perturbed at persistent reports of violations of the Geneva Accords and hope that they will be implemented faithfully by all the parties. In addition to restoring peace and stability to the region, the implementation of the Geneva Accords would also remove the ostensible cause for introduction of sophisticated arms into the area.
While positive developments have taken place in the Gulf as well as in Afghanistan, the continued great-Power naval presence in the Indian Ocean remains a factor contributing to tension and instability. We reiterate our call for the withdrawal of all military forces of outside Powers from the Indian Ocean so that it can emerge as a zone of peace.
There is more than a glimmer of hope for the resolution of the conflict situation in South-East Asia. The horrors suffered by the people of Kampuchea in the 1970s must not be allowed to revisit them ever. The dialogue at the Jakarta Informal Meeting was a welcome beginning, which we appreciate. We also applaud the initiative of the Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement to explore ways and means in which the Movement can assist the efforts to solve the Kampuchean problem. Given India's historical ties with the peoples of South-East Asia, we are ready and willing to contribute in whatever way we can to this process.
In our neighbourhood, we have watched with growing concern the trials and tribulations faced by the people of Burma, with whom the people of India are bound by close ties of history and culture. India has always scrupulously avoided interfering in the internal affairs of other countries. However, we cannot but sympathize with democratic aspirations. We are saddened by the growing number of innocent dead in Burma. We hope that a way will be found to end this tragic conflict as soon as possible.
There is renewed belief that the long-delayed solution to the Namibian question is at hand. Responsibility for the delay rests squarely with the South African Government, which has, with impunity, refused to comply with its international commitments and obligations. The world community is committed to the emancipation of the Namibian people engaged in a historic struggle for freedom under the leadership of the South West African People's Organization (SWAPO). Their sole and authentic representative. India was the first country to accord diplomatic recognition to the representative of it. We look forward to welcoming Namibia as the 160th Member of the United Nations at the General Assembly session next year.
While there is movement on the question of Namibia, the situation in South Africa itself shows no sign of improvement. The racist Pretoria regime continues its reign of terror, subjecting the people of South Africa to the most inhuman forms of oppression. The evil system of apartheid cannot be reformed, it has to be abolished in total. South Africa must open а dialogue with the genuine representatives of the oppressed people. Nelson Mandela, the universal symbol of courage and fortitude, whose state of health is a cause of concern to all of us, must be released immediately and unconditionally. Effective pressure in the form of comprehensive mandatory sanctions must be applied, without invoking unconvincing arguments regarding their effect on employment of the oppressed people, and so on.
The Action for Resisting Invasion, Colonialism and apartheid (AFRICA) Fund, established by the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, has received pledges and contributions from a third of the world community. Described at the recent meeting of the non-aligned in Nicosia, Cyprus, as an instance of the Movement's capacity for collective action, the Fund demonstrates an international commitment to the front-line States and liberation movements of southern Africa transcending geographical or political barriers.
The international 00tmunity should be opposed to racial discrimination no matter where it is practised. Last year my delegation referred to the unfortunate developments in Fiji, which had distinct racial overtones. He hoped that the groundswell of international public opinion would help restore the spirit of trust, harmony and concord which had prevailed in Fiji since its independence. As a Member of the United Nations and as a member of its Committee on decolonization, India had been in the forefront in the fight for Fiji's independence. It is a matter of great regret to us that the situation in Fiji has considerably deteriorated during the past year. There are clear indications that an attempt is being made to institutionalise racial discrimination in Fiji. We understand that there is to be a process of consultation with the various communities before the draft constitution is finalized. We hope that this process will enable all sections of the people to participate in it in a non-discriminatory manner. There was a time when Fiji used to be described as "what the world should be like". The racial harmony, peace and tranquillity in Fiji used to be a model for the world to follow. We hope that Fiji will return soon to those harmonious times.
India's support of the right of self-determination for the Palestinian people has its roots in our own struggle against colonial rule. Many changes have taken place in the region. What has remained constant, however, is the determination of the Palestinian people. The message of intifadah to the world is unambiguous, 20 years of occupation have utterly failed to suppress the fierce nationalism of the Palestinian people. It should also have made it clear to the world, including Israel, that territories illegally occupied cannot be retained forever. Israel must withdraw from the territories it has occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem. We reiterate the call for the convening of an international peace conference on the Middle East, with the participation of all the parties, including the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), on an equal footing. Such a conference, we believe, should facilitate the establishment of an independent homeland for the Palestinians and the creation of conditions in which all the States in the region can live within secure and recognized boundaries.
India has always supported the aspirations of the people of Cyprus to live together in ш independent and non-aligned country, with its territorial integrity intact. We deeply appreciate the resumption of dialogue between the two communities under the auspices of the United Nations Secretary-General. We urge both sides to spare no effort to find a solution to the problem within the time-limit envisaged by the Secretary-General.
Similarly, we ate heartened by the acceptance by the two sides concerned of the Secretary-General's proposals for finding a solution to the problem of Western Sahara. Here again, we hope that this question will be resolved satisfactorily so that the people of the territory, as well as other countries in the Maghreb, can live in peace and co-operation with one another.
In the Korean peninsula, which unhappily remains divided, there is an overwhelming sentiment in favour of peace, reconciliation and dialogue. We hops the aspirations of its people to peaceful reunification will find early fulfilment.
This year marks the fortieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The Declaration, which furnishes the philosophical basis for the human rights work of the United Nations, is of seminal importance. Like the Charter itself, it points to the interdependence of human rights, social and economic progress and international peace and security. Over the past four decades, the concepts embodied in the Declaration have been developed and enriched, particularly with regard to economic, social and cultural rights. It remains our firm belief that the inherent dignity of the human person requires full respect for his civil and political rights and, equally, for his economic, social and cultural rights.
While there; have been encouraging developments recently in the political sphere, the outlook in the area of international economic co-operation remains bleak. The low rates of growth of world trade and output in recent years will not suffice to resolve any of the major problems facing the world economy. In the industrialized countries high rates of unemployment persist, making it difficult for them to undertake the structural adjustments that ate necessary in the long term. The major imbalance, with its attendant uncertainties, continues to persist. For the developing countries the outlook is even worse. Inadequate resource flows, deteriorating terms of trade and the heavy burden of external debt have all but halted the development process of these countries. They have retarded attempts to address the fundamental problem of poverty and deprivation. The 1980s are being characterized as the lost decade of development.
The policies of the major developed countries constitute the essential determinants of the external environment for the developing countries. There has been no coherent and considered effort to fashion these policies on the basis of co-operative international action, taking into account their impact and consequences for the developing countries. Here it is useful to recall the proposals made by the developing countries for removing the structural deficiencies and fundamental failings of the international monetary, financial and trading systems. The underlying structural and systemic problems of the world economy have to be addressed by deliberate and co-operative international action that gives full recognition to global interdependence. Both the developed and the developing countries need to pursue convergent and mutually reinforcing policies in the interrelated areas of trade, money and finance.
The area of international trade is being increasingly characterized by an erosion of the accepted rules and regulations and by reliance on unilateral discriminatory action. Despite repeated affirmation of commitments on standstill and rollback, protectionism continues to grow unabated. Protectionist measures ate imposed in those areas where the developing countries have demonstrated their competitiveness and made investments for structural reforms. There has been little progress so far in the ongoing Uruguay Round on multilateral trade negotiations in areas of direct interest to the developing countries, such as safeguards, textiles, agriculture and tropical products. The Uruguay Round should provide an important opportunity for strengthening and preserving the multilateral trading system. It should also help to reduce the tensions and distortions that characterize the world trade system.
The proposals made in the new areas in the Uruguay Round have to be consistent with the right of developing countries to manage their economies in accordance with their national objectives and priorities, to regulate activities of transnational corporations and to channel investment into those desired sectors of their economies. Such proposals should promote the autonomous and self-reliant development of those countries.
Another area of concern is the stagnation or decline, in real terms, of resource flows to developing countries. The international financial system has failed to ensure the transfer of adequate resources on proper terms and conditions to developing countries and thus provide adequate financing for development activities. The alleviation of the current development crisis requires з more effective system that will guarantee an increasing flow of resources, in particular official development assistance resources, to developing countries and also guarantee access by international monetary and financial institutions to adequate resources.
Let us collectively recognize the need to evolve a more broad-based system for managing the world economy that reflects the interests of all groups of countries and provides an equitable and harmonious basis for the collective management of global interdependence. The seventh session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development was a small step in this direction. In the coming days we must make use of other opportunities for building a renewed consensus on development directed against the global problem of hunger and poverty. The formulation and elaboration of an international development strategy for the Fourth United Nations Development Decade provides such opportunity.
The virtual paralysis of the North-South dialogue makes it all the more important for the developing countries to redouble their efforts to collective self-reliance through the economic co-operation among developing countries. It has become imperative for developing countries to build on complementary in their economies. In this respect the conclusion in Belgrade earlier this year of the Agreement on the Global System of Trade Preferences was a significant achievement. It laid down for the first time among the signatory developing countries the legal and institutional foundation for trade expansion.
In our own region the formation of the South Asian Association of Regional Co-operation has provided a framework for wide-ranging economic and technical co-operation. Specific areas of mutually beneficial co-operation have been identified and practical measures are being implemented by member States.
One is, however, constrained to note that economic co-operation among developing countries has developed only partially and its full potential remains unexplored. What is needed is a hard look at concrete programmes to address, in the first instance and in the main, the elementary human needs of a large chunk of humanity. In these areas it is possible to make a better impact than has happened so far.
During the current year many developing countries have been hit by natural disasters requiring urgent international relief operations. Large areas in Africa have been afflicted by prolonged drought. Jamaica has been devastated by a hurricane of unprecedented magnitude, and Sudan by floods. Our own region, South Asia, has witnessed widespread havoc caused by floods, above all in Bangladesh, though we too have not been spared the ravages of floods. It was our privilege, as a friendly neighbour, to be the first to go to the assistance of the people of Bangladesh in response to an appeal from the Government of Bangladesh. A task force of experts from Bangladesh and India has been set up to study the Ganga and Brahmaputra waters jointly for flood management and the water flow thereof. 
Over the past two decades, drug abuse and illicit trafficking in drugs have assumed proportions of a major global problem, not only affecting consumers but also posing serious problems for transit States. We hope that the Plenipotentiary Conference scheduled to convene in Vienna later this year in order to finalize a draft convention on this question will meet with success.
The United Nations is dedicated to the pursuit of the twin goals of peace and development. It can claim credit for significant achievements in both these spheres, and in particular in recent months we have seen encouraging progress in the resolution of complex political issues. But in the sphere of economic and social development, its major successes belong to past decades; its achievements recently have been relatively modest. We must renew our commitment to the eradication of the evils of poverty, disease and illiteracy through concerted international action. This is a struggle that must be waged in common by all humankind. As Jawaharlal Nehru told the Assembly in 1963, "The only war we want is a war against poverty and disease and its brood".
Many centuries ago India's sages gave the calls "Let us move, together. Let us talk, together. Let us be of single common mind."
The renewed sense of community witnessed in the United Nations today gives hope that over the coming year, in time for its forty-fourth session, the world body can set before itself a viable specific agenda for the 1990s that would help render our planet ready for the century drawing in upon it. Such an agenda must assess and chart the means of fulfilment of the minimum needs of man. The world, as Mahatma Gandhi put it, has enough to fulfil man's need, but not his greed. This distinction between need and greed becomes all the more real and crucial at a time when geo-environmental, geo-economic and geo-political imperatives have to be fully harmonized in the interest of survival. Runaway desires of imprudent humans must be tailored so as to be compatible with the capacity to fulfil them. If we collectively determine to do that, this forum, the United Nations, is the place where we must begin, for the United Nations is as strong, and only as strong, as the will of its Members.
And when we talk of Members, let us not forget that behind the Member States represented in this Assembly are the men and women of the world. It is they that give this Organisation its flesh and its blood and should therefore legitimately dictate its aspirations and efforts. Their control over rulers who fall short of or go beyond their mandate is not as palpable as it should be, but that is part of man's constant aspiration, which the United Nations needs to be inspired by in order to give effective voice to the millions who cannot speak for themselves.
The United Nations should thus promote the ascendancy of peoples, translating into reality the relationships which the peoples would wish to have among themselves.
Invested with a popular dimension, rooted in a time when the process of peace can be rendered irreversible and man's scarce energies given a chance to better his own being, this is the moment for the United Nations which should endure until the mission for humanity is completed.
We must not fail.
﻿
Mr. President, I should like at the outset to congratulate you on your election to the esteemed post of President of the forty-third session of the General Assembly. I feel sure that the possibility of restoring to the United Nations the spirit of conciliation and peace for which it was founded will depend, in no small measure, on your wise and experienced guidance.
In a discussion of the Middle East, history should precede diplomacy. The region has known epochs of war and golden ages, military conquests and spiritual greatness. It was in the Middle East that an invisible divide saw frustration and promise prevail in an unpredictable, seemingly uncontrollable, cycle. Yet it was man who triggered waves of hope and despair. Thus it was man who determined the course of history.
Today, once again, the region faces a moment of human choice.
We are preparing for a better tomorrow. We are prepared with a vision of peace. It is the vision of an end to a futile, economically devastating arras race now sliding in the inhumane direction of chemical and biological warfare. Ballistic missiles know no boundaries, chemical warheads do not distinguish young from old. Those senseless enough to employ them must recognize that they are creating a danger to themselves as well.
It is a vision of an opportunity to concentrate on scientific and technological breakthroughs on Earth and in space, on civilian requirements rather than military needs where resources wasted on armaments are invested in creative enterprises from the greening of the land to the clearing of the waters, from educating young children to caring for the senior citizen.
It is a vision of a region whose stability is inviting, whose dwelling is hospitable, whose creativity is encouraging, whose needs are seriously addressed by those seeking to invest in promoting stability and in expanding economic potential.
It is a vision of a region come of age, a region cognizant of global rapprochement, a region ready to tackle the heretofore seemingly insoluble in order to offer a better future for all - Jews and Arabs alike - a region ready to respect differences among peoples without discriminating against any.
It is a vision that is a necessity. It is a vision that is within reach.
Yet the smoke of old fires is still in the air and new ones threaten to darken the horizon. 
Unless we take decisive action to change course belligerency will not be overcome. We have to do our utmost to ensure that never again will a young man or woman die in a war we failed to prevent.
What should be done to achieve this goal?
I shall start with Israel.
Three years ago Israel stood before this Assembly and pledged to dedicate its efforts to the pursuit of peace. That pledge rested not only on resolve, but also on a conviction: that in the north, war can be brought to an end; in the south, peace can be salvaged and nourished and, in the east, the ground can be laid to start meaningful negotiations.
In all three directions we laboured to fulfil the commitment.
In the north, we put an end to our involvement in Lebanon. We are out of Lebanon, its land and politics. Our sole concern is to see that Lebanon no longer serves as the base for hostile activities against us.
In the south, we have revived our relations with Egypt, which has since restored full diplomatic representation in Israel. We have witnessed Egypt, under the steady leadership of President Mubarak - dedicated to progress at home and peace in the region - reassume its central role in the Arab world without parting with its peace strategy.
In the east, we have experienced hope and frustration. Until less than a year ago, before things went awry, the West Bank turned from the centre of violent debate to the focus of diplomatic efforts. Most significantly, in April 1987, energetic and creative diplomacy produced a framework for negotiations. Known as "the London Document", it provided a non-imposing internationally supported setting for direct negotiations. 
Unfortunately, while still viable, the effort has not yet reached fruition. Sadly, the absence of progress was accompanied by an outbreak of violence. Wrongly, the Palestinians chose to knock on the door of the future with stones in their hands. Knocking with a message of peace would have triggered an entirely different situation.
Indeed, the Palestinians must recognize that it is possible to secure their legitimate rights - but not at the expense of Israel's security. Palestinian aspirations and Israeli security are not necessarily incompatible. 
Peace is an Israeli national interest. While we have confidence in the capacity of the Israeli Defence Forces to defend our country, by deterring any aggression and defeating it if need be, we consider the achievement of peace through diplomacy the greatest victory of all. My country has never surrendered to the pressures of war and will never yield to violence. In peace negotiations we shall stand firm on our security interests. Yet we stand ready for a historic compromise with our neighbours. For 40 years we have built our strength so as not to negotiate out of weakness. Today we are strong enough to negotiate for peace.
Israel has no intention of harming the Palestinian people. Israel has no desire to dominate their lives or to hurt their pride. We are prepared to negotiate with them, fairly, freely, as equals, a meeting-ground of needs, where Palestinians can enjoy their identity and Israelis security in peace.
We are prepared to conduct negotiations on the basis of the only framework, reaffirmed this week in the trilateral meeting chaired by President Reagan, with the participation of the Egyptian Minister for Foreign Affairs, and accepted by Arab countries as well as by all permanent members of the Security Council - that is. Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), calling for a territorial compromise and secure borders. They are the only existing common ground.
As we stand ready to live up to these commitments, we shall be as clear in addressing our expectations of our neighbours. For there can be peace, but not unilaterally; there can be accommodation, but only by mutual effort. We expect from the Arab world a clear voice for peace. For how long can a desire for peace be treated as a secret password as though we were living in clandestine surroundings? Commitment to peace must emerge loud and clear, for sceptics to witness, for the hopeful to respond. 
We expect the Arab world to realize that there is no indirect peace. Peace is meant to reinforce, not to undermine, freedom and security for all involved.
We expect the Arab world, including the Palestinians, to do away with the contradiction of sweet promises and bitter violence. A policy of "no war, no peace", much like a policy that claims to combine both, is an exercise in evasion. A choice must be made: to pay the price of peace or to be resigned to the costs of war.
All of us must recognize changing realities. That which was rejected when offered, that which was doomed by war, that which could have been possible, belongs to the past. In the realities of 1988 the lines of 1947 no longer exist. After the Six-Day War Israel should not be expected to return to the lines from which it attacked. Readiness for a territorial compromise does not include readiness to compromise security.
A breakthrough requires the understanding that peace is a matter of choice; it is the outcome of decisions; it is the product of a historic compromise. No vague formulation can replace a clear strategy to part with the past. The turn to a so-called Government-in-exile, the return to General Assembly partition resolution 181 (II), represents yet another escape to the realm of self-illusion. Any attempt to add to or subtract from the only commonly accepted basis for negotiations is bound to destroy the existing framework without creating a new one. Fuelled by a commitment to no war and no violence, no terrorism and no pressure, we can travel the distance towards accommodation.
To the Palestinians I must say with candour that violence does not pay off. By avoiding negotiations they are depriving themselves of their hope. For there is hardly a chance for a compromise to emerge in the absence of, or prior to, a free negotiating process. 
Although we cannot agree in advance on the outcome of negotiations  we can agree on the process by which to go forward - negotiations as an open-ended effort, free of pressure, imposition or threat. In those negotiations, Jordanians and Palestinians, much like ourselves, may present expectations and demands as they labour to balance contradictory aspirations so as to answer the call of peace. We are ready to enter into negotiations with Jordan and with authentic representatives of the Palestinian people who ate men of peace and not men of violence, in order to solve our differences with Jordan and to resolve the Palestinian problem in all its aspects. We are ready to negotiate with a joint Jordanian-Palestinian delegation. Yet, as peace is unlikely to be achieved in one leap, we are prepared to start negotiations without prior conditions with a Jordanian delegation or a Palestinian one. We hope that the Palestinians will not postpone the prospects of peace; and we hope that Jordan, regardless of its relations with them, will not postpone negotiations either.
I wish to express the gratitude of my people to the United States, its leaders and its institutions for their firm and consistent support. The United States has enabled us to guarantee our security. It has encouraged us, as it has our neighbours, to enter into political negotiations.
The Shultz initiative calling upon the parties to enter into direct negotiations and negotiate a just and fair solution calls also on the permanent members of the Security Council to avoid imposing solutions, refrain from applying pressure and serve as supporters of peace. This initiative, which provides for direct negotiations launched in a non-coercive international setting - remains available for consideration.
When we had an opportunity to review the prospects for peace earlier this week we were reassured by the unanimity among the host. President Reagan, and his guests from Egypt and Israel that there is no substitute for an ongoing, uninterrupted effort towards peace, and that all those attending are resolved to fill the next few months with relevant content.
I wish to express my hope that the policies adopted by the Soviet Onion under the leadership of Mikhail Gorbachev will lead to a world of more ploughshares and fewer swords. Moscow has undertaken some steps, which, though partial and limited, are yet of importance. Zionist prisoners have been released. The number of Jewish emigration permits has grown. Consular groups have been stationed in the Soviet Union and Israel respectively. We have taken note of statements from Moscow calling on all sides in the Middle East to adopt realistic positions with the objective of demilitarizing international relations. 
I wish to express the hope of my people that the cultural autonomy announced by the Soviet leadership will enable our Jewish brethren to pray to our Lord in their own synagogues, to teach their children the history of the Jewish people, to express themselves in the language of their forefathers, and to set sail to the shores of the promised land.
As we watch with wonder and respect the People's Republic of China rearrange its own destiny, we hope it will find this the occasion to support a non-coercive setting for Arab-Israeli negotiations, as well as to normalize its relations with the State of Israel.
There is nothing in our region's history or in its present that rules out a different future. In an era of peace and co-operation, the industrial dynamics of the Far Fast, the Economic Community of Europe, the free enterprise and the enterprise of freedom of the United States, and the Soviet capacity to introduce an air of glasnost can all apply to the Middle East. We can draw on the experience of others. We can add that which is unique to us and offer our young generation the dawn of prosperity in peace.
In order to prepare the ground for the launching of our region on the long road to peace, may we suggest that all relevant parties undertake the following: those interested in the promotion of peace and stability in the Middle East undertake a moratorium on all threats or acts of violence; those interested in promoting Arab-Israeli peace negotiations undertake to encourage and facilitate the early convening of such negotiations in a non-coercive setting, free of a renewed arms race and free of external pressure; and those committed to the cause of peace in the Middle East reaffirm their adherence to ,the only commonly accepted basis for such negotiations - Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) - the renunciation of violence and terror and recognition of the right of all peoples and States in the region to freedom, dignity, peace and security.  
Before I conclude I wish to refer again to yet another issue that is very close to our hearts. As we have pointed out so often in the past, in Yemen, in Syria, in Iran and elsewhere our brethren are today permitted neither the free pursuit of our common heritage nor free departure to Israel. We call upon the Governments of those countries to respect basic human rights. We also call upon the Governments to reject the shameful assertion that Zionism is racism, a statement that shows no understanding of Zionism and a dangerous misunderstanding of racism.
Forty years ago the founder of our State, David Ben-Gurion, against the background of the turmoil of war and revival, introduced our Declaration of Independence, which stated:
"We extend our hand in peace and neighbourliness to all the neighbouring States and their peoples, and invite them to co-operate with the independent Jewish nation for the common good of all."
Israel at 40, proud of its accomplishments at home, confident about its future, today reiterates that very call; we extend our hand in peace to all our neighbours, peoples and States, as we stand ready to alter the course of Middle East history. At the all-too-familiar crossroads of hope and despair we are convinced that the choice is ours to make.
Most appropriately, this week our people celebrate the holiday of Succoth, the Feast of Tabernacles, as we pray together "Spread over us the Tabernacle of Thy peace ..."
"He who maketh peace in heavens, may He make peace for us ..."
We need it; we can help to achieve it. 
﻿Sir, I congratulate you on your election to the presidency of this forty-third session of the General Assembly. I say, with the benefit of my personal acquaintance with you, that it is an honour that you truly deserve. This Assembly is in good hands as it begins to tackle the work on its agenda. 
This forty-third session of the General Assembly carries more than the usual sense of occasion. I am not alone in detecting here a feeling of purpose and o  achievement that has not always been evident in recent years. I take great satisfaction in being able to address the Assembly at a time when the standing of the United Nations is higher than it has been for some time. Even the fountain works. The mood has changed distinctly since the fortieth commemorative session, because, despite the difficulties and uncertainties it has faced, the Organization has pursued its diverse agenda while tackling a major programme of administrative reform. The record in recent times has been one of solid achievement.
The changing international climate has helped this process. In this Hall on Monday, President Reagan in his valedictory address spoke to us of his satisfaction at the movement towards a more constructive relationship between his country and the Soviet Union. Foreign Minister Shevardnadze pursued the same theme. In certain regions of the world there has been welcome progress in resolving conflicts that had been festering for some time„ Many of the signs are favourable.
That will be a matter of particular satisfaction to the smaller members of the international community, including my own country. We have always attached importance to the principle that the collective effort of that community should above all be applied to the task of keeping the peace. That was the central purpose of those who founded the Organization. Today it remains a goal of no less importance. Thus far 1988 has been a year of significant peacemaking, from which the world can take heart and upon which it can build. As one who stood here to address the fortieth anniversary session, I am pleased that we are now seeing renewed recognition of the value of the role and achievements of the United Nations.
Recent developments have highlighted the continuing value of this Organization's efforts in the settlement of international conflict. The accords reached on Afghanistan and the cease-fire in the devastating Gulf War required the co-operation of those directly involved. But a particular tribute must go to the dedication of the Secretary-General. The people who ate saved from further threat or have the hope of peace are indebted to his patience, skill, perseverance and unquenchable optimism. We welcome the role he has played.
There are other situations that still need the resources the United Nations can offer by way of mediation or assistance with peacemaking. Western Sahara, Namibia, Cyprus and Cambodia are all affected by unresolved conflicts. But even here the auguries are promising.
In this age regional tensions cannot be isolated from the mainstream of international life. There are dangers for all of us in conflict wherever it occurs. It follows that we share a responsibility to do all that we can to eliminate the conditions in which conflict breeds and to restore the peace if it is broken. At times the principle of collective security has commanded more support than the practice. I hope the success of current peace-keeping efforts under United Nations auspices will reinvigorate the principle of collective security and lead to its wider application.
My Government pledged last year to expand our practical contribution to the United Nations peace-keeping efforts. I am pleased that we have been able to give effect to that undertaking. Our existing commitment to the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization has been maintained. In the past month we were pleased to be able to respond to the Secretary-General's request for a contribution to the United Nations Iran-Iraq Military Observer Group (UNIIMOG). A contingent of New Zealand army officers was deployed to UNIIMOG following the cease-fire. Earlier this week a Royal New Zealand Air Force Andover transport aircraft with flight crews and maintenance personnel left New Zealand to become an important national contribution to UNIIMOG's air capacity. We stand ready to assist in a practical way if, as we hope, solutions are found to other long-standing conflicts.
I have already welcomed the signing of the Geneva Accords on Afghanistan. Noteworthy as they were, the Accords did not put a final end to the conflict in Afghanistan nor did they bring into being a fully representative government enjoying the confidence of the people of Afghanistan. New Zealand hopes that the withdrawal of the remaining Soviet forces will be accompanied by real progress in addressing those unresolved problems. As Mr. Shevardnadze said:
"The Geneva Accords" [should be] "the first step in a chain reaction leading to a healthier world." (A/43/PV.6, p. 66)
The values of tolerance and respect for the dignity and worth of human beings can be seen by us all in the current Olympic Games. They are a sign of that healthier world and we congratulate the Republic of Korea on its role as host. But it is a matter for regret that divisiveness has persisted on the Korean peninsula for so long. We look for an easing of tensions and an improvement in relations between the Koreas.
Cambodia, too, has been a tragic source of international tension for many years. That impasse has come to seem rather less intractable during 1988. In each of the past nine years, this Assembly has rightly emphasized Vietnam's violation of the Charter of the United Nations by its invasion and occupation of Cambodia. That remains a fundamental issue.
But we must insist also on a settlement there which will prevent a return to power by the Khmer Rouge. The international community was slow to accept the evidence of genocide committed by the Pol Pot Government and we have had to deal with the consequences ever since. We have a responsibility to ensure that such atrocities are never again committed against the peoples of Cambodia. 
Harrowing images of mass persecution, unfortunately not confined to a single country or continent, remain fresh in our memories as we commemorate the fortieth anniversary of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Much has nevertheless been achieved in the intervening years. But it cannot be denied that gross and massive abuses of human rights continue.
The problem of human rights is more and more the focus of the attention of the Members of the United Nations. All of us are bound to speak up and, if we do not, we bear a responsibility for continuing and future evils. The authority of this Organization as it deals with human rights must rest on a commitment by all to objectivity. South Africa's system of apartheid is an abuse in a category of its own. Events of the last year have shown the South African Government clinging tenaciously to its course, in spite of the international community's abhorrence of its apartheid policies.
It has so far spurned all the voices of reason and moderation. Nelson Mandela, the most respected leader in South Africa, remains incarcerated. The Sharpeville Six are still under sentence of death. The intercessions of the Security Council have been ignored. The country lives in a continuing state of emergency; it experiences increasing repression. The South African response to protests from neighbouring States is to make repeated terrorist attacks on them and to undermine their economic stability - all totally unacceptable.
New Zealand has implemented wide-ranging sanctions against South Africa. We believe that such sanctions are an effective means of changing the attitude of the white minority. New Zealand is ready to implement further measures. Our goal is non-violent progress to a non-racial, democratic and just society in South Africa.
There has been an encouraging movement recently towards peace in Angola. In Namibia, the United Nations has faced an enormous task. At last α settlement there appears tantalizingly close. We trust that Namibia's independence can be secured peacefully and soon in accordance with Security Council resolution 435 (1978). That would present a further major achievement in the work of the United Nations on decolonization.
On the initiative of the seven South Pacific member countries of the United Nations, New Caledonia was re-inscribed in 1986 on the United Nations list of Non-Self-Governing Territories, thus invoking a United Nations responsibility for the future of the progress of the Territory to self-determination. The tragic events at Ouvea in New Caledonia earlier this year demonstrated the consequences of ignoring United Nations principles and also the aspirations of a major communal group. New Zealand therefore welcomed the decision in June by the new Prime Minister of France and the leaders of the loyalist and independence movements in New Caledonia to move together on a plan for political development. That plan rightly takes account of the interests of all genuine New Caledonians.
That development was recognized last month by the Special Committee on Decolonization in a resolution which was adopted by consensus and has since been endorsed by the South Pacific Forum at its annual meeting last week. No one should underestimate the difficulties that may lie ahead, but everything is looking better. We look forward to a free and genuine act of self-determination in New Caledonia which is consistent with United Nations principles and leads to a settlement safeguarding the rights of all New Caledonians, including the indigenous Kanak people. 
Some argue that while the United Nations has a vital role in dealing with regional issues of the kind I have mentioned, the scope for its involvement in the balance between the super-Powers is a limited one. I do not accept that. We have seen how the super-Powers inevitably become involved in the troubles of the world's regions. Equally, issues of disarmament - including those which vitally involve the super-Powers cannot be considered as anything but questions involving all members of the international community for we are all affected, by choice or otherwise.
The issue of nuclear disarmament has taken on new urgency. Nuclear weapons technology no longer remains the exclusive preserve of the five permanent Members of the Security Council. The capacity to build a nuclear weapon is now possessed by a larger number of countries, and soon even more will have it. There are indications that some of those countries have nuclear ambitions. Whatever their motivation, such ambitions have to be curtailed.
There is a real risk here. Regional conflicts, and their tendency to attract external intervention, are dangerous enough as it is. But the prospect of nuclear weapons being deployed in such situations must now be taken into account. In that event, the dangers we would all face would be appalling.
This is an added reason why the efforts of the United States and the Soviet Union to agree on further reductions in their nuclear arsenals are so important. What prospect is there of blocking the spread of nuclear weapons if these two nations cannot stop their relentless drive to develop and deploy new nuclear weaponry? In the course of last year's general debate, New Zealand applauded the United States and the Soviet Union for their decision to eliminate their land-based intermediate-range nuclear missiles. The resulting treaty is now for the first time leading to a real reduction in the world's stock of nuclear weapons. With an agreement in the strategic arms reduction talks, the super-Powers would truly have shown the way to the other nuclear weapons States and those which have nuclear ambitions. It is not too much to hope that a corner would be turned and the threat of vertical and horizontal proliferation would no longer hang over us all. 
New Zealand believes that achieving reductions and balances in conventional forces will be central, in the search for nuclear disarmament, to the nuclear-free world seen by President Reagan and General Secretary Gorbachev at Reykjavik. In Europe and many other parts of the globe the accumulation of conventional forces, often without regard to actual defensive requirements, has heightened tensions and led some to look for other mote dangerous means of deterring aggression; so the processes of nuclear and conventional disarmament must take place in step, and must involve all States.
Yet, at the third United Nations special session devoted to disarmament, when we had an opportunity to set up a multilateral disarmament agenda to take us up to the beginning of the next century, we could not take advantage of it. But our failure then does not mean it cannot be done. Instead we have the task now, beginning at this session of the Assembly, to pick up where the special session left off.
Rather than confess disappointment at the special session's results, or conclude that the job is too difficult, we must try all the harder to broaden the areas of international agreement. The search for consensus on the prevention of an arms race in outer space must go on. The campaign must continue unabated to convince those few remaining States which yet doubt it that a comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty is an essential measure to end the proliferation of nuclear weapons.
The world community must at last bring to conclusion the negotiations on a comprehensive chemical-weapons convention. The Secretary-General has been called on time and time again to investigate allegations of chemical weapons use. He should never again have to issue a finding confirming such a charge. These hideous weapons must be outlawed once and for all, so that the world will never again be a horrified witness to chemical warfare. The main elements of a multilateral agreement have now been elaborated by the Conference on Disarmament. It is time to finish the job.
New Zealand has taken substantial disarmament initiatives. We are proud to have been part of the regional drive to create the South Pacific Nuclear-Free Zone, a significant multilateral arms-control measure.
The Treaty of Rarotonga makes a decisive contribution to the stability of the region. The majority of South Pacific Forum members have become parties to the agreement. Two of the nuclear Powers, the Soviet Union and China, have ratified the protocols to the Treaty. We look to the other nuclear Powers to do the same. The Treaty covers a wide area of the region, bordering the Latin American nuclear-weapon-free zone to the east, and the demilitarised Antarctica to the south. We support ongoing co-operation with the Latin American patties to the Treaty of Tlatelolco so that we can each benefit from our mutual experience.
For nearly 30 years the Antarctic Treaty and its associated instruments have provided the framework for effective and peaceful co-operation in Antarctica, keeping that vast area free of all military activities. The Treaty, which is open to all States, has been the basis for a unique programme of scientific research and for the adoption of measures to protect the fragile environment.
A further element was added to the treaty system with the adoption in June this year of the Convention on the regulation of Antarctic mineral resource activities. New Zealand was pleased to host the final session of the negotiation. The Convention provides a strong mechanism for protecting the Antarctic environment if mineral resource activities ever take place. It is a significant strengthening of international co-operation under the Antarctic Treaty. A peaceful Antarctica is of the highest importance for New Zealand. We look for a consensus at this session of the Assembly to preserve the Antarctic Treaty. New Zealand is strongly opposed to any efforts to undermine it.
The world economy offers us little cause for satisfaction or confidence. Trade growth is uncertain. The economic difficulties facing many developing countries seem almost intractable. Indebtedness and underdevelopment are threats to global economic stability. Much is at stake for developed and developing countries alike in the present round of multilateral trade negotiations. New Zealand calls on all member countries of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade to go to the forthcoming mid-term review in Montreal in a positive mood, determined to achieve real progress.
New Zealand places special important on achieving from the Uruguay Round a liberalization of world agricultural trade and the elimination of domestic and international policies which distort such trade. There would be no better single way of solving the menacing problems of indebtedness and underdevelopment of which I have spoken.
There have been significant moves recently towards regional free-trade areas, including an agreement between New Zealand and Australia to establish a single trans-Tasman market by 1990. It is vital, however, that the international community should continue at the same time to move along the road to an open, market-oriented, multilateral trading system. We must look for strong leadership here from the major economies, which have a special responsibility to apply, fairly and across the board, the principles of comparative advantage and fair competition. Smaller countries like my own, dependent on primary production, require the reassurance that we will not continue to be subjected unreasonably to artificial restraints on trade. 
It is a paradox that the United Nations is demonstrating renewed vitality and relevance at a time when it faces major financial uncertainties. It is unacceptable that Member States should fail to carry out their legal obligations to contribute their assessed financial dues in good time.
We must recognize, nevertheless, that constraints on available resources are likely to remain while at the same time the demands upon the Organization continue to grow. Accordingly, there is no choice but to maintain the worthwhile progress already achieved towards administrative reform; otherwise, the Organization will be incapable of meeting the critical challenges as they arise.
I speak here as the representative of the Fourth New Zealand Labour Government. The First New Zealand Labour Government, and its Prime Minister Mr. Peter Fraser, played a deeply committed role in the discussions leading to the adoption of the Charter in 1945. New Zealand's hopes of those early days have been exceeded by some of the Organization's achievements - in its economic and social work, for example, and in its human rights and decolonization activities. By contrast, our high hopes for the United Nations peace-making and disarmament roles have yet to be fully realized, but we are optimistic that the log-jam has started to move in those areas.
New Zealand continues to set high store on the work of the United Nations - particularly in its tasks of promoting world peace, preserving the global environment, combating world hunger, removing racial discrimination everywhere and creating equal opportunities for men and women throughout the world. We are determined to maintain New Zealand's strong support in the years ahead.
﻿
As my first duty, permit me, Sir, to congratulate you on your election to the important and honourable post of President of the General Assembly at the current session.
We are meeting at a remarkable time. Though it may appear quite unremarkable on the working calendar of our Organization, it is a time filled with extraordinary events - events that can become the norm for the life of mankind if we succeed in turning them into a trend. Such, in our view, should be the main thrust of the current session, which in many respects is a watershed for the world community. I am referring to a new world calendar which is being created by the efforts of States and peoples, by the efforts of the United Nations. 
A character in the classical comedy "Woe from Wit" exclaims, "Calendars all lie". However, the calendar that has taken shape today does not deceive us. It tells of change in the world; change that is a product of reason. We find on that calendar the Moscow summit meeting, at which Mikhail Gorbachev and Ronald Reagan exchanged the instruments marking the entry into force of the Treaty on the elimination of intermediate- and shorter-range missiles; the conclusion of the Geneva Accords on political settlement around Afghanistan; the first ever public destruction of nuclear missiles; and the cease-fire in the Iran-Iraq war. 
All this is a product of reason, of a new political intellect, which has superseded the dark legacy of the past. It is destroying the reciprocal "enemy images" that have existed and is shaping the image of co-operative partners. 
It has made it possible to discuss a world without arms in the emerging context of real disarmament, as was recently demonstrated at the third special session of the General Assembly on disarmament. It offers us a chance for the successful conclusion of the Vienna meeting, which is a major milestone in the process of the Helsinki Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) .
All that has occurred in the year 1988, which has witnessed many other remarkable events. This year has witnessed the four-party talks on southern Africa; the movement towards a political settlement around Kampuchea; contacts to resolve problems existing on the Korean peninsula; dialogue between the leaders of the two communities in divided Cyprus that were until recently irreconcilable; and the positive response to the initiative of the United Nations Secretary-General concerning a settlement of the problem of Western Sahara. I shall permit myself to include among the year's landmark events the Party Conference in my own country. Its main conclusion was that perestroika is irreversible. It is irreversible in both our domestic and our foreign policy. Radical change in our own house - and here I am quoting Mikhail Gorbachev - has engendered new approaches by us to international affairs too. In a sense, the calendar that I have brought to your attention is one of the consequences of that process.
Two years ago we said here that group, bloc or ideological considerations were beginning to give way to an understanding of peace as the supreme value. Only peace, translated from the language of declarations into practical action, can give mankind a chance of survival. The Soviet Union has grasped this world-wide trend and coupled it with its own perestroika, its process of renewal.
Today the world is changing along new lines. Through the joint efforts of States and by implementing the principles of the new political thinking, it has become possible to avert the threat of war. To a large extent this is due to the political will demonstrated by the leaders of States, and here I can only agree with President Reagan's remarks yesterday about the beneficial impact on that process of Soviet-American political dialogue.
We are now moving further ahead - towards comprehensive security. This requires truly international co-operation. This universal international alliance must rise above differences, which, to use the words of Albert Einstein, are infinitely small compared to the danger that threatens us all.
The formation of this alliance is being facilitated by the emergence of mechanisms of interaction among States and peoples, first and foremost through the United Nations and its institutions. Its main working unit, its engine, its heart, is here, in our house of peace, as are the people who have found way to increase the power of the instruments of peace-making, and we thank them for that. There is however, no better way of expressing gratitude than by a collective effort to enhance the role of the United Nations and make it stronger not only as a unique international forum but also as an equally unique global centre for ensuring universal and regional security and the security of each country. 
In this capacity the United Nations should, in our view, play a more active and direct role in eliminating the main threat to mankind - the threat of a nuclear catastrophe. We would like to see greater involvement by the United Nations in the process of nuclear disarmament, in reaching a global agreement on the cessation and prohibition of nuclear-weapons testing, and in creating nuclear-free zones in various parts of the world.
Space should become an area for the priority attention of the United Nations. The international community has a vital interest in preventing it from becoming an arena for military rivalry. Today this can still be done; tomorrow will be too late.
The Soviet Union has made the case for setting up a world space organization, which could include a centre for international co-operation in the peaceful uses of outer space, to be established on the basis of the Krasnoyarsk radar, as proposed by Mikhail Gorbachev.
We call upon the Government of the United states to follow that example, and thus allay our concern with respect to United States radar facilities in Greenland and Great Britain. By doing that, we would not only lay the material groundwork for international co-operation in space but also strengthen the ABM Treaty regime.
This Organization could become involved, in practical terms, in resolving the issue of conventional arms limitation. The Soviet Union supports the idea of setting up, within the United Nations, a register of conventional arms sales and transfers, and is ready to take part in developing the parameters of such a register. 
The arms race cannot be curbed without putting under control the use of scientific and technological achievements for military purposes. We support the proposal by India and other countries to set up a group, under the United Nations Secretary-General, to provide assessments and forecasts in the area of new technology.
The United Nations will measure up to all these tasks if we take a fresh look at the practical aspects of our work. First of all, the General Assembly, as one of the principal bodies of the Organization, should substantially increase its contribution towards finding ways and means of solving international problems, inter alia, through renewing and improving its methods and procedures.
There is but one criterion here - that decisions be productive and democratically worked out and adopted. A first step in this direction would he to adopt an increased proportion of United Nations decisions by consensus, though it is important that General Assembly resolutions adopted by a vote should not be devalued.
It is also necessary to reinvigorate the work of the Security Council, and to ensure closer interaction among its members. At consultations among the five permanent members of the Council, attended by the Secretary-General, it would be useful to hold periodic reviews of situations in areas of conflict and to identify priority measures to improve the situation. It is felt that there is a need for periodic meetings of the Security Council at the foreign-minister level, as envisaged by the Charter.
The idea of convening special expanded Security Council meetings in regions of tension is worthy of consideration. Such meetings could also be held in the capitals of the Council's permanent members. The Soviet Union confirms its readiness to host such a meeting in Moscow. We all owe a debt to the United Nations, and it is in our common interest to repay our debts. We can repay them in full if, in addition to dollar contributions, we invest innovative thought in the activity of the Organization's institutions, if we revive its main function - as a centre for the settlement of international conflicts through united efforts.
Let there be no lament, then, over the sacred national prerogatives. The Soviet Union is a firm advocate of strengthening national sovereignty, particularly wherever infringements of it are most keenly and painfully felt. We regard as highly objectionable the anomaly of foreign military presence - military bases in other States' territories - as well as violations of national sovereignty by the undeclared arrival of nuclear arms in, or their transit through, ports of other countries. We have stated clearly what we believe: that any military presence must be confined within national borders.
But what we are speaking of now is voluntarily delegating a portion of national rights in the interests of all - paradoxically enough, to strengthen national security, while at the same time strengthening universal security.
The interrelationship of events in an interdependent world increasingly compels us to delegate some national prerogatives to an international organization. In fact, this is happening already. Military activity is ceasing to be taboo. Having cleared the verification barrier, and having initiated the process of real nuclear disarmament, the Soviet Union and the United States, the German Democratic Republic and Czechoslovakia, the United Kingdom, the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, Belgium and the Netherlands gave up some of their rights when they permitted the inspection of facilities in their territories. This was done in the interests of universal security. By establishing new, previously inconceivable, rules of openness in the military sphere, the world is undoubtedly moving towards the creation of a common sovereign right - the right to survive. When the United States Secretary of Defence sits at the controls of a top-secret Soviet bomber, and the Chief of the General Staff of the Soviet armed forces tours an equally secret United States base, that is something more than a mere exchange of protocol courtesies in the spirit of the times; it indicates that the elimination of secrecy is becoming a factor of security.
We draw this conclusion from the conviction that, today, it is no longer possible to achieve political goals by means of war. To put it simply, war is ceasing to be - indeed, it has already ceased to be - an instrument of rational policy.
Let us consider this from the perspective of regional conflicts, while they flare up and develop in different ways, they still have one feature in common - they drag on intolerably long, without delivering positive political results.
However, positive political results are not slow in coming when interference in regional conflicts gives way to the efforts of the world community to promote their settlement. No one should hinder this process. In this context we have to speak of Afghanistan.
The Geneva Accords are not just an isolated local instance of the settlement of a regional conflict. They ate the first step in a chain reaction leading to a healthier world. They are a new promising beginning in world politics, attesting to a qualitative change in political thinking. They are a message of good news to other regions. Any violation of the Geneva Accords undermines those achievements.
The Soviet Union and the Republic of Afghanistan are observing their obligations under those Accords faithfully, to the letter. There is no need to prove that. However attempts are being made arbitrarily to alter the formula established by the Geneva Accords, thus significantly changing its meaning.
As soon as the Soviet troops began to withdraw, a non-stop production line of violations was set in motion. The list of them would totally refute the assertion heard here yesterday that bloodshed has diminished in that region. On the contrary, terror has been mounting sharply and is increasingly directed against civilians.
In the circumstances, the fact is that faithful compliance by some with their obligations creates conditions for others to commit new crimes, of which the most heinous is the destruction of hard-won hopes. This must not be allowed to happen. The chain of conflict settlement generated by Afghanistan must not be allowed to break.
We are not complaining to anyone. We have the means to make things fall into place. But we are responsible to the United Nations, and therefore we are appealing to it. We are proposing that a meeting of the permanent members of the Security Council, hosted by the United Nations Secretary-General, discuss the question of compliance with the Geneva Accords. It would also be appropriate to invite to such a meeting representatives of the parties directly concerned. 
The deep involvement of the United Nations in the resolution of major international problems has spotlighted the acute need for new mechanisms of verification and control. We propose that consideration be given to the idea of an international monitoring and verification agency within the framework of the United Nations.
That body's terms of reference could be very broad. Disarmament and security in all its aspects are becoming an increasingly multilateral and truly international process. The institution for monitoring and verification should also be international.
Many countries feel the need for it. Thus Japan is proposing an interesting idea for the world-wide seismic monitoring of nuclear explosions. France has what we regard as the reasonable idea of setting up an international satellite monitoring system.
These are interesting ideas, but how could they be implemented? Naturally, the most sensible way is to make their, part of a universal monitoring and verification mechanism that would operate under United Nations auspices or within its structure.
Verification is no longer a preference but an imperative of our time. It is an imperative of our time to search for forms and methods for the development of societies that would be in keeping with modern requirements. Certainly this is true with respect to socialism, but with equal certainty it applies to other socio-political systems. While we are changing in both our own and international interests, we are entitled to expect the same kind of perestroika from others.
Separating the wheat from the chaff, distinguishing the right choice from the wrong, and achievements from deterioration, we are unforgiving in judging the past. To be self-critical is the canonical rule for politicians who believe in their people and want the people to believe them. But we expect certain leaders of States who address the international community to be equally self-critical in assessing the past.
It is appropriate to mention this in the year that marks the anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which some are marking by reasserting the supremacy of law, and others by preaching their own faultlessness. We could list numerous international instruments on human rights that have not been ratified by the countries represented here by some speakers. We could talk of the continuous practice of violations of civil rights in those countries. But we prefer to speak of ourselves.
The supremacy of law is the corner-stone of political renewal in our country. Creating a State based on the rule of law also has a direct bearing on our foreign policy.
A constitutionally authorized mechanism for working out and adopting strategic foreign-policy decisions is being put in place in our country. Questions such as military budgets, the use of troops outside the country, and innovations in the development of the armed forces will also be subject to constitutional and legal scrutiny.
For us, the principle of the supremacy of law and the policy of democratising our society ace indivisible. The emergence of a State based on the rule of law links with the world-wide will to assert the primacy of international law as the standard for mankind's existence. Among politico-military, economic, humanitarian and environmental guarantees of universal security, we view its legal guarantees as paramount.
From States based on the rule of law to a world based on the rule of law - such is the logic of the movement. A starting-point on this path could be the elaboration of a major long-term programme for the development of international law. Its thrust could be expressed in the motto "Security, trust and co-operation through law". 
We must also work persistently to enhance the effectiveness of the International Court of Justice on the basis of developing a common approach by all States to that main judicial body of the United Nations. Completion of the preparation of a code of crimes against peace and the security of mankind would be a major step.
Probably nowhere is the role of law so important as in ensuring freedom of choice, which is the linchpin of the new political thinking. For how can there be any freedom to choose one's own course in situations in which international law is constantly violated - as in southern Africa, the Middle East, Central America and elsewhere?
Freedom of choice defies confinement within ideological borders or geographical zones. It cannot be stopped by "crusades"; it can only be recognized. It is absolute, and equally -resolute is our respect for it, regardless of the orientation of any particular country.
By defining freedom of choice as the key link in the new political thinking, we hope to use that key to open many doors that until now have been tightly locked. Recognition of the diversity of interests, the priority of universal human values and the supremacy of political means in solving international problems, and replacing confrontation with dialogue - those and other components of the new political thinking have resulted in substantial and, we trust, irreversible positive changes. Yet, the fires of political inquisition ace still blazing in the world, and some would try to bring to the stake entire nations and movements accused of the heresy of having freely chosen their own course. Ideology in the shape of missile projectiles crushes them with the cruelty of a medieval axe. I should like to stress that our sympathy is on the side of those who seek to achieve freedom of choice.
Why, for instance, can the great American people have their own great dream, and why should the Cuban or the Nicaraguan, the Angolan or the Vietnamese people, the Ethiopian people be deprived of the right to have their own ideals? Why cannot the Palestinian people have their homeland? Why should other nations, countries and movements be humiliated by great Power arrogance? While not renouncing any of our values or denying to others the right to have their own, while continuing to respect the yearning of peoples for national self-assertion and liberation from economic subjugation and political dependence, the Soviet Union supports the de-ideologization of international relations and the exclusion of the overwhelming component of ideological differences from foreign policy and diplomacy. It expects and hopes that others will do likewise.
It expects the problem of how to pool our efforts to be recognized as commensurate with the problem of the survival of mankind. It expects the force of peace-making policy to prevail over the policy of force which has run its historical course.
The division of mankind into great and small countries is something which has also run its historical course. And, if the term "great Powers" is to be kept at all, it is only in the sense of great responsibility towards the rest of the world. Divisions and re-divisions of the world into spheres of influence are historically pointless. Today, we must all have only one sphere of influence – our planet. It will perish if our influence on the threatening course of destructive developments is divided and fragmented into blocs and systems. Therefore, the Soviet leadership has attempted to reinterpret more profoundly the idea, originally inherent in Marxism, of the interrelationship between class and universal human values, according priority to the interests shared by all nations. In our vision of peaceful coexistence as the universal principle of international relations, it does not emerge as a special form of class struggle.
A rigid polarization of the world, which is becoming increasingly diverse, must give way to its consolidation, which allows the rivalry of two different systems to take on non-confrontational forms. This, if you will, is also a choice, the freedom of which is born of the new political thinking and of its dialectics- which makes it possible to put policies to the test of real life.
But it would appear that not everyone measures up to this freedom. Obstinately clinging to divisive fetishes, some would try to put a brake on the action of the centrifugal forces. As a result, any red-letter days have not appeared on the new calendar of peace this year. For example, it does not include the date marking the completion of a treaty on 50 per cent reductions in strategic arms. The pace of real disarmament set by the Treaty on the Elimination of Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles is slowing down as negotiations proceed.
We seemed to have dealt once and for all with the issue of verification, but it has arisen again because of the negative position of our negotiating partners. It looks as if the Russian proverb "Trust but verify" is good only when applied to the Soviet Union but is not applicable to the United States.
Once again we call on the United States of America to reconsider its attitude to verification of the process of reducing and eliminating nuclear arsenals. For verification is something more than the technical checking on the parties compliance with their obligations. It is the material expression of sincerity and honesty, without which it is impossible to make policy today. It is also regrettable that an agreement barring weapons from outer space has not been concluded in 1988.
We had every reason to hope that 1988 would see the signing of a history-making global convention on the complete prohibition and destruction of chemical weapons. Indeed, most of the complex fundamental issues have either been settled already or ace close to agreement. But once again, the sticky quagmire of procrastination is thwarting the final step towards victory. Meanwhile, in the absence of progress an alarming trend towards the spread of chemical weapons and what I would call chemical permissiveness is surreptitiously beginning to develop.
We do not object to the exploration of alternative ways. The Soviet Union takes a positive view of the proposal made yesterday by the President of the United States to convene a conference of the parties to the 1925 Geneva Protocol. At the same time we, of course, assume that the drafting of the convention banning chemical weapons will be continued and, of course, completed.
The beginning of the process of nuclear disarmament has brought into sharper focus the problem of conventional armed forces and armaments, including naval armaments. Here, too, great hopes were being pinned on this year. The programme of radical reductions in the military capabilities of the two opposing political-military alliances proposed by Warsaw Treaty countries has put the problem on the track of practical solution.
We have a clear goal - to achieve a situation in which the two sides would . have only the forces and capabilities sufficient for defence but insufficient for launching a surprise attack or conducting offensive operations. 
There is also another priority problem. Access to conventional weapons in their most modern modifications is expanding. Their technological sophistication makes it easier to use them. There is now no need to spend much time or money on special training, and anyone can easily operate those infernal devices. In other words, conventional weapons are becoming part of everyday life, a common tool in the hands of too many people. This dangerous situation, which is particularly typical of regional conflicts, calls for joint efforts to constrain international arms markets.
Working out a mandate for the future negotiations is also a collective undertaking. Jointly with our allies, we have been finding solutions which bring general agreement closer.
On the question of unfulfilled hopes, we must mention the lack of progress in settling some of the most pressing problems, such as those of the Middle East, Central America, and certain others.
Today, it is clearer than ever what needs to be done. Elementary common sense enjoins that consolidation of forces must be placed above their fragmentation, and constructive dialogue must be placed above destructive scepticism. None of us can any longer waste our time on mutual fault-finding, on mutual recrimination and reproaches. The growing physical destruction of our planet is the verdict against the existing division of the world. It is because of that division that so many pages in the 1988 calendar have not been filled. It is foe the same reason that this year has had such a generous supply of sombre dates.
It is perhaps for the first time that we have seen the stark reality of the threat to our environment - a second front fast approaching and acquiring urgency equal to that of the nuclear and space threat. For the first time we have seen clearly that, in the absence of any global control, man's so-called peaceful constructive activity is turning into global aggression against the very foundations of life on earth. For the first time we have understood clearly what we had guessed: that the traditional view of national and universal security, based primarily on military means of defence, is now totally obsolete and must be urgently revised.
Faced with the threat of environmental catastrophe, the dividing lines of the bipolar ideological world are receding. The biosphere recognizes no division into blocs, alliances or systems. All share the same climatic system and no one is in a position to build his own isolated and independent line of environmental defence.
Man-made "second nature" - the technosphere - has turned out to be dangerously fragile. The consequences of many of its breakdowns are becoming international and global.
The environmental crisis is being exported on an increasing scale, with toxic technologies, facilities, products and wastes spreading, overtly or covertly, through the channels of economic relations.
Quite deliberate attempts are being made to turn densely populated areas of the third world into toxic waste dumps.
In a situation like this it is suicidal to try economically to rein in progressive national developments, to wear down an imaginary enemy by economic pressure. That is the kind of thinking that belongs to the Stone Age.
It is unreasonable to impede the economic reconstruction of countries that seek to restructure the energy industries and to introduce resource-saving and waste-free technologies, thus making the world less dangerous.
How much more sensible it is, as we ate proposing to the United States and other countries, to abolish some planned or ongoing military programmes and channel the funds thus released towards instituting an international regime of environmental security.
All the environmental disasters of this year have placed in the forefront the task of pooling and co-ordinating efforts to develop a global strategy for a rational management of the environment.
All of us - and I emphasize this, all of us - need an international programme to manage the risks involved in economic activities and to shift to alternative technologies that spare both man and nature.
We need resources to save our planet, instead of destroying it. I believe that the world community possesses such resources. But they have to be supplemented, first, by the will and readiness to act and, secondly, by an effective mechanism for international ecological co-operation.
It is quite clear that in this area, too, nothing can be done without the tools of the new political thinking. In this area, too, it must emphasize the factor of time. We have too little of it - very little - and problems are piling up faster than they can be solved.
Even the implementation of the positive decisions already adopted could take years and years. Just the physical elimination of intermediate- and shorter-range missiles will take three years of continuous daily work and the Treaty's entire sequence of implementation will take 13 years. This makes it incumbent upon us to take responsible decisions today.
What are our liabilities? Tens of thousands of nuclear warheads and hundreds of thousands of tons of toxic agents; mountains of conventional armaments; holes burnt in the ozone layer and the eroding biosphere; the greenhouse effect and the depletion of non-renewable sources of energy; acid rains and deserts devouring the green world; forest fires-and floods; drying up seas and dying fauna; terrorism against the peoples and aggression against nature.
What are cur assets? The world's growing maturity which makes it possible to raise and solve global problems on a planetary scale; a growing world-wide "Green Peace" movement; shared perceptions of environmental scientists and policy-makers who are becoming increasingly active as environmentalists, as demonstrated by the document of the States Parties to the Warsaw Treaty and the recent appeal issued by the peace movement; the report entitled "Our Common Future", prepared by the World Commission headed by Mrs. Brundtland, and the United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP) models of environmental renascence to counter environmental apocalypse; the experience of the past three years which attests to the possibility of removing corrosive growths from the body of the earth; the experience of pooling the efforts of States in the use of advanced technology, such as thermonuclear fusion and superconductivity, in the interests of human survival.
This year's calendar has also included another event; the inauguration of the Centre for the development of an international experimental thermonuclear reactor by scientists from very many countries who will chart the way towards inexhaustible sources of energy for the coming century and at the same time develop a model for concerting efforts in the interests of all peoples. 
Among our assets is the realization that a monopoly of a small number of countries over advanced technologies and attempts at all costs to keep others on the sidelines of the emerging science-and-information world may boomerang against the monopolists.
Among our assets is the United Nations, whose high efficiency has been so graphically demonstrated by the events of 1988. They have also highlighted a simple but very profound truth; when nations, particularly the great Powers, begin to co-operate, the United Nations gains in influence and strength, once again recapturing the spirit of its initial objectives.
It is true that the fable about two elephants stamping our grass is still popular. President Reagan's statement yesterday would seem to indicate that this grass is not being threatened.
We do not want to fight, and love is still a remote possibility.
But speaking seriously, the world community has gained much from the improvement in Soviet-American relations.
In this regard I am pleased to cite a remark by Mr. Perez de Cuellar.
The meeting between Gorbachev and Reagan, he said, has shown the world community an example of voluntary dialogue. Governments have suddenly realized that the United Nations is an entirely appropriate place for negotiations and solving problems. Precisely, but I would say "the most appropriate place". If in the past it has not always been that, the Organization itself is least to blame.
Let us speak frankly and say that many of us, including particularly the permanent members of the Security Council, are to blame for the fact that at some point certain fundamental values of our Organization embodied in its Charter were devalued. Now that they are regaining their initial level, it is our duty to learn the bitter lessons of the past for the sake of the future.
Today, for instance, the Soviet Union is reconsidering its previous attitude to the Organization's economic institutions. In particular, we attach great importance to the activities of the United Nations Economic and Social Council and would like to contribute to enhancing its effectiveness.
No country stands to gain by remaining aloof from the international forums of our Organization. Having drawn this more than obvious conclusion, we are asking: should not some of our partners take a fresh look at their attitude to the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)?
The permanent members of the Security Council should set an example in strengthening the authority of the united Nations, enhancing its role and expanding and enriching its peace-making functions. All of us here are witnesses to the beginning of the renaissance of our Organization. At the same time we are architects of this process. We shall enhance the role of the United Nations even more by concerted efforts to combat the threats to our environment. It is, we believe, precisely within the framework of the United Nations that international machinery should be established to formulate urgent decisions on pressing global problems, above all economic and environmental problems. 
The Soviet Union proposes a discussion on the question of how to turn the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) into an environmental council capable of taking effective decisions to ensure ecological security. It proposes that a three-event series of emergency meetings be held - of course, under the auspices of the United nations - to co-ordinate efforts in the field of ecological security; a consultative meeting of experts to discuss the health of the Earth, in 1989? a summit meeting of the leaders of, say, 15 or 20 States representing all continents, and the influential force of our time, the Non-Aligned Movement, in 1992 the holding of the second United Nations international conference on the environment, as planned, in 1992, or even earlier, but in any event at summit level.
We have been speaking of a calendar of real achievements, a calendar of ideas as yet unrealised, a calendar of hopes and plans for the future. The review of this year that we have undertaken is not an end in itself. What can be an end in itself is the inner moral objective of achieving progress and acceptance of the political need to identify the moment of truth, which from time immemorial has tended towards movement, towards overcoming inaction.
This year has been full of both movement and slow-downs. It has shown that Mikhail Gorbachev was right when he said;
"A complex and in many respects unusual situation is developing in the world. We are at the beginning of a new, long road that offers new prospects and new problems" Which tendency will prevail? What will gain the upper hand - the tendency towards further movement ahead or the inertia of stagnation?
The answer is to be found in abandoning certain dogmas, even though cast in the form of eternal truths. We have to write a new catechism of international existence, in which the beginning will be thought and reason, followed by deeds for the sake of our common salvation and development. We must stop sermonizing from lofty international rostrums and recognize the principle of equality in international dialogue.
As for the dogma of "peace through strength", let us leave it to those who worship the faded commandments of the past. The keynote of history is peace through reason, and this, too, is a commandment foe the future.
The past has great power over us, but although that is true, the future has an even greater gravitational pull. The poetic metaphor, "to win the affection of space, to heed the call of the future", takes on a lofty political meaning.
Let us not be deaf to that call. Let us respond to it by really uniting to save life on our Earth.
Let us begin now.
﻿
Half a world away from this place of peace, the firing, the killing, the bloodshed in two merciless conflicts have for the first time in recent memory diminished. After terrible new names, names such as Halabja, Maidan Shahr and Spin Buldak, have been added to the toll-call of human horror, there is today hope of peace in the Persian Gulf and Afghanistan.
So too, in the highlands and coastal cities of southern Africa, places of civil war, places of occupation by foreign troops, talk of peace is heard, peace for the tortured nation of Angola. Sixty-five hundred miles east, in the South-East Asian country of Cambodia, there is hope now of a settlement and the removal of Viet Nam's occupying forces. Finally, in this hemisphere, where only 12 years ago one third of the people of Latin America lived under democratic rule, some 90 per cent do so today. And especially in Central America, nations such as El Salvador, once threatened by the anarchy of the death squad and the spectre of totalitarian rule, now know the hope of self-government and the prospect of economic growth. 
Another change, a change that if it endures may go down as one of the signal accomplishments of our history, a change that is cause for shaking the head in wonder, is also upon us; a change going to the source of post-war tensions and to the once seemingly impossible dream of ending the twin threats of our time - totalitarianism and thermonuclear world war.
For the first time, the differences between East and West - fundamental differences over important moral questions dealing with the worth of the individual and whether Governments shall control people or people control Governments - for the first time these differences have shown signs of easing, easing to the point where there are not just troop withdrawals from places such as Afghanistan, but also talk in the East of reform and greater freedom of the press, of assembly and of religion. Yes, fundamental differences remain, but should talk of reform become more than that, should it become reality, there is the prospect of not only a new era in Soviet-United States relations but a new age of world peace; for such reform can bring peace. History teaches, and my country has always believed that, where the rights of the individual and the people are enshrined, war is a distant prospect. For it is not people who make war; only Governments do that.
I stand at this rostrum, then, at a moment of hope; hope not just for the peoples of the United States and the Soviet Union, but for all the peoples of the world, and hope too for the dream of peace among nations, the dream that began the United Nations. Precisely because of these changes, today the United Nations has the opportunity to live and breathe and work as never before.
Already, Mr. Secretary-General, you, through your persistence, patience and unyielding will, have shown in working towards peace in Afghanistan and the Persian Gulf how valuable the United Nations can be. We salute you for these accomplishments. In Geneva at this very hour there are numerous negotiations under way: multilateral negotiations at the Conference on Disarmament, as well as bilateral negotiations on a range of issues between the Soviets and ourselves. These negotiations, some of them under United Nations auspices, involve a broad arms-control agenda: strategic offensive weapons, strategic defence and space, nuclear testing, and chemical warfare - whose urgency we have witnessed anew in recent days.
And the negotiators ate busy. Over the last few years they h iv/e been engaged in more than an academic exercise. There is movement; the log-jam is broken. Only recently, when the United States and the Soviet Union signed the intermediate-range nuclear forces (INF) agreement, an entire class of United States and Soviet nuclear missiles was eliminated for the first time in history. Progress continues on negotiations to reduce strategic weapons in massive number, with effective verification, and talks will begin soon on conventional reductions in Europe.
Much of the reason for all this goes back, I believe, to Geneva, to the small chateau beside the lake where I and the Soviet General Secretary had the first of several fireside chats - exchanges characterized by frankness, but friendliness too. I said at the first meeting in Geneva that this was a unique encounter between two people who had the power to start a third world war or to begin a new age of peace among nations. I also said that peace conferences, arms negotiations and proposals for treaties could make sense only if they were part of a wider context, a context in which we sought to explore and resolve the deeper underlying differences between us. I said to Mr. Gorbachev then, as I have said to the Assembly before, that nations do not mistrust each other because they are armed; they are armed because they mistrust each other. 

In that place, by that peaceful lake in neutral Switzerland, Mr. Gorbachev and I did begin a new relationship based not just on engagement over the single issue of arras control but on a broader agenda about our deeper differences, an agenda of human rights, regional conflicts and bilateral exchanges between our peoples. Even on the arms-control issue itself we agreed to go beyond the past, to seek not just treaties that permitted building weapons to higher levels, but revolutionary agreements that actually reduced and even eliminated a whole class of nuclear weapons.
What was begun that morning in Geneva has shown results: in the INF Treaty? in my recent visit to Moscow; in my opportunity to meet there with Soviet citizens and dissidents and speak of human rights; and to speak too, in the Lenin Hills of Moscow, to the young people of the Soviet Union about the wonder and splendour of human freedom. The results of that morning in Geneva are seen in peace conferences now under way around the world on regional conflicts and in the work of the United Nations here in New York as well as in Geneva.
But history teaches caution. Indeed, that very building in Geneva, where important negotiations have taken place - those on the Geneva Accords on Afghanistan, and the Iran-Iraq negotiations, for example - we see today as stone-like testimony to a failed dream of peace in another time. The Palais des Nations was the headquarters of the League of Nations, an institution that was to symbolize an end to all war. Yet that institution and its noble purpose ended with the Second World War; ended because the chance of peace was not seized in the 1930s by the nations of the world, ended because humanity did not find the courage to isolate the aggressors, to reject schemes of government that served the State, not the people. We are here today determined that no such fate shall befall the United Nations. We are determined that the United Nations shall succeed and serve the cause of peace for humankind.
So we realize that, even in this time of hope, the chance of failure is teal, but this knowledge does not discourage us: it spurs us on. For the stakes are high; do we falter and fail now, and bring down upon ourselves the just anger of future generations? Or do we continue the work of the founders of this institution, and see to it that, at last, freedom is enshrined and humanity knows war no longer, and that this place, this floor, shall be truly "the world's last battlefield"?
We are determined that it shall be so. So we turn now to the agenda of peace. Let us begin by addressing a concern that was much on my mind when I met with Mr. Gorbachev in the Kremlin as well as on the minds of Soviet citizens I met in Moscow. It is also an issue that I know is of immediate importance to the members of this Assembly who, this fall, commemorate the fortieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
That Declaration says plainly what those who seek peace can forget only at the greatest peril that peace rests on one foundation; observance of the "inalienable rights of all members of the human family". In a century where human rights have been denied by totalitarian governments on a scale never before seen in history, with so many millions deliberately starved or eliminated as a matter of State policy - a history, it has been said, of blood, stupidity and barbed wire - few can wonder why peace has proved so elusive.	
Well, let us understand. If we would have peace, we must acknowledge the elementary rights of our fellow human beings, in our own land and in other lands. If we would have peace, the trampling of the human spirit must cease. Human rights is not for some, some of the time. Human rights, as the Universal Declaration adopted by this Assembly in 1948 proclaims, is "for all peoples and all nations". And for all time.
This regard for human rights as the foundation of peace is at the heart of the United Nations. Those who starve in Ethiopia, those who die among the Kurds, those who face racial injustice in South Africa, those who still cannot write or speak freely in the Soviet Union, those who cannot worship in the Ukraine, those who struggle for life and freedom on boats in the South China Sea, those who cannot publish or assemble in Managua - all of these are more than just an item on your agenda. It must be a first concern, an issue above others. For when human rights concerns are not paramount at the United Nations - when the Universal Declaration of Human Rights is not honoured in these halls and meeting rooms - then the very credibility of this Organization is at stake, the very purpose of its existence in question.
That is why, when progress is made in human rights, the United Nations grows stronger and the United States is glad of it. For example, following a two-year ¡ effort led by the United States, the United Nations Commission on Human Rights took a major step towards ending the double standards and cynicism that had characterized too much of its past. For years, Cuba, a blatant violator of its citizens' human rights, has escaped United Nations censure or even scrutiny. This year, Cuba has responded to pressure generated by the Commission on Human Rights by accepting an investigation into its human rights abuses. Fidel Castro has already begun to free some political prisoners, improve prison conditions, and tolerate the existence of a small, independent national human rights group.
More must be done. The United Nations must be relentless and unyielding in seeking change, in Cuba and elsewhere. And we must also see to it that the Universal Declaration itself is not debased with episodes like the resolution "Zionism is racism". Respect for human rights is the first and fundamental mission of this body, the most elementary obligation of its members. Indeed, wherever one turns in the world today, there is a new awareness, a growing passion for human rights. The people of the world become united: new groups, new coalitions form, coalitions that commit: government, that work against discrimination, that fight religious or political repression, unlawful imprisonment, torture or execution. As those I spoke to at Spaso House said to me last June: Such movements make a difference.
Turning now to regional conflicts, we feel again the uplift of hope. In the Gulf War between Iran and Iraq - one of the bloodiest conflicts since the Second World War - we have a cease-fire. The resolution and the firmness of the allied nations in keeping the Persian Gulf open to international shipping not only upheld the rule of law, it helped prevent further spread of the conflict and laid the basis for peace. So, too, the Security Council's decisive resolution in July a year ago has become the blueprint for a peaceful Gulf. Let this war - a war in which there has been no victor or vanquished, only victims - let this war end now. Let both Iran and Iraq co-operate with the Secretary-General and the Security Council in implementing resolution 598 (1978). Let peace come.
Moving on to a second region, I would recall that when I first addressed the United Nations General Assembly in 1983, world attention was focused on the brutal invasion and illegal occupation of Afghanistan. After nearly nine long years of war, the courage and determination of the Afghan people and the Afghan freedom fighters have held sway - and today, an end to the occupation is in sight. On April 14, the USSR signed the Geneva Accords, which were negotiated under United Nations auspices by Pakistan and the Kabul regime. We encourage the Soviet Union to complete its troop withdrawal at the earliest possible date, so that the Afghan people can freely determine their future without further outside interference.
In southern Africa, too, years of patient diplomacy and support for those in Angola who seek self-determination are having their effect. We look forward to an accord between the Governments of Angola, Cuba, and South Africa that will bring about a complete withdrawal of all foreign troops - primarily Cuban - from Angola. We look forward as well to full implementation of United Nations Security Council resolution 435 (1978) and our longstanding goal of independence for Namibia. We continue to support a growing consensus among African leaders who also believe there can be no end to conflict in the region until there is national reconciliation within Angola.
There are new hopes for Cambodia, a nation whose freedom and independence we seek just as avidly as we sought the freedom and independence of Afghanistan. We urge the rapid removal of all Vietnamese troops and a settlement that will prevent the return of the Khmer Rouge to power, permitting instead the establishment of a genuinely representative government - a government that will, at last, respect fully the rights of the people of Cambodia and end the hideous suffering they have so bravely and needlessly borne.
In other critical areas, we applaud the Secretary-General's efforts to structure a referendum on the Western Sahara. In the Mediterranean, direct talks between Greek and Turkish Cypriot common ties hold much promise for accord in that divided island nation. Finally, we look to a peaceful solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict. So, too, the unnatural division of Europe remains a critical obstacle to Soviet-American relations. 
In most of these areas, then, we see progress and, again, we are glad of it. Only a few years ago, all of these and other conflicts were burning dangerously out of control. Indeed, the invasion of Afghanistan and the apparent failure of will among democratic and peace-loving nations to deter such events seemed to cause a climate where aggression by nations large and small was epidemic, a climate the world had not seen since the 1930s. Only this time, larger war was avoided - avoided because the free and peaceful nations of the world recovered their strength of purpose and will. And now the United Nations is providing valuable assistance in helping this epidemic to recede.
And because we are resolved to keep it so, I would be remiss in my duty if I did not now take note here of the one exception to progress in regional conflicts. I refer here to the continuing deterioration of human rights in Nicaragua and the refusal of the tiny elite now ruling that nation to honour promises of democracy made to their own people and to the international community. This elite - in calling itself revolutionary - seeks no real revolution; the use of the term is subterfuge, deception for hiding the oldest, most corrupt vice of alls man's age-old will to power, his lust to control the lives and steal the freedom of others.
That is why, as President, I will continue to urge the Congress and the American public to stand behind those who resist this attempt to impose a totalitarian regime on the people of Nicaragua; that the United States will continue to stand with those who are threatened by this regime's aggression against its neighbours in Central America.
Today, I also call on the Soviet Union to show in Central America the same spirit of constructive realism it has shown in other regional conflicts; to assist in bringing conflict in Central America to a close by halting the flow of billions of dollars worth of arms and ammunition to the Sandinista regime; a regime whose goals of regional domination, while ultimately doomed, can continue to cause great suffering to the people of that area and risk to Soviet-American relations unless action is taken now.
With regard to the arms reduction agenda, I have already mentioned the importance of the INF Treaty and the momentum developed in the strategic arms reduction talks (START). The draft START treaty is a lengthy process filled with bracketed language designating sections of disagreement between the two sides. But through this summer in Geneva, those brackets have diminished; there is every reason to believe this process can continue. I can tell this Assembly that it is highly doubtful such a treaty can be accomplished in a few months, but I can tell you that a year from now is a possibility - more than a possibility. But we have no deadline. No agreement is better than a bad agreement. The United States remains hopeful, and we acknowledge the spirit of co-operation shown by the Soviet Union in these negotiations. We also look for that spirit to be applied to our concerns about compliance with existing agreements.
So, too, our discussions on nuclear testing and defence and space have been useful. But let me here stress to the General Assembly that much of the momentum in nuclear-arms-control negotiations is due to technological progress itself, especially in the potential for space-based defensive systems. I believe that the determination of the United States to research and develop and, when ready, deploy such defensive systems - systems targeted to destroy missiles, not people - accounts for a large share of the progress made in recent years in Geneva. With such systems, for the first time, in case of accidental launch or the act of a madman somewhere, major Powers will not be faced with the single option of massive retaliation, but will instead have the chance of a saner choice: to shield against an attack instead of avenging it. So, too, as defensive systems grow in effectiveness, they reduce the threat and the value of greater and greater offensive arsenals. Only recently, briefings I have received in the Oval Office indicate that progress toward such systems may be even more rapid and less costly than we had at first thought. Today, the United States reaffirms its commitment to its strategic defence initiative and our offer to share the benefits of strategic defences with others.
And yet, even as diplomatic and technological progress holds out the hope of at last diminishing the awful cloud of nuclear terror we have lived under in the post-war era, even at this moment another ominous terror is loose once again in the world, a terror we thought the world had put behind, a terror that looms at us now from the long-buried past, from ghostly, scarring trenches and the haunting, wan faces of millions dead in one of the most inhumane conflicts of all time.
Poison gas; chemical warfare: the terror of it; the horror of it! We condemn it. The use of chemical weapons in the Iran-Iraq war, beyond its tragic human toll, jeopardizes the moral and legal strictures that have held those weapons in check since the First World War. Let this tragedy spark reaffirmation of the Geneva Protocol outlawing the use of chemical weapons. I call upon the signatories to that Protocol, as well as other concerned States, to convene a conference to consider actions that we can take together to reverse the serious erosion of this treaty. We urge all nations to co-operate in negotiating a verifiable, truly global ban on chemical weapons at the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva.
It is incumbent upon all civilized nations to ban, once and for all - and on a verifiable and global basis - the use of chemical and gas warfare.
Finally, we must redouble our efforts to stop further proliferation of nuclear weapons in the world. Likewise, proliferation in other high-technology weapons such as ballistic missiles, is reaching global proportions, exacerbating regional rivalries in ways that can have global implications. The number of potential suppliers is growing at an alarming rate, and more must be done to halt the spread of these weapons. This was a matter of discussion last week between Secretary Shultz and Foreign Minister Shevardnadze. Talks between American and Soviet experts begin on this today; and we hope to see a multilateral effort to avoid having areas of tension like the Middle East becoming even more deadly battlegrounds than they already are.
Rut in most of these areas we see not only progress but also the potential for an increasingly vital role for multilateral efforts and institutions like the United Nations. That is why now more than ever the United Nations must continue to increase its effectiveness through budget and programme reform. The United Nations already is enacting sweeping measures affecting personnel reductions, budgeting by consensus, and the establishment of programme priorities. These actions are extremely important. The progress on reforms has allowed me to release funds withheld under congressional restrictions. I expect that the reform programme will continue and that further funds will be released in our new fiscal year.
Let me say here that we congratulate the United Nations on the work it has done in three areas of special concern. First, our struggle against the scourge of terrorism and State-sponsored terrorism must continue; and we must also end the scourge of hostage-taking. Second, the work of the World Health Organization in co-ordinating and advancing research on AIDS is vital. All international efforts in this area must be redoubled. The AIDS crisis is a grave one; we must move as one to meet it. 
So, too, is the drug crisis. We are moving now toward a new anti-drug-trafficking convention. This important treaty will be completed in December. I am confident that other strong United Nations drug-control programmes will also follow. The American people are profoundly concerned and deeply angered. We will not tolerate the drug traffickers. We mean to make war on them - and we believe this is one war the United Nations can endorse and participate in. Yes, the United Nations is a better place than it was eight years ago - and so, too, is the world. But the real issue of reform in the United Nations is not limited to fiscal and administrative improvements; it includes also a higher sort of reform, an intellectual and philosophical reform, a reform of old views about the relationship between the individual and the State. 
Few developments, for example, have been more encouraging to the United States than the special session on Africa that this body held two and a half years ago - a session at which the Members of the United Nations joined in calling as one for free-market incentives and a lessening of State controls to spur economic development. 
At one of the first international assemblies of my presidency, in Cancun, Mexico, I said that history demonstrates that, time and again, in place after place, economic growth and human progress make their greatest strides in countries that encourage economic freedom; that individual farmers, labourers, owners, traders and managers are the heart and soul of development. Trust them, because where they are allowed to create and build, where they are given a personal stake in deciding economic policies and benefiting from their success, societies become more dynamic, prosperous, progressive and free. We believe in freedom; we know that it works.
This is the immutable lesson of the post-war era: that freedom works; that, even more, freedom and peace work together. Every year that passes, everywhere in the world, this lesson is taking hold - from the People's Republic of China to Cameroon, from Bolivia to Botswana, and, yes, in the citadel of Marxism-Leninism itself. No, my country did not invent this synergy of peace and freedom, but, believe me, we impose no restrictions on the free export of our more than two centuries of experience with it. Free people, blessed by economic opportunity and protected by laws that respect the dignity of the individual, are not driven towards war or the domination of others. Here, then, is the way to world peace. But we Americans champion freedom not only because it is practical and beneficial but because it is also just, morally right.
Here I should like to note that I have addressed this assemblage more often than any of my predecessors and that this is the last occasion on which I shall do so. Therefore I hope that I may be permitted some closing reflections.
The world is currently witnessing another celebration of international co-operation. At the Olympics we see nations joining together in the competition of sports, and we see young people, who know precious little of the resentments of their elders, coming together as one.
One of our young athletes, from a home of modest means, said that she drew the strength for her achievement from another source of wealth. "We were rich as a family" she said about the love she was given and the values she was taught. I dare to hope that in the sentiment of that young athlete we see a sign of the rediscovery of old and tested values; values such as family - the first and most important unit of society, where all values and learning begin, an institution to be cherished and protected·, values, too, such as work, community, freedom and faith, for it is here we find the deeper rationale for the cause of human rights and world peace.
Our own experience on this continent, the American experience, though brief, has had one unmistakable encounter, an insistence on the preservation of one sacred truth: it is a truth that our first President, our founding father, passed on in the first farewell address made to the American people; it is a truth that I hope you will permit me to mention in these remarks of farewell, a truth embodied in our Declaration of Independence: that the case for inalienable rights, the idea of human dignity, the notion of conscience above compulsion, can be made only in the context of higher law, only in the context of what one of the founders of this Organization, Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjöld, called "devotion to something which is greater and higher than we are ourselves."
This is the endless cycle, the final truth to which humankind seems always to return - that religion and morality, faith in something higher, are prerequisites for freedom, and that justice and peace within ourselves is the first step toward justice and peace in the world and for the ages.
Yes, this is a place of great debate and grave discussion. Yet I cannot help but note here that one of our founding fathers - the most worldly of men, an internationalist, Benjamin Franklin - interrupted the proceedings of our own constitutional convention to make much the same point.
I cannot help but think this morning of other beginnings - of where and when I first read those words "and they shall beat their swords into ploughshares" and "your young men shall see visions and your old men shall dream dreams". This morning, my thoughts go to her who gave me many things in life but whose most important gift was the knowledge of the happiness and solace to be gained in prayer. It is the greatest help I have had in my presidency, and I recall here Lincoln's words when he said
"Only the most foolish of men would think he could confront the duties of the office I now hold without turning to someone stronger, a power above all others. "
I think, then, of her and others like her in that small town in Illinois, gentle people who possessed something that those who hold positions of power sometimes forget to prize. No one of them could ever have imagined that the boy from the banks of the Rock River would come to this moment and have this opportunity. But, had they been told that it would happen, I think they would have been a bit disappointed if I had not spoken here for what they knew so wells that when we grow weary of the world and its troubles, when our faith in humanity falters, it is then that we must seek contort and refreshment of spirit in a deeper source of wisdom, one greater than ourselves.
So, if future generations do say of us that in our time peace came closer, that we did bring about new seasons of truth and justice, it will be cause for pride. But it will be a cause of greater pride still if it is also said that we were wise enough to know that the deliberations of great leaders and great bodies are but an overture, that the truly majestic music, the music of freedom, justice and peace, is the music made in forgetting self and seeking in silence the will of Him who made us.
Thank you for your hospitality over the years. I bid you now farewell, and God bless you.
﻿
May I begin by congratulating you warmly, Sir, on your election to the presidency of this session of the General Assembly. I am sure that, with your remarkable ability and rich experience and the concerted efforts of representatives from various countries, this session will be a success. I also wish to take this opportunity to express my heartfelt thanks to your predecessor, Mr. Peter Florin, for his outstanding contribution in fulfilling the high mission of President of the last session.
When the forty-second session of the General Assembly opened here a year ago people already saw signs of relaxation in the prolonged international tension. Now, a year later, when we look at the world situation again, the trend towards relaxation is definitely gaining greater momentum. Some problems that have long been a cause of concern are heading towards solution. The Soviet-United States Treaty on the Elimination of Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles - the INF Treaty - signed last December after many years of negotiations, is being implemented. 
Agreement was finally reached in April tills year on the Afghan question, which has been a cause of grave concern to the international community for more than eight years, and the Soviet troop withdrawal is now under way.
Another issue of grave international concern is the eight-year-long war between Iran and Iraq, but the situation has at last taken a Favourable turn thanks to acceptance of Security Council resolution 598 (1987) by the two sides. The two countries have agreed to a cease-fire and are on the way to a negotiated peace. In south-west Africa, after long years of war and upheaval, the parties concerned have reached agreement in principle on the withdrawal of foreign troops from Angola and on the initial steps to implement Security Council resolution 435 (1978) regarding the independence of Namibia. There have also been positive developments in the Horn of Africa, Western Sahara and the eastern Mediterranean. Efforts towards a settlement of the Middle East and Central American questions are also being made.
Dialogue is playing an increasingly prominent role in improving the international situation. There has been frequent dialogue between the United States and the Soviet Union, and also fairly active dialogue between the parties concerned on questions of regional conflicts. In various regional organizations and conferences in Asia, Africa and Latin America, in the Non-Aligned Movement and in many bilateral contacts, countries are seeking settlement of international, regional or bilateral issues through dialogue. This year saw the first meeting of Foreign Ministers of the Balkan region, which was aimed at boosting co-operation among the Balkan countries. In order to ease the situation on the Korean peninsula and promote the peaceful reunification of Korea, the north and the south of Korea are making contacts. Facts show fully that in today's world dialogue is taking the place of confrontation, and the tendency to seek the peaceful settlement of international disputes is growing. This is a striking feature of the present international situation. Obviously, it is the outcome of the common efforts of all countries and is deeply rooted in the events of the time.
In the past 40 years or more since the Second World War history has made giant strides forward. The colonial system is now a thing of the past. Former colonies and, dependencies have become sovereign States one after another and stand on their own feet in the family of nations. Respect for each other's independence and sovereignty and opposition to foreign aggression and oppression has become a most important feature in the international politics of the day. The power politics that prevailed in former days are becoming less and less operative. Facts have shown time and time again that even the super-Powers, which possess strength unmatched anywhere in the world, cannot conquer weaker and smaller nations by force and impose their will on others. All their attempts have inevitably failed because of the resolute resistance of the peoples subjected to aggression and the widespread condemnation by the international community. This is thought-provoking.
While the danger of war still exists, the forces of peace are steadily growing. People all over the world have voiced an increasingly strong demand for peace and against war. None of the third-world. East European or West European countries or other developed countries want to go through the holocaust of another world war. Even the super-Powers, which possess sufficient nuclear armaments to destroy the Earth several times over, do not believe that they could win a nuclear war. All these factors have helped to check the outbreak of another world war.
Problems among developing countries ought to be settled through negotiation. Unfortunately, some differences have given rise to armed conflicts. There is a growing trend in developing countries towards seeking the peaceful settlement of disputes through dialogue. This indicates that they are becoming more and more aware that their major historical task is to develop their national economies and improve the quality of people's lives, and that armed conflicts among themselves can only deplete their national strength, to the detriment of their fundamental interests. War means mutual disaster, while peace brings mutual benefit. If the third-world countries handle their relations in this spirit, it will greatly hasten their development and enable them to play a more effective role in the cause of maintaining regional and global peace. 
Rapidly developing science and technology, which is being translated into unprecedented great productive forces, spurs the development of the economy and is changing the face of human society. This is a salient feature of the present era. The aggregate strength of a country depends more and more on its economic, scientific and technological level. A review of post-war history clearly indicates that countries which practise hegemonism and engage in the arms race, foreign expansion and military conflicts have found their national strength seriously weakened, while those countries which devote themselves to the development of science, technology, the economy and education have rapidly grown strong. Some have even risen in the world as great economic Powers with advanced science and technology. Meanwhile, the third world is very active in the international arena as a growing political force. Many regional political and economic organizations are also playing an ever more important part in international affairs. With the combination of these elements, the world is moving from bipolarization to multipolarization, which, in our view, is conducive to peace.
It is against such a backdrop that there emerges the trend of dialogue replacing confrontation and of the peaceful settlement of international disputes. These developments are a source of encouragement to the people of all countries.
However, is the present world free from troubles? Obviously it is not. The root cause of turbulence in the world has not yet been removed. The peoples of all countries must make unremitting efforts to safeguard world peace.
The world's peoples are faced with the common task of halting the arms race and striving for disarmament in order to preserve peace. The recently concluded third special session of the United Nations General Assembly devoted to disarmament represented a major effort by the international community to push forward the process of disarmament. Although the special session failed to achieve specific results because of the rigid positions taken by one or two countries, in disregard
  

of the reasonable demand of the vast majority of countries, the statements made by representatives of many countries and non-governmental organizations and the suggestions and propositions that they put forward mirrored the universal desire of the international community for peace and disarmament. The powerful public opinion arising there from has a positive impact on the promotion of the disarmament process. The special session enabled people to have a clearer picture of the present state of the arms race and the correct orientation of and approach to disarmament. On the question of disarmament, the Chinese delegation deems it necessary to expound the following three points at this session of the General Assembly.
First, it is a welcome development that the United States and the Soviet Union have taken a step forward on the road to disarmament. However, we cannot but note that the huge nuclear arsenals they possess still pose a threat to world peace. The arms race between them is still going on. They are trying greatly to improve and upgrade the quality and function of their respective nuclear weapons, vying with each other to develop high-tech weaponry and extending the arms race to outer space. Hence, the disarmament task remains arduous and formidable.
Secondly, countries across the world have repeatedly reaffirmed the important principle that the super-Powers, which possess the largest and most sophisticated arsenals, bear a special responsibility for disarmament and should take the lead in drastically cutting their arms. This is a correct direction and an effective approach for the realization of disarmament. We hope that the super-Powers will, in conformity with the trend of the times, quicken their pace on the road to disarmament and reach agreement on a drastic reduction of nuclear weapons at an early date, starting with a 50 per cent cut in strategic nuclear weapons. Their talks on conventional disarmament should also be speeded up and the arms race in outer space, in all its forms, should be halted. 
Thirdly, the question of disarmament concerns the security interests of all countries. Countries, big or small, strong or weak, all have the right to participate in the discussion and settlement of the disarmament question on an equal footing, and can each play a positive role. The super-Powers should respect and take seriously into consideration the reasonable demands and propositions set forth by the small and medium-sized countries. The United Nations and other multilateral disarmament agencies are important venues for the discussion and solution of this question by all parties on an equal basis. Their role should be strengthened. Multilateral and bilateral disarmament negotiations should complement and promote each other.
The third special session of the United Nations General Assembly devoted to disarmament showed that most countries have identical or similar views on the aforementioned questions. We hope that the current session of the General Assembly will give full expression to the strong desire of these countries, and make significant progress towards disarmament. While there is greater effort to seek the peaceful settlement of regional conflicts through dialogue, the Flames of war in quite a Few conflict-ridden areas are yet to be extinguished. Dialogue on a number of issues has failed to make substantive progress. On some other issues, although agreements have been reached, the successful implementation of those agreements requires continued efforts by the parties concerned. In international relations the Chinese Government has all along advocated the observance of the five principles of mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence. As regards regional conflicts, it has always stood for a fair and reasonable political settlement; therefore aggression must be stopped, foreign troops withdrawn and the sovereignty of all countries respected. Differences among developing countries should all the more be settled appropriately through peaceful negotiations on mutually acceptable terms.
The Chinese Government has consistently opposed Israel's policy of aggression and expansion and supported the just struggle of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples and the efforts of the Arab countries and the Palestine Liberation Organization (РLO) to seek a solution to the Middle East question. We hope to see an early, fair and comprehensive solution to the question and an end to the turmoil caused by four decades of war, so that the people of the Middle East may enjoy peace again.
We are concerned about peace and stability on the Korean peninsula. China supports the reasonable proposition of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea for the independent and peaceful reunification of the country through consultation and dialogue and opposes any action that adds to tension on the peninsula.
Following the decision of the Soviet Union to pull out lt4 troops from Afghanistan, the international community has voiced an even stronger demand for Vietnamese troop withdrawal from Kampuchea and for an end to the war of aggression. Regrettably, however, what the Vietnamese authorities have been doing runs counter to the desire and demand of the international community. While professing their readiness to withdraw their troops, they have put forward unreasonable demands in an attempt to delay their troop withdrawal and legalize the results of their aggression, so as to get what they have failed to achieve in their 10-year war of aggression. It should be stressed that on the Kampuchean question Viet Nam is the aggressor and the Vietnamese troops are the only foreign troops on Kampuchean territory. It is explicitly and solemnly stated in the very first Article of the United Nations Charter that to maintain international peace and security it is essential to take effective measures for the suppression of acts of aggression. Since the Vietnamese invasion of Kampuchea, the General Assembly has for nine successive years adopted resolutions calling for the withdrawal of foreign troops from Kampuchea so as to facilitate the settlement of the Kampuchean problem by the Kampuchean people themselves, free from outside interference. All this shows that the international community brooks no legalization of the results of aggression. The Chinese Government considers it necessary for the current session of the General Assembly to reiterate those just demands and to uphold the sanctity of the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter.
The Chinese Government has for the past decade worked hard towards a fair and reasonable settlement of the Kampuchean question. Recently it has further elaborated its position on the question, which can be summed up in the following five points.
First, a complete withdrawal by Viet Nam of its troops from Kampuchea is the key to a settlement of the Kampuchean question. The Vietnamese side should produce, as soon as possible, a timetable for its troop withdrawal from Kampuchea within a short period of time. 
Secondly, we favour the establishment, with Prince Norodom Sihanouk in charge, of a provisional quadripartite coalition government in Kampuchea as Viet Nam withdraws its troops from the country. Each faction's candidates for the provisional government should be proposed by the faction itself but should be acceptable to the other parties concerned. We stand for a quadripartite coalition in Kampuchea. We are against the exclusion of any of the four factions from it or the exercise of power by any one faction alone.
Thirdly, upon the establishment of the provisional quadripartite coalition government of Kampuchea, a freeze should be imposed on the activities of the Kampuchean armed forces of all factions. They should refrain from becoming involved in politics and interfering in the general election, so that the Kampuchean people may conduct a free election in the absence of outside interference and the threat of force. To prevent a civil war in Kampuchea the existing armed forces of all factions might be disbanded, to facilitate the creation of a unified national defence force composed of an equal number of officers and men from each of the four factions, under a unified command.
Fourthly, practical and effective international supervision should be instituted over Viet Nam's troop withdrawal, the maintenance of peace in Kampuchea and the conduct of a free election there. To that end the Chinese Government supports the proposition for the sending to Kampuchea of an international peace-keeping force and an international control committee.
Fifthly, when the parties concerned have reached agreement on a political settlement of the Kampuchean question, China will be ready to join other countries in an international guarantee for an independent, neutral and non-aligned Kampuchea.
It must be clear to all that China seeks no self-interest in Kampuchea as in any other region of the world. The Chinese Government's position is based entirely on the principle of opposing aggression, upholding justice and safeguarding the United Nations Charter and the norms governing international relations. It is our hope that the international community will continue to work under this principle for a fair and just settlement of the Kampuchean question.
We should attach adequate importance to world economic problems while paying attention to the international political situation. The current world economic development is extremely uneven, despite the presence of a few positive factors. Worrisome problems still exist and some have even gone from bad to worse. While developed countries have enjoyed economic growth for six successive years, developing countries have suffered severe economic setbacks. Many of them have witnessed increasing signs of stagnation in the process of development. The economic difficulties of African countries have aroused wide concern. The heavy debt burden, reduced inflow of funds, worsening trade terms and growing protectionism have all seriously hampered the economic growth of developing countries. All this demonstrates that present international economic relations are becoming increasingly out of accord with the needs of economic growth in the world and of developing countries in particular.
In the present-day world there is even greater economic interdependence among countries. Developed countries will find it difficult to sustain their economic growth if developing countries long remain in difficulties and their economies cannot move ahead. It is an urgent task in the international economic sphere to improve, by effective measures, the external environment of developing countries in such fields as commodities, trade, debt, capital, currency and finance. That would contribute not only to resumed growth and development of developing countries but also to the stability and growth of the world economy. Recently the Group of 77 has proposed the convening of a special session of the United Nations General Assembly devoted to economic matters. The United Nations Secretary-General, Mr. Perez de Cuellar, has also proposed a summit meeting similar to the Cancun Meeting. The Chinese Government seconds those proposals and hopes to see increased North-South co-operation through dialogue and the invigoration of the world economy.
Over the past few years, regional economic co-operation has increased markedly, which is an important trend in international economic relations. We believe that regional co-operation based on equality and mutual benefit is of positive significance, for it helps the development of different regions. At the same time I should like to emphasize that in the present world economic conditions neither a country nor a region can achieve development and prosperity behind closed doors. It has to open itself to the outside world. Trade protectionism, while harming others, is in the final analysis detrimental to the initiator as well. It is our hope that countries and regions across the world will open up to and complement one another, to the benefit of their common development and prosperity.
As there is growing regional co-operation in the world, co-operation and development in the Asia-Pacific region have attracted more and more attention in recent years. This region is indeed making rapid economic progress and has tremendous potential. However, the development level varies with different countries in the region, where many countries remain underdeveloped or even impoverished. As a large country in the region, China supports regional economic co-operation. China's development is closely linked with that of the Asia-Pacific region. We hope to see closer co-operation and the common prosperity of all countries in the region. 
China will implement unswervingly the policy of deepening reform and wider opening to the outside world. It is opening itself to the whole world, including the developed and developing countries, countries whose social systems are similar to or different from the system of China. Recently, we have adopted new measures in an effort to restructure our foreign trade and improve our investment environment. Most important, we have mapped out an economic development strategy for China's coastal regions. Those regions, which cover an area of about 320,000 square kilometres with a population of 160 million, boast a better infrastructure, greater economic and technological strength and higher quality of labour force. Accelerating their opening-up and strengthening their multi faceted, multi channel and multiform economic and technological co-operation with the Asia-Pacific region and the rest of the world will not only speed up China's economic development but also make positive contributions to the prosperity of the Asia-Pacific region and that of the world as a whole.
This year marks the fortieth anniversary of the adoption by the United Nations of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Forty years ago the people and Governments of various countries that had suffered from the catastrophe of the two world wars worked out and adopted that Declaration through their joint efforts. It is the first international instrument that systematically and specifically sets forth respect for and protection of fundamental human rights. Despite its historical limitations, the Declaration has exerted a Far-reaching influence on the development of post-war international human rights activities and has played a positive role in that regard. In the past four decades the concept of human rights has continuously developed, and its content has been enriched and its theory improved. A series of subsequent declarations and conventions concerning human rights has further developed and stipulated in detail the specific content of each human right. In this connection particular mention should be made of such important items as the right to national self-determination, the right to racial equality, the permanent sovereign right over natural wealth and resources and the right to development. All those are of great significance to the fight for equality, freedom and liberation waged by the nations and peoples under the apartheid system of foreign aggression and oppression, to the efforts made by countries newly independent in the post-war period to preserve their sovereignty and territorial integrity and to the demands of the developing countries for restructuring the irrational international economic situation. The Chinese Government has always appreciated and supported the United Nations efforts to promote and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms, in accordance with the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter.
Three years ago, from this solemn rostrum, the Chinese leader Zhao Ziyang pointed out that the world needs the United Nations, while the United Nations needs the support of the world. Events have repeatedly testified to that important thesis. With the passage of time the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter, which are increasingly recognized as norms governing international relations and as an embodiment of the lofty ideals of mankind, are playing an ever greater role in the international community.
Despite its inadequacies the United Nations is irreplaceable in its role as the most broadly representative and most influential international organization in the world. Gone are the days when a few big Powers could manipulate world affairs. The United Nations is the proper forum in which countries meet to discuss world affairs. It has proved itself capable of doing important work, and it has great potential for solving questions facing mankind, questions such as those of the environment, population, public health and scientific and technological development. Above all, it should be pointed out that in recent years the Security Council and the Secretary-General, with the support o£ Member States, must be credited with achievements in promoting the settlement of major international disputes. Here, I want to present my compliments to the Secretary-General, Mr. Perez de Cuellar, and to wish him continued successes in his peace mission. The importance of the United Nations role is on the rise, in keeping with the expectations of our time. The people of the world expect the United Nations to play a greater role in maintaining world peace, in spurring development and in strengthening international co-operation. As a permanent member of the Security Council, China is ready to continue to work with other Member States for the realization of the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter.
﻿
Please convey, Sir, my warm congratulations to the President on his election to preside over the forty-third session of the General Assembly. I wish him luck and success in his high office.
As in previous years, my delegation will do everything possible to help the General Assembly achieve positive results.
I wish to thank the President of the forty-second session, Ambassador Peter Florin, for his successful contribution. He guided the Assembly's proceedings circumspectly and pragmatically and with a view to getting results.
This session begins in encouraging circumstances. When we met here 12 months ago the war between Iraq and Iran was claiming countless victims day after day. In Afghanistan an end to the human suffering was not foreseeable. In southern Africa, too, there was no cause for hope.
Today the weapons in the Gulf are silent. Negotiations have been begun between the warring parties. A year after its unanimous adoption by the Security Council, resolution 598 (1987) has been accepted by both parties to the conflict as a basis for a cease-fire. In Afghanistan the Geneva agreements, likewise achieved with the decisive assistance of the United Nations, created the conditions for the withdrawal of the Soviet troops. Fifty per cent of those troops have already left the country in accordance with the terms of the agreements.
Following his talks in southern Africa the Secretary-General has expressed his confidence with regard to the implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978).
None of this progress has simply fallen into the world Organization's lap. These achievements are the outcome of a favourable change in the international climate and are the product of the manifold efforts of the principal organs of the United Nations, above all its Secretary-General, Mr. Perez de Cuellar.
The Secretary-General has said that serving the cause of peace is worth the maximum personal endeavour. He is making that endeavour and we all, the Members of the United Nations, are grateful to him for it. He has proved wrong those who had doubts about the United Nations. He encourages all who seek to strengthen its peace-promoting role.	.
The Federal Republic of Germany has actively supported the United Nations and its Secretary-General.
As a non-permanent member of the Security Council, we have worked constructively for the implementation of Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 598 (1987). After the adoption of resolution 598 (1987) we kept in touch with both parties to the conflict, calling upon them to accept and implement it. I appeal to Iraq and Iran to conduct the negotiations with a will to make compromises and to achieve a comprehensive, just and honourable peace settlement. 
In Afghanistan the withdrawal of the Soviet troops opens up the possibility of a new political beginning in that country. This opportunity should be seized by all concerned, like the European Community, the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany is ready to provide substantial humanitarian assistance in the process of repatriating and reintegrating the millions of refugees and, given the right domestic conditions, to contribute to Afghanistan's reconstruction.
Major progress has also been achieved towards a settlement of the conflicts in southern Africa. Important forward steps have been taken. The South African troops have left Angola. Negotiations are under way for the withdrawal of the Cuban troops. We have come a good deal closer to Namibia's independence. Security Council resolution 43S (1978) has always been and remains the only viable route to this goal. As a member of the Contact Group, my Government offers its good offices in seeking the implementation of that resolution.
Developments have also been favourable in other parts of the world.
In Cambodia the contours of a peace settlement are beginning to appear.
Talk between the Governments of South Korea and North Korea now seem to be within the realm of the possible.
In Central America the continuing cease-fire can facilitate dialogue between the conflicting parties so that democracy may be firmly established.
A peaceful settlement of the conflicts in Western Sahara and between Libya and Chad is moving nearer.
Representatives of the two ethnic groups in Cyprus are negotiating on the island's future.
 · 
The Middle East is still a source of concern. Negotiations are still not in sight, although the Palestinian uprising in the occupied territories shows that the status quo is untenable. An international conference on the Middle East is and remains the appropriate framework for the necessary negotiations on a peace settlement that will enable the Palestinian people to exercise their right to self-determination and guarantee the right of all States in the region, including Israel, to exist within secured borders.
We wish sorely-tried Lebanon a peaceful solution to its problems based on sovereignty, unity and national reconciliation.
If we want to secure peace world-wide once and for all we must strengthen the forces of peace. This means, first of all, that we must strengthen the United Nations. To achieve this we must continue the successful endeavours to bring about internal reforms. What we need above all is full implementation of the Charter. We are prepared to consider seriously proposals aimed at enhancing the peace-promoting powers op our Organization. This is also the objective of our initiative for preventing conflicts which has been put before this session of the General Assembly for final approval. We deem it essential that the United Nations be in a position to act before a conflict actually breaks out.
The kind of peace we pursue can be based solely on the rule of law. It must derive from the right of self-determination of nations and from the civil, economic and social human rights enshrined in the International Covenants on Human Rights adopted by the United Nations. There is a growing awareness that all public power comes up against its absolute limit in human rights. Respect for human rights is not only an internal affair, within the framework of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe ÍCSCR) process those rights have become a central issue.
One of the most blatant mockeries of human rights and manifestations of disregard for those rights is the system of apartheid in the Republic of South Africa. We demand the abolition of this un-reformable system. We demand the release of Nelson Mandela, Eric Molohi and all other political prisoners in South Africa. We demand the lifting of the ban on the African National Congress of South Africa (ANC) and all other organizations of the black
majority so as to open the way for a peaceful national dialogue. Let there be no doubt about it; we will not be prohibited from helping anti-apartheid organizations.
The chairman of the largest single trade union in the world, the Metal Workers' Union in the Federal Republic of Germany, has drawn up a catalogue of minimum standards for labour relations to be respected by the South African subsidiaries of German companies. They afford South African unions and workers, irrespective of their colour, the same claim to social justice as their colleagues in the Federal Republic of Germany. Large German companies have promised to apply these minimum standards in South Africa. From this rostrum I appeal to all trade unions and all firms to follow this example.
The rule of law implies absolute respect for international law. That respect is the foundation of policies that are geared to negotiation and agreements rather than to the threat or use of force. The rule of law implies protection of and respect for minorities, be they religious, national or ethnic minorities. All such minorities have a right to develop their identity, to cultivate their language and to live according to their cultural traditions and to exercise their religion, while enjoying equal political and legal rights.
The rule of law is menaced by international terrorism. The international community must oppose terrorism, which is hostile to human dignity and any human order, with still greater determination.
The rule of law implies joint efforts to combat drug trafficking. This is an increasingly urgent international problem which can only be solved through the joint efforts of all governments. My Government hopes that the deliberations of the forthcoming diplomatic conference in Vienna will lead to a United Nations convention to combat illegal drug trafficking. This could mean considerable progress. 
We can look to the future with confidence. The community of nations is showing greater respect for the rule of law. There is a growing willingness to resolve even the most serious differences by negotiation. This indicates a fundamental change in international relations. The core of these changes is in the attempts by West and East to place their relations on a new foundation. One of the reasons why the world Organization has been able to achieve progress in the peaceful settlement of conflicts is that West and East have increasingly been co-operating to this end. It has become obvious that West-East confrontation must not be carried over into the third world but must, where it arises, be defused step by step and, as far as possible, be resolved through dialogue and co-operation.
The progress of the European Community is one of the promising world trends. By creating a community of 12 European democracies we have won a victory over national egoism, power politics and prejudice. It is the greatest and finest victory in the history of Europe. It has not cost a single human life, yet it is winning us the future.
Franco-German friendship and co-operation are at the core of this future-oriented development. The European Community is the most advanced association of sovereign States to date. The dynamism and attractiveness of our Community are growing constantly. The European Community has committed itself to free world trade and world economic co-operation. It is becoming a driving force of growth not only for ourselves but for the world economy as a whole. This makes us resolute opponents of protectionism.
The growth potential of the single market and of the common social and monetary area will make the European Community even more capable of developing a world economic partnership with the North American democracies and Japan. By increasing our economic strength we can also increasingly promote the development of the third world. The larger European market will be able to absorb even more products from the third world.
As the Lomé Conventions, our agreements with the Mediterranean area and our co-operation agreements with the Association of South-East Asian Nations, the States of Central America and the Gulf Co-operation Council show, the European Community is already a major partner of the countries of the third world. This co-operation takes place on the basis of equal rights.
The powerful growth of the European Community creates a considerable opportunity for the development of West-East relations. The task now is to plan the architecture of the whole of Europe, from the Atlantic to the Urals. The more the Soviet Union pursues the process of opening itself internally and externally, the more capable it will become of co-operation with the West and the East. We want this reform policy to prove successful. Europe's future lies not in hoping for, let alone seeking, the destabilization of the other side, but rather in co-operation and productive competition.
The manifold forms of co-operation will determine the architecture of the peaceful order in Europe or, as it also can be termed, the common European house.
The ensuing interdependence will enhance mutual confidence and make for greater stability. This new order must not be characterized by fences, but by open doors, by freedom of movement for people, for ideas and goods, as well as respect for human rights.
One of the pillars of the European structure is and will remain the European Community oriented towards openness and co-operation. We know that Europe is more than the European Community. President Mitterrand put this most impressively in his historic speech in Aachen in 1987. As a result of increasing co-operation, of genuine détente and of disarmament, the military elements will lose significance in the West-East relationship, whereas political, economic, ecological and cultural co-operation will gain in importance.  Thanks to this development. West and Fast will derive a fresh potential which can he used not for disarmament but for the advancement their own societies and for co-operation with the developing countries.
The change for the better in the whole of Europe derives energy from the revival of our continent's identity. That identity emanates from our common European history, Europe's glories and aberrations, its common culture - to which all European nations have made major contributions, and from the awareness of our mutual responsibility for the future of our continent and for peace and development in the world. Decades of separation have not made two Europes out of one Europe; decades of separation have not made two German nations out of one German nation. The German people in the heart of Europe, having often been in conflict with its neighbours, has learned its lessons from history. Both German States are meeting their responsibility for peace in Europe, including through mutual co-operation. 4hat benefits all Europeans.
Through our membership of the European Community and the Atlantic alliance, we Germans in the Federal Republic of Germany have responsibly used the freedom we regained after the Second World War. We have established the strongest imaginable bond States can have: the bond of common values. Our commitment to peace in Europe also led us to conclude treaties with the Soviet Union, the Polish People's Republic and Czechoslovakia, and to conclude the Basic Treaty with the German Democratic Republic, united, too, to our active participation in bringing about the Final Act of Helsinki and in the process of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE). We regard the development of our relations with the Soviet Union, which are of crucial importance to us, as playing a key role in improving the overall West-Fast relationship. Chancellor Helmut Kohl's forthcoming visit to the Soviet Union will serve that purpose. 
We have been nailing for a peaceful order in Europe ever since the Atlantic alliance presented its Harmel report in 1967. For a long time we received no answer to this proposed grand design for a better Europe. The policy initiated by General-Secretary Gorbachev in the Soviet Union can turn the design contained in the Harmel report into reality. This new policy in the Soviet Union meets not merely with a favourable but with a constructive response from us. We all have a responsibility to use every opportunity to bring about a change for the better. The distinct improvement in United States-Soviet relations indicates the opportunities arising there from.
The Final Act of Helsinki marks the course towards a peaceful order in Europe in which states with different political and social systems can live together in peaceful competition without fear of one another. By seeking to establish such a peaceful order in Europe, the Federal Republic of Germany is complying with the mandate of its Constitution, the Basic Law, which is to serve the cause of peace in Europe and to overcome the separation of our indivisible nation. Our efforts to achieve the early conclusion of the Vienna follow-up meeting with the adoption of a substantive and we11-balanced final document should bring us another step forward towards a European peaceful order.
We are today confronted with the task of protecting mankind from the dangers which man himself has created. Technological development leaves in our hands the decision whether we create a better and more humane world or we perish. The responsibility not only for ourselves but for all future generations must determine our policies, our thinking and our actions. 
In view of the danger of nuclear annihilation, the disarmament process had to begin with nuclear disarmament. In this connection the Treaty on intermediate-range nuclear forces represents a breakthrough of fundamental importance since till now arms have only been limited. Now, for the first time, a whole class of weapons is being eliminated. The global elimination of Soviet and United States intermediate-range nuclear weapons must be followed by radical measures with regard to nuclear, chemical and conventional weapons. Reducing the strategic nuclear forces of both super-Powers by half must become a reality.
The shocking pictures of the consequences of the use of chemical weapons prompt me to appeal to all participants in the Geneva Conference on Disarmament to bring the now-far-advanced negotiations on a global ban on such weapons to the earliest possible conclusion. Only a world-wide convention ensuring the verifiable prevention of the manufacture, storage, transfer and use of chemical weapons can free mankind from the scourge of these cruel weapons for all time. My Government is playing an active part also in efforts to strengthen all instruments which can be utilized to prevent the use and proliferation of chemical weapons even before a global ban is in force. We welcome President Reagan's initiative calling for a conference of the signatories of the 1925 Geneva Protocol. While pursuing all these efforts, we must devote our entire energy to the task of achieving a global ban as the priority objective.
In the field of conventional arms our aim is to remove superiority and imbalances by means of asymmetrical disarmament. We want to create conditions in Europe in which neither side will still be capable of launching an attack on foreign territory. Large-scale offensive options do not feature in our Western concept. True conventional stability and further confidence-building require also consensus on the question of the defence philosophy underlying the policies. We seek а consensus on the functions to be given to both sides' forces. This must cover their size, equipment and command principles. I appeal to all concerned, to all the participants in the CSCE, to adopt before the end of October 1988, together with this final document of the Vienna CSCE follow-up meeting, a mandate for the commencement of negotiations on conventional stability. The time is ripe; all must now live up to their responsibility. 
Unlimited armaments do not create unlimited security, but balanced and mutual disarmament can help create more security. That is why disarmament and arms control are just as much an integral part of the security policy of the Atlantic Alliance as our defence efforts.
In the nuclear age war must be made un-wageable once and for all. New thinking requires that over the net of deterrence - the safety net of the ultimate ratio - an additional net of new, co-operative structures of military security be created which will reduce the enormous risks of exclusive reliance on deterrence.
Being realists, we know that we cannot base today's security on hopes for tomorrow. But, being men of action, meeting our responsibility for the future, we must today already create the foundations for our future security, foundations which must be broader, more solid and stronger than the ones on which peace has been based up to now.
Mankind's future is not threatened by war alone. There is a growing danger of man's destroying his own sources of life on this planet. We are faced with the task of preserving our natural sources of life and pressing ahead with the development of the third world. The two are closely intertwined. At present the world's population is more than 5 billion; soon it will be 6 billion. According to the World Bank statistics, about one billion people live in absolute poverty.
The industrial countries - all industrial countries; not only those in the West but also the socialist States - have a duty to act together. We must use our economic, scientific and technological potentials in order to render development possible and to preserve the world's natural sources of life. This presupposes the development of new forms of transport, new sources of energy, new materials and new production methods. It is on this and not on the development of new and ever more terrible weapons of mass destruction that the energy and the technology of industrial countries must he concentrated. What the nations of the third world need from industrial countries is not weapons but help for their development. I repeat my proposal that the United Nations record exports of weapons in a register. I welcome the Soviet Union's support for this proposal as expressed yesterday.
The purpose is also to satisfy the basic needs of hundreds of millions of people in the developing countries. Time and again, at ever shorter intervals, catastrophic food shortages occur which pose a challenge to mankind's solidarity and willingness to help. But humanitarian assistance alone cannot solve the problem. In spite of some favourable trends this year - the world economic situation having improved more than expected - we must admit that poverty in the third world is growing and the debt burden is growing. True, the gross domestic product increased in the developing countries as well last year, bat in many instances this improvement is being negated by population growth. Investments for the future are impeded by debt-servicing commitments.
In 1987 the debt-servicing payments of developing countries exceeded incoming funds by $15 billion. In such circumstances it is impossible for these countries to increase their economic potential.
The situation is particularly serious in the sub-Saharan countries. My Government supports the programme of action adopted at the special session of the General Assembly on Africa. 11 had previously cancelled about 2.9 billion marks of the debt owed by 20 of these countries. It has also announced its readiness to write off debts worth about 2.3 billion marks for six more African countries that are not among the least developed countries and are prepared to implement adjustment and reform programmes in collaboration with the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. 
All donors should include in their official aid to the poorest countries a large grant element. We intend to increase the grant element of our financial co-operation with the developing countries overall. Our development assistance to the least developed countries is already being provided in grant form
My Government also proposes that initial, tangible debt-servicing relief should be afforded within the scope of the Paris Club rescheduling operations. It has also decided to broaden and considerably ease the terms of our bilateral financial co-operation with our partners in the third world.  We expect the commercial banks too to increase their commitment in the developing countries. Many of the newly industrializing economies as well are suffering from the consequences of their heavy foreign debts. Here, too, the commercial banks in particular are urgently called upon to provide the funds necessary to ensure the economic development of these countries. Such funds will not bring any long-term benefits, however, unless the recipients carry out effective adjustment programmes which create suitable conditions. We hope that the new Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency will also be conducive to this process.
It remains indispensable to secure free access for developing countries to the markets of industrial countries. The main problem here lies in non-tariff trade barriers. These must be removed in the course of the ongoing Uruguay Round if the concept of free world trade is not to lose its credibility. In the first six months of this year our imports from developing countries increased by over 5 per cent, while corresponding exports are down by more than 8 per cent.
In their joint efforts to promote development the industrial and developing countries must make sure that those very efforts do not themselves become one of the factors causing the destruction of the environment. The principle still to be observed is that the industrial countries, when investing in developing countries, should submit to the standards that apply at home.
The idea of introducing an international criminal law for crimes against the environment, which is being considered by the Committee on Crime Prevention and Control, is right. We must prevent large parts of the third world being turned into poison-garbage depots of the northern over-consumption societies as a result of criminal transport practices, but also as a result of exploitation of the financial distress of some developing countries. The political and economic colonialism of the past must not now be followed by poison-garbage colonialism.
There is more to the relationship between development and ecology than that, however. Many developing countries, owing to their economic plight, are compelled to over-exploit their natural resources. 
The economy-ecology relationship must be made one of the main items of the agenda in the North-South dialogue. The violation and destruction of nature is much the same as the violation of human rights. The damage caused in one country is the concern of all- Who would still dispute that this has long since become a task of world domestic policy? For this reason, all German development projects are thoroughly examined as to their compatibility with the environment. Such a review should be carried out as a matter of course in the context of all development co-operation between North and South.
The extent of the danger to which we are all exposed is obvious from the changes in the world's climate. The gap in the Earth's ozone layer is constantly widening. A commission appointed by the German Federal Republic Parliament came to the conclusion that a catastrophic deterioration of the Earth's climate can be avoided only if the present international agreements are drastically tightened up in the next few years and if the aerosols causing the damage to the ozone layer have been almost completely removed by the year 20Ü0,
Over the past 20 years more than 3 million people have lost their lives as a result of natural disasters all over the world. More than 800 million people have suffered as a result of such disasters and damage to property has exceeded $23 billion. The forty-second session of the General Assembly quite rightly proclaimed the last 10 years of the century the decade for disaster prevention.
The number of disasters afflicting mankind that do not have natural causes but are nature's reaction to its maltreatment by man is increasing all the time. The repair of damage resulting from such disasters must be complemented by preventive measures designed to ensure their early detection and mitigate their consequences. We already have the science and technology to achieve this, if only we can pool our efforts. This is a dictate of political and economic reason and applies to all members in the community of nations. The international community as a whole is responsible for the state of the Earth, which has been entrusted to us for safekeeping. The consequences of any aberrations affect us all.
Genetic engineering will soon give man the power to change himself. This poses the question of our self-perception as human beings, a question which no congress of biogenetic engineers, no State, but only mankind itself can answer. It therefore needs to be dealt with by the United Nations. Let us bring together the best and the wisest citizens of all nations so that they may tell us where man should set his own limits if he is not to betray himself, if he is not to abandon his dignity, his uniqueness.
We must set our minds to that task. It, too, calls for a new approach. The scientist accepts as a matter of course that there is a complex interdependence, an interaction of different elements and processes. Similarly, politics too must now be understood as the interaction of quite different people, States and systems with but one framework for their actions, the biosphere in which we live, and with one dimension of responsibility, which extends far beyond our age, embracing the survival of mankind and the fate of the whole of creation.
Let us erect a barrier against the maltreatment and destruction of creation. Because we all depend on the success of these efforts, we all depend on one another. While dependence compels all of us to desist from trying to dominate others, to desist from an arms race and to reject the arrogance of power and the egoism of the stronger.
West and East, North and South, must channel their energies into a new responsibility for this planet and for the future of mankind. We must no longer ask what our neighbours are doing to protect the Earth. We must ask what we ourselves can do, what can we do together. We need not despair in the face of this responsibility, which is unique in the history of mankind. We have no reason to be faint-hearted or despondent. As we face up to our responsibility for the future our best allies are the nations themselves. The people wish to live, they wish to live without fear; they wish to live without want. They will no longer allow themselves to be made objects of exploitation, oppression and power politics. They demand the chance to exercise their human rights, their civil, economic and social rights. The people are determined and inspired by the idea of their inalienable human dignity, the idea of freedom and the idea of peace. Nothing is more powerful than an idea whose time has come. The time has come. We must act now.
﻿I begin by paying tribute to the wisdom of the members of the General Assembly at its forty-third session, who, in electing you President, Sic, have made clear both the deservedly high esteem in which they hold you and the prominent place held by Argentina and, beyond Argentina, by Latin America in today's world.
I wish to add that I deeply appreciate the great honour of having this opportunity to address the Assembly again.
Having just learned, as the Assembly has, the news about the Nobel Peace Prize, I wish immediately to convey my congratulations to the United Nations on the award of the Prize to the United Nations peace-keeping forces.
When I came to this rostrum five years ago the world was dominated by the East-West confrontation, the proliferation of regional conflicts, the deepening of the gulf between North and South and repeated violations of human tights and the rights of peoples. Have those realities now disappeared? Is our planet decisively turning towards unity and peace? I shall not claim that that is so. In spite of the passing years, I seem to hear too often the same words, the same vain incantations, and to see too often the same hopes being aroused only to end in the  same disillusionment. The expectations of too many peoples remain unfulfilled. Two centuries after the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen there are still many Bastilles to be taken, many liberties to be won, many rights to be safeguarded. But here and there some progress is being seen. What had seemed for ever immovable has begun to move. Will hope come into its own again in the society of men?
We know how much we owe to Mr. Reagan and Mr. Gorbachev, who have had the intelligence and the courage to have done with the arms race and the escalations of confrontation.
Similarly, the adversaries engaged in some regional conflicts - whether they have taken stock of the limits of their action and the attrition of their strength, have changed their appraisal of their people's interests, or have wanted to contribute to the general movement towards the easing of tensions - are trying to disengage themselves from the tragedy they have been living through.
I wish to express my gratitude to peace-loving men and women everywhere who have worked ceaselessly to bring about such a result. Among them I should mention the name of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Perez de Cuellar. Without his skill, his persistence, his constant readiness to serve and his cultural resources, we should not have come this far.
For the first time since the last World War the two greatest Powers have begun to explore the path of disarmament. It must be stated that their agreement on the elimination of United States and Soviet intermediate forces in Europe is a good agreement. On behalf of France, I unhesitatingly approved it from the very first day. It is now my expectation that the United States and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics will make progress in the reduction of their strategic nuclear armaments, as they have planned to do. If the negotiations they are conducting lead to agreements consistent with the imperative rules of balance and verification this will do much to strengthen the security of all.
These questions are, of course, of tremendous importance. But it will be readily understood that, as the head of a European State, I attach priority to the reduction of the conventional armaments which are stockpiled in Europe, and stockpiled unequally, to the disadvantage of Western Europe. It is my earnest hope that the 35 participants in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe will take up the substance of these negotiations as soon as possible.
We have been offered an opportunity, unprecedented in the past half century, to ensure the establishment of a stable balance at a lower, sufficient and reasonable level of armaments. Will this balance be achieved? That will depend on the political will of the States involved. But who could assume the responsibility of rejecting this chance out of hand?
The objective is easy to formulate: that everyone should be able to defend himself, as is his right, without threatening anyone else. But how shall we go about this? I venture to suggest some elements of an answer.
First, by ensuring that no army and no coalition of armies in the area where East and West are facing each other has the means for the sudden launching of a surprise attack, nor for waging a prolonged war. To that end, it would be desirable to arrange measures in that area for the reduction, withdrawal and de-concentration of troops and equipment - tanks, armoured vehicles, artillery, portable bridges and all other techniques for crossing water barriers - and measures for the limitation of reserves and stockpiles.
Secondly, by preparing procedures for verification and inspection to prevent any violation of treaties. These new measures of transparency and confidence would usefully supplement the arrangements arrived at in Helsinki.
My country has taken a number of initiatives concerning the definition of the area in which these constraints would be applied, the ratio between new military equipment and foreign equipment and the ceiling to be set on the basis of an individual country in relation to the whole. It would also be my wish that at the end of the next two years the status of negotiations should be examined. If nothing had been achieved, there would be nothing to prevent people from exercising their freedom. However, a favourable outcome would open vast new prospects for the future of Europe. All of us, Europeans both in the East and in the West, belong to the same continent and derive our heritage from the same culture. History and geography invite us patiently to overcome, by every possible means, for the security of all, the confrontation of hostile blocs.
As for chemical weapons, whose ravages we have unfortunately observed in the recent past, we must eliminate them as quickly as possible. What President Reagan said last Monday about this subject was quite right. He expressed himself in lofty and urgent terms, which echoed our own concerns, and in a manner that is all the more timely because his country possesses such weapons. 1 noted with equal interest that the Soviet Union, which also possesses chemical weapons, had supported this proposal.
The proposals put forward by France, which has no chemical weapons, are of three Hinds. First of all, my country, the depositary of the Geneva Protocol of 1325, naturally favours a meeting of the 110 signatories to that agreement. The purpose of such a meeting, in our view, would be to solemnly reaffirm the commitment not to use chemical weapons, to prevent their proliferation to encourage new accessions to the Protocol, to improve investigative procedures - in short, to indicate a common desire for the success of the work currently being carried out at Geneva within the context of the Conference on Disarmament. .
Secondly, my country wants to increase the role of the United Nations in the struggle against the proliferation and the use of chemical weapons. In 1982 Prance was the originator of the resolution enabling the Secretary-General to arrange investigations in those parts of the world where chemical weapons had reportedly been used. This procedure has already confirmed that such weapons have in fact been used. Let us go further: let us create a situation that would make it impossible for any State to use chemical weapons with impunity to settle its external or internal problems. If any State should use them, I think it would become necessary, among other measures, to impose an embargo on all deliveries of products, technologies and, more generally, weapons to that State. For its part, France is ready, after consultation with its partners, to submit a draft resolution to this effect. This would be without prejudice to any sanctions decided upon by the Security Council.
The third and last point is the one I particularly wish to stress: we must prohibit not only the use of chemical weapons but also their manufacture. The risks of the normalization and the proliferation of chemical weapons compel us to accelerate our efforts to bring about the destruction of stockpiles, as well as to maintain close supervision of the means that would make it possible to rebuild them.
In signing the convention, each State possessing stockpiles of chemical weapons would undertake to destroy them. In the view of experts, this will take several years, and in the meantime the chemical threat will continue to exist. This is why I believe that chemical-weapons factories should be closed as soon as the convention enters into force and, like stockpiles, should b© subjected to international surveillance before they are dismantled. France declares its readiness, as of this moment, to renounce under the same conditions - that is to say, as soon as the future convention enters into force - any possibility of producing chemical weapons.
0£ course, the banning of chemical weapons could not be imposed on some if others, including the nuclear Powers, retained a clear field for themselves and did not persevere in their desire for nuclear disarmament.
In this connection, I recall that in September 1983, speaking from this rostrum, I stated the conditions under which my country would agree to participate, at the proper time, in a nuclear-disarmament conference among the Powers that possess nuclear weapons: a decisive narrowing of the gap between the arsenals of the great Powers and our own·, a halt in the anti-missile, anti-satellite and anti-submarine weapons race; and correction of the Imbalances In conventional armaments. Today I maintain what I said at that time.
I would add that limiting the disarmament effort must be extended to space, the common heritage of mankind. That is why France is opposed to an arms race in space but supports the use of space-borne means of control.
Before the INF treaty, the importance of which is becoming more apparent every day, and the on-site verification for which it provides - a clause the Importance of which can never be over-emphasized - disarmament negotiations had stalled over this problem. At the special session of the United Nations last June - the third special session devoted to disarmament - my country advocated control by satellite and by automatic surveillance, as well as the so-called routine or challenge on-site inspections. We can now define, on a case-by-case basis, a combination of means of control adapted to each disarmament agreement. But nothing can be done without the political will of States.
Coming now to regional conflicts, I can only welcome the developments in the Gulf, what has been initiated in Afghanistan, and what is expected in the Western Sahara, Cambodia and, perhaps, Cyprus. This is the easier for me because France has always refused to recognize the fait accompli, has ceaselessly condemned terrorist or military intimidation, and has tirelessly pleaded for settlement of conflicts by peaceful means. Far be it from me to underestimate the scope of the progress made in the past few months. I have noted, however, that while the rapprochement between the United States and the Soviet Union has contributed to the cessation of fighting, it remains insufficient to restore lasting peace, for the underlying causes persist. In this connection, I have noted that this period of diplomatic calm has not reached several parts of the globe; the Middle East, Central America, despite the Arias Plan and the action of the Contadora and Lima Groups, which France supports; and, while there may be some respite now and again, southern Africa, a direct consequence of the intolerable policy of apartheid.
It is the responsibility of the international community to consolidate what has been achieved and help extinguish the last retraining pockets of violence. When weapons have fallen silent, so much will remain to be done agreements to guarantee, wounds to staunch, adversaries to reconcile, economies to be rebuilt.
It will do no good to shower the work and the person of the Secretary-General with praise, if we are going to withhold our support from him tomorrow. For peace has its prices sending armed troops there, organizing a referendum here, and elsewhere setting up aid for reconstruction. All this has to be financed. I would hate to think that after being so lavish in their war efforts, States, particularly the most powerful, would be tight-fisted when it comes to peace efforts.
In Afghanistan no one can ever be satisfied with replacing an international conflict by a civil war. The withdrawal of foreign troops should normally open up the way for the restoration of the sovereignty of that country, the return of refugees and economic reconstruction. But this can only come about with extreme vigilance.
It is my wish that the cease-fire between Iraq and Iran will lead, as quickly as possible, to a genuine peace, a settlement of conflicts, the reconstruction of  disaster-stricken areas and the restored freedom of navigation in the Gulf and the Strait of Hormuz.
Peace is contagious and everyone, the States and the peoples of the region, will reap the benefits. At this time, how can we be unmindful of the fate of a minority which has suffered in a two-fold way, such as the Kurdish people? I hope that renewed conciliation in Western Sahara will prevail. We could believe it today. This will remove an obstacle to the construction of the Greater Maghreb, bringing with it peace and prosperity, a plan of which Prance approves. Here we count upon the wisdom of leaders.
In the Middle East, the uprising of Palestinian youth and the decision of King Hussein of Jordan have shown once again that the status quo no longer protects those who are subject to it, those who seek to benefit from it, and that it is increasingly deadly for those who are subjected to it.
Let us go back to the basic principles of a lasting settlement, as defined by the United Nations. All members are familiar with them. For my part, I outlined them both in the Knesset in Jerusalem and in the Arab capitals. Israel has the right to exist within safe and recognized borders; the Palestinian people are entitled to aspire to a homeland and to take charge of their own destinies.
In order to arrive at a peace settlement, which would enshrine these rights, there must be dialogue between the parties. Each side, Israelis and Palestinians, must do its share. Each must be willing to accept for the other what it demands for itself, and each must be able to say this in no uncertain terms. I do understand how difficult it is to take the first step.
In order to facilitate dialogue and break down the walls of distrust, the international community must clearly act as an intermediary. A procedure exists: the international conference. It is the only framework within which teal partners can meet and establish bilateral contacts between them. The international conference has become a reference point. Let us make it a reality. I proposed some time ago that a preparatory committee earnestly go about laying the groundwork. Mr. Gorbachev was in agreement with me on this idea. Now the time has come to revive this. I suggest that a diplomatic arrangement be made among the five permanent Members of the Security Council in conjunction with the Secretary-General. This preparatory work should result in recommendations on the organization and calendar of the future conference and recommendations about who its participants will be.
France, of whose ties to Lebanon need not remind the Assembly, will not resign itself to watching that country's independence and unity disintegrate. We call upon the United Nations as a witness to the obstacles which have been placed in the way of the free exercise of the sovereignty of the people. We appeal to the sense of reason of the neighbours of that country. A peaceful, reconciled Lebanon is no threat to anyone. A Lebanon dismembered and the object of conflict and dispute will remain an area of insecurity for us all. Let us urge the Lebanese to draw upon their national pride and patriotism to summon the strength and courage to have faith in their country. I can assure the General Assembly, in any case, that France will remain at the side of those who, in mutual respect, are fighting for a democratic future for Lebanon, as well as its territorial integrity and sovereignty.
Farther away, towards the Far East, an end to the sufferings of Cambodia is in sight. The decision announced by the Government of Viet Nam to end its intervention, the initiatives of the countries of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), the actions of such leaders as Prince Norodom Sihanouk may bring us closer to the hour of a political settlement. My country, which facilitated the initial meeting between the Cambodian partners, will continue to work even harder at this, and soon, I hope. We stand ready, if they so wish, to invite the parties involved to meet in Paris in due course.
At this point in my address, I wish to tell the General Assembly that nothing seems more important to me, whatever the importance of the subjects I have touched upon this morning - disarmament and the settlement of regional conflicts - nothing, I stress, is more important to me than closing the ever-widening gap between developed and developing countries. The causes of this disparity, as the General Assembly knows, are many: political, social, economic, demographic, financial, and so on. They have become so serious that many are tempted to dismiss all remedies as futile. 
That is not the case with France. For seven years now - and I am certainly not the only one - I have been repeating that it is in the interests of the North to help the South; that there is no such thing as fate; that man can always master the course of events and that it is urgently necessary to do so. I see in the persistence of the current imbalances the most damaging cause of tremendous unhappiness, a misfortune which, more assuredly than any other danger, will drive the world towards the endless chaos of war, or something even worse.
Nevertheless, International multilateral or bilateral aid is stagnating or receding. France - which, of all the industrially advanced countries, allocates the highest percentage of its gross national product to development aid - believes that it has not yet done its duty. The target of 0.7 per cent remains its ambition. In particular, the debt burden calls for immediate action. Ά number of very Interesting Initiatives have been launched by one country or another. For ray part, I suggested to the major industrialized countries at their Toronto meeting this year that they make the terms of repayment considerably easier for the poorest countries. As for France, It has chosen to cancel one third of the debt owed to it by these countries. This significant step is but a beginning.
For other heavily indebted countries, particularly In Latin America and Africa, debt also represents an intolerable burden, and in certain cases a threat to democracy. In the face of this situation the International community must show that it can be more realistic and more imaginative. All debts Incurred must be repaid, but the cost of this can be reduced without passing on the burden to the taxpayers of creditor countries.
Thus, last year the United States, in a bold move, guaranteed a proportion of the principal of Mexico's commercial loans. Several countries and many experts have thought of creating a multilateral fund which would lower the cost by guaranteeing interest payments. Various methods of financing this fund have been put forward.
In the view of France, the best technique would be to create a fund in the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to guarantee the payment of interest charged on certain commercial loans converted into bonds. This fund would lower significantly the finance charges payable by debtor countries and would involve them more actively in world trade.
In order to finance this, the developed countries would set aside their share of a new issue of special drawing rights for use by the developing countries. I realize that the implementation of this project would represent a significant legal and financial innovation. It would require lengthy preparatory work and many consultations among creditors and with their debtors. However, this alone would seem to be equal to the challenge.
But development requires many other things.  I  would mention the following: stabilizing the export earnings of countries in the southern hemisphere and diversifying and increasing the value of their production - and the Uruguay Round must take these into account; environmental protection, which only a short time ago was endangered by industrial wastes from the North being disposed of in the South - and the international community will have to agree to regulations and the necessary precautions; a massive transfer of technology and know-how from the North to the South - and I would like in this regard to suggest a new approach, modelled on what is known as Europe's EUREKA project, in which Government stimulus, together with initiatives freely undertaken by companies and universities, leads to co-operation on an equal footing. I continue ray brief list: launching major programmes of universal interest which can mobilize our energies to bring help to regions facing catastrophes due to natural causes or the folly of men. I cite as an example the stabilization of the rivers that have been flooding Bangladesh, the cause of a terrible catastrophe, as an appropriate beginning for a project of this kind. France, for its part, is ready to contribute.
Two centuries ago France began a revolution that changed the course of history throughout the universe. In doing so, France took a position in the battle which has yet to be won, and is still necessary, for a greater measure of freedom, equality and brotherhood. As we prepare to celebrate this bicentenary, let us defend human rights more fiercely than ever before, from the earliest recognized to the latest: human rights, the rights of peoples, the rights of mankind. Today, in certain emergency situations, in situations of distress or extreme injustice, we should affirm the right of humanitarian assistance.
Economic and social progress is the only solid foundation on which to build democracy; the moral weight of public opinion and unflagging vigilance will be its best guarantee.
So many people are still being denied their most elementary tights and for so many men, women and children poverty is the only world they know, and the absence of eights is their only horizon.
Surely the time has come to acknowledge that rights of mankind exist and should be defined. I am thinking of the protection of our natural environment in the face of the sometimes irresponsible requirements of our economy. I was happy to hear the representative of the Soviet Union asking for a plan to be worked out before 1992 on this subject. I am also thinking of the protection of the human species, the ravages of drugs, and the extraordinary possibilities of science, in particular genetics. 
The conference of Nobel Prize-winners which I convened in 1988 in Paris elected us to the dangers of this. It is not knowledge in itself that is dangerous; it is rather the applications of science that must be controlled, that we must master. Since we are accountable in proportion to the power we now possess in transmitting a natural and genetically intact heritage to our descendants, we must lay the foundations for the ethics of the third millennium.
I must stop here. Since, with you, I have been looking at the future, I dream of the day when Europe, as it is trying to take shape, will be able to speak here with a single voice, using, as I have just done, the language of peace among nations and confidence in the destiny of humanity.
﻿
Sir, may I offer you my congratulations on taking up the presidency of the General Assembly and send my warm thanks to the outgoing President, the Deputy Foreign Minister of the German Democratic Republic.
This has been a year of unprecedented natural disaster. No outsider can fully share the tragedy of the flooding in Bangladesh. The hurricane devastation in the Caribbean and Mexico has horrified us all. From South Asia, through Africa, to the Caribbean and even to the grain belt of America, we have seen destruction on a scale rarely equalled before.
Last week I was in Africa. I went first to the Sudan. I saw there the devastation caused by the recent floods and the brave efforts of the Sudanese Government and people to cope with that crisis. I visited a refugee camp of 500 tents supplied by Britain, made in Malta. Alongside them were tents from Saudi Arabia and Kuwait. Nations from all over the world had come to Sudan's aid. The following day I flew to Kenya, where pictures of the famine and suffering in southern Sudan were front-page news in the Nairobi press.
The tragedies that have been occurring this year are seen and felt by people in towns and cities around the globe, and the world community has responded with rarely equalled sympathy and generosity. My own country alone has this year contributed some £80 million to disaster relief around the world. The total contributed by the Western democracies is likely to have been at least 10 times that amount.
These immediate natural disasters are a poignant reminder of the need to tackle an issue that is of longer term but crucial for us all; the health of our planet as a whole. Some of its present transformation is good. Its resources are being better used for the benefit of mankind. But other elements are leading to a progressive pollution of the land, the sea and the air.
There has already been some disruption of natural patterns. Damage to the ozone layer, first identified by the British Antarctic Survey in 1985, caused instant international alarm. That concern has already led to agreement to limit the production of certain industrial chemicals.
The possibility of climatic change caused by the increase in the greenhouse gases, leading to a global heat trap, has become a real concern. The increases predicted in global temperatures would have substantial effects, within the next few decades, on life and human society. Even small variations would have great consequences in a crowded world.
We are totally dependent on climate. Damage it beyond repair, and the earth becomes a Lifeless desert spinning in space. We cannot leave a problem of this magnitude to technical bodies. Britain is among those who have pressed for a serious debate on the subject within the United Nations. Last year we welcomed the Brundtland report, the report of the World Commission on Environment and Development. We want to carry forward its work. So we welcome the forthcoming discussion in the Second Committee. The problem must command an urgent place on the world agenda.
It is in the face of natural disaster that we are made most vividly aware of the fragility and interdependence of human existence. Faced with the enormity of the difficulties, the speed and universality of response are extraordinary. Yet sadly, in the face of man-made disasters we have not so far been able to respond in such a United and effective way. Their causes are more complex, their effects are equally devastating, and they too demand our utmost and our urgent energy and ingenuity. This year we have broken the pattern of the past by applying the principles of the Charter to the resolution of a lengthy and bloody dispute, the conflict between Iran and Iraq.
Each one of us here is committed, bindingly committed, to the Charter of the United Nations; not just to words on a page, but to fundamental principles of·' justice and international law. It was those principles that I had in mind when I spoke here a year ago at the height of the Iran-Iraq war. I said then: "The blunt truth is that the way in which the United Nations handles the conflict between Iran and Iraq must have a decisive effect upon its reputation in the eyes of all the peoples whom we represent." (A/42/PV.8, p. 58) I called then for a degree of unity which the international community had rarely been able to achieve, and a year later the scene that then seemed so dark and hopeless has been lighted by the united efforts of the international community.
Many factors have helped to foster this change; the realization by Iran and Iraq that war to the death would mean mutual destruction the spirit and resolve of the Secretary-General and his dedicated staff; and, perhaps above all, the part played by the Security Council and its five permanent members.
The permanent members are given a unique power under the Charter. That power, the power of veto, carries with it a special responsibility, a responsibility that has rarely been exercised. But the last year has witnessed the development of a new co-operation among the five. It began tentatively; it was pursued pragmatically; but it was born of principle as well as pragmatism, of a combined determination to do all we could together to bring an end to the devastation of a senseless war.  
That determination, coupled with the skill, patience and persistence of the Secretary-General, culminated in the successful achievement of a cease-fire. Now the action has switched from the battleground to the negotiating table, from the banks of the Tigris to the banks of the East River. The Secretary-General must be allowed to build on the cease-fire so as to arrange the withdrawal of forces and the repatriation of prisoners of war. The framework for peace is Security Council resolution 598 (1987), which provides for negotiations under the auspices of the Security Council. Britain will do all in its power to sustain the spirit of co-operation and to contribute to a peaceful settlement.
If the international community can find a way forward on the dispute between Iran and Iraq it cannot ignore the plight of the Kurds, driven from their homes not by natural disaster but by unnatural force and brutality. The containment of conflict in one form must not lead to its prosecution in another.
The charge that Iraq has used chemical weapons against the Kurds adds gravity to the situation. Under Security Council resolution 620 (1988), the Secretary-General can conduct a prompt and independent inquiry. The need for such an inquiry is evident. The refusal of Iraq to co-operate in such an inquiry is all the more to be deplored, because the spread of chemical weapons is one of the most disturbing of recent developments.
As more countries develop a chemical-weapons capability, the risk of the increased use of these weapons as an instrument of war and terror multiplies. It is for that reason that Britain has taken a lead in preparing an international convention for the world-wide suppression of chemical weapons and in pressing the crucial case for greater openness in this field. Nowhere is glasnost more necessary. At the special session in June I made important proposals to strengthen the international standards of the 1925 Geneva Protocol. So today I welcome President Reagan's proposal to reconvene the 1925 Geneva Conference to mobilize the international community behind the search for a convention on chemical weapons which would outlaw their use.
Co-operation on the resolution of the Iran-Iraq conflict has been unique. But it must not be the only example of the constructive exercise of shared responsibility among the permanent members of the Security Council. There are grounds for hoping that will not be the case, for we have also been witnessing this year a change in the atmosphere which increases the scope for such co-operation.
East-West relations themselves have moved on to a new footing. The Treaty on the Elimination of Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles - the INF Treaty - the Washington and Moscow summits and the Moscow Party Conference have all been remarkable in their separate ways.
Perhaps just as significant has been the recent acknowledgement by Mr. Shevardnadze that foreign policy is no longer to be seen in Moscow as a special form of class struggle. "The struggle between the opposing systems", he said, "is no longer a determining tendency of the present era". I believe that most of the members of this Assembly will say "amen" to that. No longer, to paraphrase Clausewitz, need foreign policy be the continuation of class warfare by other means.
Even so, progress on arms-control talks would not have been made without the constant and united determination of the members of the North Atlantic alliance. Of course we want to see success in the negotiations between Washington and Moscow for a reduction in strategic weapons, but we want to see early progress as well in cutting the conventional imbalances in Europe, which prejudice the security of millions of people. 
Arms-control negotiations no longer bear the full burden of East-West relations. They remain a vital component in the creation of a climate of confidence. So too does the search for a world-wide pattern of respect for human rights and freedom. In Europe we look for further progress in this regard from an early conclusion of the Vienna Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. The fundamental principle, which we have long proclaimed and which Mr. Shevardnadze endorsed in his statement yesterday, is that the rule of law and the right of the individual to determine his own future are inseparable.
More widely than that, if we can establish confidence in East-West relations we can harness energies which have too often pulled in different directions, and put them to constructive work. The place to do that is the United Nations.
There are many tasks, many regional conflicts, but also growing signs that progress is possible.
Recent developments over Afghanistan are one example. Eight years after its forces invaded Afghanistan the Soviet Union has finally begun to take them home. Over half have now left. This may well reflect a new realism in Moscow, but it is also a consequence of the courage and determination of the Afghan people and of the sustained and overwhelming support of this General Assembly. Tens of thousands of Afghans have died. Millions have been driven from their homes. That is why we now look forward to the complete and prompt withdrawal of Soviet troops. The Afghan people as a whole must then be given the chance to select a truly representative government by a genuine act of self-determination. Only then can Afghanistan start to live again.
It is possible now to perceive as well that universal condemnation of Viet Nam's illegal occupation of Cambodia is also having its effect. Britain was among the first to insist that Viet Nam must withdraw from Cambodia unconditionally and quickly. Viet Nam cannot by itself sustain its occupation; its own economy is in ruins. 
One consequence of Viet Nam's policy has been the huge exodus of its own people in boats to Hong Kong and other destinations. It is time for this tragic migration to cease, time for Viet Nam to take back its own people in humane fashion. Hong Kong's policy of seeking to return those people who are not genuine refugees is the only way to cope with what would otherwise be an unmanageable influx.
We also think the time is now right to look closely at ways of promoting a settlement in Cambodia. The aim should be to secure the early and unconditional withdrawal of Vietnamese forces and a political settlement to give Cambodia a stable and secure Government, that must by definition preclude a return to the horrors of the Pol Pot regime.
Just as in the Gulf one resolution of the Security Council offers the prospect of peace, so in southern Africa another resolution offers similar hope of a peaceful end to an old dispute. Ten years ago tomorrow Security Council resolution 435 (1978) was adopted. It remains the best framework for independence for Namibia.  The first crucial step has been taken in South Africa's withdrawal from Angola and the establishment of an effective cease-fire. The next task is to achieve the withdrawal of South African forces from Namibia; and all Cuban forces from Angola and free- elections in Namibia, leading to independence. That will require enormous ingenuity, perseverance and compromise.
It will require from South Africa a new respect for the integrity of its independent neighbours. We hope the recent reaffirmation of the Nkomati accord represents a commitment by South Africa to the stability of the region as a whole.
It will require from Angola a determined effort to achieve reconciliation within Angola, where the Cuban presence has helped to make an international issue of what is essentially a matter for internal resolution.
Just as Security Council resolution 435 (1978) has stood the test of time, so too has the British Government's commitment to act in its support. We long ago offered to provide a signals unit to the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG). We remain ready to play our part, and are ready, with our partners in the European Community, to offer assistance to an independent Namibia.
A settlement in Angola and the independence of Namibia would not in themselves resolve the intractable problems of South Africa. The principle at stake there is a simple one; the liberty and dignity of the individual. We are committed to the abolition of the system of apartheid, which stifles liberty and denies dignity. We have to find the lever that will effect that change. We do not believe that comprehensive sanctions are that lever. Some see sanctions as a political gesture which should be made almost for its own sake, but it would be an empty gesture. It would be a gesture with too high a price attached; too high a price in terms of the millions of black jobs, black livelihoods, which would be at stake. Our goal is the same as that of our friends in Africa. We are doing all we can to bring apartheid to an end.
Our aid to South Africa's neighbours since 1980 is worth well over £1 billion. We supply defence assistance to Mozambique and Zimbabwe. The Limpopo railway is being repaired with British help and defended by Mozambican troops trained in Zimbabwe by British army officers.
We give aid to black groups and individuals within South Africa so that they can educate themselves, build their own enterprises and free themselves from the oppression of apartheid.
In southern Africa, the parties to a longstanding dispute seem at last to be seeking agreement within the framework of a Security Council resolution.
The principles of a settlement in the Middle East were similarly laid down in a Security Council resolution 21 years ago. They are no less valid today. Israel and the Palestinians have a historic sense of injustice. That injustice is aggravated, not alleviated, by terrorist attacks against Israel. And the violent suppression of Palestinian aspirations jeopardizes the search for a peaceful settlement.
The international community cannot afford to give up the search for peace. The need for an international conference involving the five permanent members of the Security Council is more vital than ever. We shall be persistent in our efforts to help create the conditions in which such a conference can be held.
In Western Sahara, we have been the two sides to a dispute brought together by the commendable efforts of the Secretary-General. They have accepted that a referendum is the only way of resolving their differences. 
I hope that this new willingness to seek peaceful solutions will prove contagious. Regarding one dispute with which Britain itself is concerned, let me just say one thing; the right of the Falkland islanders to self-determination cannot be compromised, hat my country will continue energetically to seek ways of restoring more normal relations with Argentina.
Regional disputes around the world are by no means all or even the worst of our problems today. Conflicts within a nation pose some of the most complicated and intractable problems facing the international community. Often they are at a level deeper than a dispute between one nation State and the next. Often they escape the procedures and the mechanisms by which we are accustomed to operate. Yet the way in which they dislocate the very fabric of nationhood is itself a cause of tension and a challenge for the international community.
The tragedy of the Lebanon is an example of such sub-national conflict that divides a country down the middle and at the same time extends beyond its borders. We can think of other examples. Earlier this month, in Sudan, I saw the tragic consequences of an internal conflict unresolved. And the conflict in Ethiopia has exacerbated the horrors of famine and starvation in that country.
In Burma, we have been appalled at the killing of unarmed demonstrators, women and children, which has taken place over the past three months. Such violence will solve nothing. The Burmese authorities must recognize that the only way to a lasting solution to the country's internal crisis lies in meeting the desire of the Burmese people for greater freedom and multi-party democracy.
This type of internal problem poses particular difficulties for the international community. We must work hard to find answers.
I welcome the resumption of the peace process in Cyprus. The Secretary-General has met the leaders of the two communities on the island. Agreement has been created on negotiating a just and lasting settlement by 1 June next year. As we meet here, another international event is under way on the far side of the world. In Seoul, in Korea, the hosting of the Olympic Games is a tribute to the remarkable political and economic progress made in that country. We welcome the recent contacts between North and South: we hope that they will contribute to the improvement in atmosphere that will one day lead to the Korean people being properly represented with us here in this institution.
We can extend our co-operation into new areas to deal with new challenges to international peace and stability, challenges which postdate the creation of the United Nations itself.
The battle against international terrorism is one such. Following the hijacking of KU 422 in April, Britain launched an initiative which led to an agreement in the International Civil Aviation Organization on the detaining of hijacked aircraft so as to contain the spreading of a hijack crisis from one country to another. We must build on that measure to strengthen international protection against future hijackings.
The evil of drug-related crime also challenges us to a united response. In some parts of the world the malevolent forces of drug trafficking do as much damage as traditional armed conflict. Individually, many nations may feel they are victims of forces beyond their control. Together, the international community has a power immeasurably greater than the greatest threat. We must create powerful weapons for ourselves, above all by denying the use of the financial system to those that profit from this trade and by preventing funds from being ploughed back into that trade, through co-operation to seize drug traffickers' assets wherever they are. My own country has adopted legal powers to help do this. We cannot act alone. We urge the international community to consider similar action. 
With the terrorist, the hijacker, the drug trafficker, we have to find ways of directly attacking the environment which sustains him. We must deny him the life support of finance or the comfort of a bolt hole on the other side of a frontier. Drugs and terror are partners in crime. We must be partners within this Organization in fighting them.
We must be partners, too, in fighting afflictions which are not man-made but which require human resource to solve. When AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome) first started, there was a tendency to put up moral barricades, maximize blame and minimize action. Now we know better. In January, Ministers of Health from all over the world met in London to discuss the problem openly, compare our experience and co-operate in finding solutions. In the face of such disparate and complex issues it is not always easy for the international community to act. None the less, the greater the degree of unity we can display, the greater our chances of finding solutions.
In the face of such disparate and complex issues it is not always easy for the international community to act. None the less, the greater the degree of unity we can display, the greater our chances of finding solutions. I am convinced that we can go further together.
I began by speaking about my recent visit to Africa and of how different countries, helped by the international community, are coping with man-made as well as natural hazards. In each of the five African countries I visited I was enormously conscious of the economic problems with which they are grappling. Their experience is mirrored in other continents. 
So we warmly welcomed the positive conclusion last weekend of the meeting under United Nations auspices which reviewed the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990. We will continue to do all we can to help. We can now build further on our partnership with the countries concerned,
Disparities between rich and poor cannot be reduced overnight. It will be a long process. Aid can help. So, too, can the creation of more open conditions for international trade, and likewise internal economic reform, within the framework of structural adjustment and with adequate support from other countries. That is the importance of relieving the burden of debt on those least able to bear it. These are all matters in which Britain will continue to play a prominent, and in many respects a catalytic, role.
The proposals on debt relief which we launched over a year ago are now coming to fruition. This opens the way for a number of countries to benefit from rescheduling on concessional terms before the end of the year. But in the last resort it is the Governments and peoples of the countries concerned that must work out their own destiny. We support their own strong determination to that end and we will work to sustain our own partnership with them.
There is a new spirit throughout the world in seeking to live up to the undertakings which we have all given under the United Nations Charter. There is a new resolve to put this Organization to work for our common good. We must sustain that spirit and that resolve in the year ahead.
﻿
It gives me great pleasure that a distinguished son and eminent representative of a country with which my country has close and cordial relations is presiding over the General Assembly at its forty-third session. I extend to Ambassador Caputo our warm felicitations on his well-deserved election. We are confident that with his exceptional ability and experience the deliberations of the Assembly have already been assured success. I would like also to place on record our deep appreciation for the effective leadership that his predecessor, Mr. Peter Florin, provided to the General Assembly during its forty-second session.
In his report on the work of the Organization for 1988, the Secretary-General recalled that he was cautiously optimistic that "the sails of the small boat in which all the people of the Earth were gathered seemed to have caught a light but favourable wind". (Д/43/1, p. 2) I take this opportunity to pay a tribute to the man who has played no mean role in the careful and patient navigation by which the vessel has come within sight of large sections of the shore. The Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, has earned the admiration of all for his patience, his skill, his understanding touch and his grasp of the larger questions as well as the small details involved in the various issues dealt with by the United Nations. The decision to confer the Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International Understanding on our Secretary-General was a tribute to his exceptional contribution to the cause of peace.
This year, 1988, has been the year of the United Nations. In the past few months the patient and persistent diplomacy of the United Nations was capped with the signing of the Geneva Agreements on Afghanistan, the entry into force of a cease-fire on the Iran-Iraq border, the renewal of inter-communal talks in Cyprus and the creation of an environment conducive to the resolution of the problem of Western Sahara. Even those who tended to pass judgement on the United Nations purely on the basis of the criteria of the maintenance of international peace and security are happily acknowledging today that this is indeed an impressive record of which the United Nations can be justifiably proud. 
India welcomes this reaffirmation of faith in the United Nations. For an overwhelming majority of Members, support for the United Nations has always been an article of faith. The universalization of this support during 1988, which we applaud as we always did, will no doubt strengthen the capacity of the Organization, not only with respect to preserving peace but also, equally, to tackling other scourges facing humankind, such as poverty, hunger, ecological degradation, terrorism and narcotics. We trust that the United Nations will be reinvigorated, not only in political terms but also in terms of concrete financial support. Let the coming decades be the decades of the United Nations. Let the all-round support which the United Nations always deserved, but seems to have got this year, be always available to it hereafter.
India, along with the rest of the international community, rejoices in the transformation of the international climate during the past year. We are indeed living through historic times. The dramatic improvement in relations between the super-Powers, for which we salute the leadership of the two countries, has had a positive impact throughout the world. History, however, teaches us that good times, like bad times, do not normally last forever. But one may be forgiven on the present occasion for entertaining the belief that the principal players have by now made a realistic assessment of the long-term interests of mankind, along with their respective national interests, and that hence the current thaw may be more lasting than those of the past.
The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, since its inception, has worked tirelessly precisely for such a turn in the international climate. By taking principled positions on major issues of our times and by refusing to get entangled in the confrontation of competing military alliances, the non-aligned countries have helped in containing conflict, and have thus contributed to the peace process which has always inhered in the minds of the millions, although it had been rendered dormant and muted by the display of military might. Therefore, we the non-aligned can claim part of the credit for the improved state of affairs. But along with claiming the credit the Movement needs to redouble its efforts to make the peace process irreversible, no longer vulnerable to the braking mechanisms which operated earlier owing to motivations too well known to need recounting.
The new air of euphoria is totally understandable as it marks a welcome departure from the intense and often bitter rivalry between the major Powers which at times brought the world to the brink of a catastrophe. It seems to have been replaced now by healthy competition for presenting proposals for strengthening peace, supporting the United Nations, saving the world from ecologic disaster, among others. It is true that this long-awaited spirit of change unfortunately has not extended to the economic field. We would therefore be well-advised to remain watch full and alert, while pursuing determined efforts to make the transformation to peace final and all-pervasive so as to comprehend all facets of human life and activity on our planet. While the primary responsibility would remain with the major Powers, the rest of us and, of course, the United Nations, can and must play a very important role.
The ratification of the Treaty on the Elimination of Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles - INF Treaty - by the United States and the Soviet Union was a historic first step which must, within an agreed time-frame and in well-considered stages, lead to successive reductions and eventual elimination of all nuclear weapons. While we are fully aware of the complexities involved in disarmament negotiations, we find that political will has enabled the experts to find satisfactory answers to what were projected as almost un-resolvable difficulties of adequate verification. Similar political will would be needed in solving the whole gamut of disarmament questions, beginning with the reduction of strategic nuclear weapons by 50 per cent, which has already been agreed upon.
Those steps, each important in itself, have to be viewed in the perspective of a comprehensive scenario of total disarmament. Only thus do they make sense and become effective and beneficial. At the third special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament in June this year, my Prime Minister, Rajiv Gandhi, put forward a comprehensive action plan for the total elimination of all nuclear weapons by the year 2010. That action plan has received appreciation in the Non-Aligned Movement, among other Governments as well as non-governmental organizations. We put forward our proposal to give concrete shape to the desire of a large segment of world public opinion for a time-bound action programme to eliminate nuclear weapons. We should also take into account other related aspects including verification.
With regard to verification, delegates will recall that the delegations of countries participating in the six-nation initiative for peace and nuclear disarmament presented a concrete proposal at the third special session on disarmament the endorsement, in principle, of an international verification agency within the United Nations. It is the intention of the six countries to revive this initiative at this session of the General Assembly.
The linkage between disarmament and development is by now well-recognized. Hardly anyone can dispute the proposition that the resources being spent on armaments could be more profitably employed in peaceful developmental activities. The decisions taken by the United Nations Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development, held last year, need to be followed up and acted upon.
Regional conflicts have dominated discussions at the current session of the General Assembly. This is perfectly understandable. Success in achieving breakthroughs is most of these conflicts is attributed, and justifiably so, to the patient diplomacy of the United Nations, as well as to the rapprochement between the two super-Powers. There is, perhaps, a lesson for all of us in this, particularly for the non-aligned and developing countries. If the tendency to seek massive external military assistance and to pursue dangerous nuclear weapon policies in the illusory hope of strengthening one's bargaining position with one's neighbours were resisted, there would be fewer regional conflicts and consequently less dependence on outside Powers for the solution of such conflicts.
India rejoiced at the cease-fire between Iran and Iraq which came into effect on 20 August 1988. Thanks to the statesmanship of the leaders of the two countries and to the efforts of the Secretary-General, the international community has been spared witnessing the eighth anniversary of the war. The cease-fire is an important first step and must be consolidated. The negotiations between the two countries currently under way, under United Nations auspices, must be pursued. The issues involved are complex and highly emotional for both sides. India has been involved in discussing the issues in detail with the two countries as part of the efforts of the Non-Aligned Movement. That experience makes me feel confident that the issues, though complex, will eventually be solved. India has the closest of ties with Iran and Iraq, and we know that the two countries are anxious to get on with the stupendous task of reconstruction.
My country rejoices at the release of the Indian national, Mr. Mithileshwar Singh. We hope that all the other hostages will also be freed and reunited with their families at an early date.
India has welcomed the Geneva Accords on Afghanistan. We have had historical ties of deep friendship with the people of Afghanistan. The Geneva Accords have established & framework which would enable the Afghan people to decide on their future free from foreign interference or intervention. While the withdrawal of Soviet troops has proceeded on schedule, we are greatly perturbed at persistent reports of violations of the Geneva Accords and hope that they will be implemented faithfully by all the parties. In addition to restoring peace and stability to the region, the implementation of the Geneva Accords would also remove the ostensible cause for introduction of sophisticated arms into the area.
While positive developments have taken place in the Gulf as well as in Afghanistan, the continued great-Power naval presence in the Indian Ocean remains a factor contributing to tension and instability. We reiterate our call for the withdrawal of all military forces of outside Powers from the Indian Ocean so that it can emerge as a zone of peace.
There is more than a glimmer of hope for the resolution of the conflict situation in South-East Asia. The horrors suffered by the people of Kampuchea in the 1970s must not be allowed to revisit them ever. The dialogue at the Jakarta Informal Meeting was a welcome beginning, which we appreciate. We also applaud the initiative of the Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement to explore ways and means in which the Movement can assist the efforts to solve the Kampuchean problem. Given India's historical ties with the peoples of South-East Asia, we are ready and willing to contribute in whatever way we can to this process.
In our neighbourhood, we have watched with growing concern the trials and tribulations faced by the people of Burma, with whom the people of India are bound by close ties of history and culture. India has always scrupulously avoided interfering in the internal affairs of other countries. However, we cannot but sympathize with democratic aspirations. We are saddened by the growing number of innocent dead in Burma. We hope that a way will be found to end this tragic conflict as soon as possible.
There is renewed belief that the long-delayed solution to the Namibian question is at hand. Responsibility for the delay rests squarely with the South African Government, which has, with impunity, refused to comply with its international commitments and obligations. The world community is committed to the emancipation of the Namibian people engaged in a historic struggle for freedom under the leadership of the South West African People's Organization (SWAPO). Their sole and authentic representative. India was the first country to accord diplomatic recognition to the representative of it. We look forward to welcoming Namibia as the 160th Member of the United Nations at the General Assembly session next year.
While there is movement on the question of Namibia, the situation in South Africa itself shows no sign of improvement. The racist Pretoria regime continues its reign of terror, subjecting the people of South Africa to the most inhuman forms of oppression. The evil system of apartheid cannot be reformed, it has to be abolished in total. South Africa must open а dialogue with the genuine representatives of the oppressed people. Nelson Mandela, the universal symbol of courage and fortitude, whose state of health is a cause of concern to all of us, must be released immediately and unconditionally. Effective pressure in the form of comprehensive mandatory sanctions must be applied, without invoking unconvincing arguments regarding their effect on employment of the oppressed people, and so on.
The Action for Resisting Invasion, Colonialism and apartheid (AFRICA) Fund, established by the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, has received pledges and contributions from a third of the world community. Described at the recent meeting of the non-aligned in Nicosia, Cyprus, as an instance of the Movement's capacity for collective action, the Fund demonstrates an international commitment to the front-line States and liberation movements of southern Africa transcending geographical or political barriers.
The international 00tmunity should be opposed to racial discrimination no matter where it is practised. Last year my delegation referred to the unfortunate developments in Fiji, which had distinct racial overtones. He hoped that the groundswell of international public opinion would help restore the spirit of trust, harmony and concord which had prevailed in Fiji since its independence. As a Member of the United Nations and as a member of its Committee on decolonization, India had been in the forefront in the fight for Fiji's independence. It is a matter of great regret to us that the situation in Fiji has considerably deteriorated during the past year. There are clear indications that an attempt is being made to institutionalise racial discrimination in Fiji. We understand that there is to be a process of consultation with the various communities before the draft constitution is finalized. We hope that this process will enable all sections of the people to participate in it in a non-discriminatory manner. There was a time when Fiji used to be described as "what the world should be like". The racial harmony, peace and tranquillity in Fiji used to be a model for the world to follow. We hope that Fiji will return soon to those harmonious times.
India's support of the right of self-determination for the Palestinian people has its roots in our own struggle against colonial rule. Many changes have taken place in the region. What has remained constant, however, is the determination of the Palestinian people. The message of intifadah to the world is unambiguous, 20 years of occupation have utterly failed to suppress the fierce nationalism of the Palestinian people. It should also have made it clear to the world, including Israel, that territories illegally occupied cannot be retained forever. Israel must withdraw from the territories it has occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem. We reiterate the call for the convening of an international peace conference on the Middle East, with the participation of all the parties, including the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), on an equal footing. Such a conference, we believe, should facilitate the establishment of an independent homeland for the Palestinians and the creation of conditions in which all the States in the region can live within secure and recognized boundaries.
India has always supported the aspirations of the people of Cyprus to live together in ш independent and non-aligned country, with its territorial integrity intact. We deeply appreciate the resumption of dialogue between the two communities under the auspices of the United Nations Secretary-General. We urge both sides to spare no effort to find a solution to the problem within the time-limit envisaged by the Secretary-General.
Similarly, we ate heartened by the acceptance by the two sides concerned of the Secretary-General's proposals for finding a solution to the problem of Western Sahara. Here again, we hope that this question will be resolved satisfactorily so that the people of the territory, as well as other countries in the Maghreb, can live in peace and co-operation with one another.
In the Korean peninsula, which unhappily remains divided, there is an overwhelming sentiment in favour of peace, reconciliation and dialogue. We hops the aspirations of its people to peaceful reunification will find early fulfilment.
This year marks the fortieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The Declaration, which furnishes the philosophical basis for the human rights work of the United Nations, is of seminal importance. Like the Charter itself, it points to the interdependence of human rights, social and economic progress and international peace and security. Over the past four decades, the concepts embodied in the Declaration have been developed and enriched, particularly with regard to economic, social and cultural rights. It remains our firm belief that the inherent dignity of the human person requires full respect for his civil and political rights and, equally, for his economic, social and cultural rights.
While there; have been encouraging developments recently in the political sphere, the outlook in the area of international economic co-operation remains bleak. The low rates of growth of world trade and output in recent years will not suffice to resolve any of the major problems facing the world economy. In the industrialized countries high rates of unemployment persist, making it difficult for them to undertake the structural adjustments that ate necessary in the long term. The major imbalance, with its attendant uncertainties, continues to persist. For the developing countries the outlook is even worse. Inadequate resource flows, deteriorating terms of trade and the heavy burden of external debt have all but halted the development process of these countries. They have retarded attempts to address the fundamental problem of poverty and deprivation. The 1980s are being characterized as the lost decade of development.
The policies of the major developed countries constitute the essential determinants of the external environment for the developing countries. There has been no coherent and considered effort to fashion these policies on the basis of co-operative international action, taking into account their impact and consequences for the developing countries. Here it is useful to recall the proposals made by the developing countries for removing the structural deficiencies and fundamental failings of the international monetary, financial and trading systems. The underlying structural and systemic problems of the world economy have to be addressed by deliberate and co-operative international action that gives full recognition to global interdependence. Both the developed and the developing countries need to pursue convergent and mutually reinforcing policies in the interrelated areas of trade, money and finance.
The area of international trade is being increasingly characterized by an erosion of the accepted rules and regulations and by reliance on unilateral discriminatory action. Despite repeated affirmation of commitments on standstill and rollback, protectionism continues to grow unabated. Protectionist measures ate imposed in those areas where the developing countries have demonstrated their competitiveness and made investments for structural reforms. There has been little progress so far in the ongoing Uruguay Round on multilateral trade negotiations in areas of direct interest to the developing countries, such as safeguards, textiles, agriculture and tropical products. The Uruguay Round should provide an important opportunity for strengthening and preserving the multilateral trading system. It should also help to reduce the tensions and distortions that characterize the world trade system.
The proposals made in the new areas in the Uruguay Round have to be consistent with the right of developing countries to manage their economies in accordance with their national objectives and priorities, to regulate activities of transnational corporations and to channel investment into those desired sectors of their economies. Such proposals should promote the autonomous and self-reliant development of those countries.
Another area of concern is the stagnation or decline, in real terms, of resource flows to developing countries. The international financial system has failed to ensure the transfer of adequate resources on proper terms and conditions to developing countries and thus provide adequate financing for development activities. The alleviation of the current development crisis requires з more effective system that will guarantee an increasing flow of resources, in particular official development assistance resources, to developing countries and also guarantee access by international monetary and financial institutions to adequate resources.
Let us collectively recognize the need to evolve a more broad-based system for managing the world economy that reflects the interests of all groups of countries and provides an equitable and harmonious basis for the collective management of global interdependence. The seventh session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development was a small step in this direction. In the coming days we must make use of other opportunities for building a renewed consensus on development directed against the global problem of hunger and poverty. The formulation and elaboration of an international development strategy for the Fourth United Nations Development Decade provides such opportunity.
The virtual paralysis of the North-South dialogue makes it all the more important for the developing countries to redouble their efforts to collective self-reliance through the economic co-operation among developing countries. It has become imperative for developing countries to build on complementary in their economies. In this respect the conclusion in Belgrade earlier this year of the Agreement on the Global System of Trade Preferences was a significant achievement. It laid down for the first time among the signatory developing countries the legal and institutional foundation for trade expansion.
In our own region the formation of the South Asian Association of Regional Co-operation has provided a framework for wide-ranging economic and technical co-operation. Specific areas of mutually beneficial co-operation have been identified and practical measures are being implemented by member States.
One is, however, constrained to note that economic co-operation among developing countries has developed only partially and its full potential remains unexplored. What is needed is a hard look at concrete programmes to address, in the first instance and in the main, the elementary human needs of a large chunk of humanity. In these areas it is possible to make a better impact than has happened so far.
During the current year many developing countries have been hit by natural disasters requiring urgent international relief operations. Large areas in Africa have been afflicted by prolonged drought. Jamaica has been devastated by a hurricane of unprecedented magnitude, and Sudan by floods. Our own region, South Asia, has witnessed widespread havoc caused by floods, above all in Bangladesh, though we too have not been spared the ravages of floods. It was our privilege, as a friendly neighbour, to be the first to go to the assistance of the people of Bangladesh in response to an appeal from the Government of Bangladesh. A task force of experts from Bangladesh and India has been set up to study the Ganga and Brahmaputra waters jointly for flood management and the water flow thereof. 
Over the past two decades, drug abuse and illicit trafficking in drugs have assumed proportions of a major global problem, not only affecting consumers but also posing serious problems for transit States. We hope that the Plenipotentiary Conference scheduled to convene in Vienna later this year in order to finalize a draft convention on this question will meet with success.
The United Nations is dedicated to the pursuit of the twin goals of peace and development. It can claim credit for significant achievements in both these spheres, and in particular in recent months we have seen encouraging progress in the resolution of complex political issues. But in the sphere of economic and social development, its major successes belong to past decades; its achievements recently have been relatively modest. We must renew our commitment to the eradication of the evils of poverty, disease and illiteracy through concerted international action. This is a struggle that must be waged in common by all humankind. As Jawaharlal Nehru told the Assembly in 1963, "The only war we want is a war against poverty and disease and its brood".
Many centuries ago India's sages gave the calls "Let us move, together. Let us talk, together. Let us be of single common mind."
The renewed sense of community witnessed in the United Nations today gives hope that over the coming year, in time for its forty-fourth session, the world body can set before itself a viable specific agenda for the 1990s that would help render our planet ready for the century drawing in upon it. Such an agenda must assess and chart the means of fulfilment of the minimum needs of man. The world, as Mahatma Gandhi put it, has enough to fulfil man's need, but not his greed. This distinction between need and greed becomes all the more real and crucial at a time when geo-environmental, geo-economic and geo-political imperatives have to be fully harmonized in the interest of survival. Runaway desires of imprudent humans must be tailored so as to be compatible with the capacity to fulfil them. If we collectively determine to do that, this forum, the United Nations, is the place where we must begin, for the United Nations is as strong, and only as strong, as the will of its Members.
And when we talk of Members, let us not forget that behind the Member States represented in this Assembly are the men and women of the world. It is they that give this Organisation its flesh and its blood and should therefore legitimately dictate its aspirations and efforts. Their control over rulers who fall short of or go beyond their mandate is not as palpable as it should be, but that is part of man's constant aspiration, which the United Nations needs to be inspired by in order to give effective voice to the millions who cannot speak for themselves.
The United Nations should thus promote the ascendancy of peoples, translating into reality the relationships which the peoples would wish to have among themselves.
Invested with a popular dimension, rooted in a time when the process of peace can be rendered irreversible and man's scarce energies given a chance to better his own being, this is the moment for the United Nations which should endure until the mission for humanity is completed.
We must not fail.
﻿
Mr. President, I should like at the outset to congratulate you on your election to the esteemed post of President of the forty-third session of the General Assembly. I feel sure that the possibility of restoring to the United Nations the spirit of conciliation and peace for which it was founded will depend, in no small measure, on your wise and experienced guidance.
In a discussion of the Middle East, history should precede diplomacy. The region has known epochs of war and golden ages, military conquests and spiritual greatness. It was in the Middle East that an invisible divide saw frustration and promise prevail in an unpredictable, seemingly uncontrollable, cycle. Yet it was man who triggered waves of hope and despair. Thus it was man who determined the course of history.
Today, once again, the region faces a moment of human choice.
We are preparing for a better tomorrow. We are prepared with a vision of peace. It is the vision of an end to a futile, economically devastating arras race now sliding in the inhumane direction of chemical and biological warfare. Ballistic missiles know no boundaries, chemical warheads do not distinguish young from old. Those senseless enough to employ them must recognize that they are creating a danger to themselves as well.
It is a vision of an opportunity to concentrate on scientific and technological breakthroughs on Earth and in space, on civilian requirements rather than military needs where resources wasted on armaments are invested in creative enterprises from the greening of the land to the clearing of the waters, from educating young children to caring for the senior citizen.
It is a vision of a region whose stability is inviting, whose dwelling is hospitable, whose creativity is encouraging, whose needs are seriously addressed by those seeking to invest in promoting stability and in expanding economic potential.
It is a vision of a region come of age, a region cognizant of global rapprochement, a region ready to tackle the heretofore seemingly insoluble in order to offer a better future for all - Jews and Arabs alike - a region ready to respect differences among peoples without discriminating against any.
It is a vision that is a necessity. It is a vision that is within reach.
Yet the smoke of old fires is still in the air and new ones threaten to darken the horizon. 
Unless we take decisive action to change course belligerency will not be overcome. We have to do our utmost to ensure that never again will a young man or woman die in a war we failed to prevent.
What should be done to achieve this goal?
I shall start with Israel.
Three years ago Israel stood before this Assembly and pledged to dedicate its efforts to the pursuit of peace. That pledge rested not only on resolve, but also on a conviction: that in the north, war can be brought to an end; in the south, peace can be salvaged and nourished and, in the east, the ground can be laid to start meaningful negotiations.
In all three directions we laboured to fulfil the commitment.
In the north, we put an end to our involvement in Lebanon. We are out of Lebanon, its land and politics. Our sole concern is to see that Lebanon no longer serves as the base for hostile activities against us.
In the south, we have revived our relations with Egypt, which has since restored full diplomatic representation in Israel. We have witnessed Egypt, under the steady leadership of President Mubarak - dedicated to progress at home and peace in the region - reassume its central role in the Arab world without parting with its peace strategy.
In the east, we have experienced hope and frustration. Until less than a year ago, before things went awry, the West Bank turned from the centre of violent debate to the focus of diplomatic efforts. Most significantly, in April 1987, energetic and creative diplomacy produced a framework for negotiations. Known as "the London Document", it provided a non-imposing internationally supported setting for direct negotiations. 
Unfortunately, while still viable, the effort has not yet reached fruition. Sadly, the absence of progress was accompanied by an outbreak of violence. Wrongly, the Palestinians chose to knock on the door of the future with stones in their hands. Knocking with a message of peace would have triggered an entirely different situation.
Indeed, the Palestinians must recognize that it is possible to secure their legitimate rights - but not at the expense of Israel's security. Palestinian aspirations and Israeli security are not necessarily incompatible. 
Peace is an Israeli national interest. While we have confidence in the capacity of the Israeli Defence Forces to defend our country, by deterring any aggression and defeating it if need be, we consider the achievement of peace through diplomacy the greatest victory of all. My country has never surrendered to the pressures of war and will never yield to violence. In peace negotiations we shall stand firm on our security interests. Yet we stand ready for a historic compromise with our neighbours. For 40 years we have built our strength so as not to negotiate out of weakness. Today we are strong enough to negotiate for peace.
Israel has no intention of harming the Palestinian people. Israel has no desire to dominate their lives or to hurt their pride. We are prepared to negotiate with them, fairly, freely, as equals, a meeting-ground of needs, where Palestinians can enjoy their identity and Israelis security in peace.
We are prepared to conduct negotiations on the basis of the only framework, reaffirmed this week in the trilateral meeting chaired by President Reagan, with the participation of the Egyptian Minister for Foreign Affairs, and accepted by Arab countries as well as by all permanent members of the Security Council - that is. Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), calling for a territorial compromise and secure borders. They are the only existing common ground.
As we stand ready to live up to these commitments, we shall be as clear in addressing our expectations of our neighbours. For there can be peace, but not unilaterally; there can be accommodation, but only by mutual effort. We expect from the Arab world a clear voice for peace. For how long can a desire for peace be treated as a secret password as though we were living in clandestine surroundings? Commitment to peace must emerge loud and clear, for sceptics to witness, for the hopeful to respond. 
We expect the Arab world to realize that there is no indirect peace. Peace is meant to reinforce, not to undermine, freedom and security for all involved.
We expect the Arab world, including the Palestinians, to do away with the contradiction of sweet promises and bitter violence. A policy of "no war, no peace", much like a policy that claims to combine both, is an exercise in evasion. A choice must be made: to pay the price of peace or to be resigned to the costs of war.
All of us must recognize changing realities. That which was rejected when offered, that which was doomed by war, that which could have been possible, belongs to the past. In the realities of 1988 the lines of 1947 no longer exist. After the Six-Day War Israel should not be expected to return to the lines from which it attacked. Readiness for a territorial compromise does not include readiness to compromise security.
A breakthrough requires the understanding that peace is a matter of choice; it is the outcome of decisions; it is the product of a historic compromise. No vague formulation can replace a clear strategy to part with the past. The turn to a so-called Government-in-exile, the return to General Assembly partition resolution 181 (II), represents yet another escape to the realm of self-illusion. Any attempt to add to or subtract from the only commonly accepted basis for negotiations is bound to destroy the existing framework without creating a new one. Fuelled by a commitment to no war and no violence, no terrorism and no pressure, we can travel the distance towards accommodation.
To the Palestinians I must say with candour that violence does not pay off. By avoiding negotiations they are depriving themselves of their hope. For there is hardly a chance for a compromise to emerge in the absence of, or prior to, a free negotiating process. 
Although we cannot agree in advance on the outcome of negotiations  we can agree on the process by which to go forward - negotiations as an open-ended effort, free of pressure, imposition or threat. In those negotiations, Jordanians and Palestinians, much like ourselves, may present expectations and demands as they labour to balance contradictory aspirations so as to answer the call of peace. We are ready to enter into negotiations with Jordan and with authentic representatives of the Palestinian people who ate men of peace and not men of violence, in order to solve our differences with Jordan and to resolve the Palestinian problem in all its aspects. We are ready to negotiate with a joint Jordanian-Palestinian delegation. Yet, as peace is unlikely to be achieved in one leap, we are prepared to start negotiations without prior conditions with a Jordanian delegation or a Palestinian one. We hope that the Palestinians will not postpone the prospects of peace; and we hope that Jordan, regardless of its relations with them, will not postpone negotiations either.
I wish to express the gratitude of my people to the United States, its leaders and its institutions for their firm and consistent support. The United States has enabled us to guarantee our security. It has encouraged us, as it has our neighbours, to enter into political negotiations.
The Shultz initiative calling upon the parties to enter into direct negotiations and negotiate a just and fair solution calls also on the permanent members of the Security Council to avoid imposing solutions, refrain from applying pressure and serve as supporters of peace. This initiative, which provides for direct negotiations launched in a non-coercive international setting - remains available for consideration.
When we had an opportunity to review the prospects for peace earlier this week we were reassured by the unanimity among the host. President Reagan, and his guests from Egypt and Israel that there is no substitute for an ongoing, uninterrupted effort towards peace, and that all those attending are resolved to fill the next few months with relevant content.
I wish to express my hope that the policies adopted by the Soviet Onion under the leadership of Mikhail Gorbachev will lead to a world of more ploughshares and fewer swords. Moscow has undertaken some steps, which, though partial and limited, are yet of importance. Zionist prisoners have been released. The number of Jewish emigration permits has grown. Consular groups have been stationed in the Soviet Union and Israel respectively. We have taken note of statements from Moscow calling on all sides in the Middle East to adopt realistic positions with the objective of demilitarizing international relations. 
I wish to express the hope of my people that the cultural autonomy announced by the Soviet leadership will enable our Jewish brethren to pray to our Lord in their own synagogues, to teach their children the history of the Jewish people, to express themselves in the language of their forefathers, and to set sail to the shores of the promised land.
As we watch with wonder and respect the People's Republic of China rearrange its own destiny, we hope it will find this the occasion to support a non-coercive setting for Arab-Israeli negotiations, as well as to normalize its relations with the State of Israel.
There is nothing in our region's history or in its present that rules out a different future. In an era of peace and co-operation, the industrial dynamics of the Far Fast, the Economic Community of Europe, the free enterprise and the enterprise of freedom of the United States, and the Soviet capacity to introduce an air of glasnost can all apply to the Middle East. We can draw on the experience of others. We can add that which is unique to us and offer our young generation the dawn of prosperity in peace.
In order to prepare the ground for the launching of our region on the long road to peace, may we suggest that all relevant parties undertake the following: those interested in the promotion of peace and stability in the Middle East undertake a moratorium on all threats or acts of violence; those interested in promoting Arab-Israeli peace negotiations undertake to encourage and facilitate the early convening of such negotiations in a non-coercive setting, free of a renewed arms race and free of external pressure; and those committed to the cause of peace in the Middle East reaffirm their adherence to ,the only commonly accepted basis for such negotiations - Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) - the renunciation of violence and terror and recognition of the right of all peoples and States in the region to freedom, dignity, peace and security.  
Before I conclude I wish to refer again to yet another issue that is very close to our hearts. As we have pointed out so often in the past, in Yemen, in Syria, in Iran and elsewhere our brethren are today permitted neither the free pursuit of our common heritage nor free departure to Israel. We call upon the Governments of those countries to respect basic human rights. We also call upon the Governments to reject the shameful assertion that Zionism is racism, a statement that shows no understanding of Zionism and a dangerous misunderstanding of racism.
Forty years ago the founder of our State, David Ben-Gurion, against the background of the turmoil of war and revival, introduced our Declaration of Independence, which stated:
"We extend our hand in peace and neighbourliness to all the neighbouring States and their peoples, and invite them to co-operate with the independent Jewish nation for the common good of all."
Israel at 40, proud of its accomplishments at home, confident about its future, today reiterates that very call; we extend our hand in peace to all our neighbours, peoples and States, as we stand ready to alter the course of Middle East history. At the all-too-familiar crossroads of hope and despair we are convinced that the choice is ours to make.
Most appropriately, this week our people celebrate the holiday of Succoth, the Feast of Tabernacles, as we pray together "Spread over us the Tabernacle of Thy peace ..."
"He who maketh peace in heavens, may He make peace for us ..."
We need it; we can help to achieve it. 
﻿Sir, I congratulate you on your election to the presidency of this forty-third session of the General Assembly. I say, with the benefit of my personal acquaintance with you, that it is an honour that you truly deserve. This Assembly is in good hands as it begins to tackle the work on its agenda. 
This forty-third session of the General Assembly carries more than the usual sense of occasion. I am not alone in detecting here a feeling of purpose and o  achievement that has not always been evident in recent years. I take great satisfaction in being able to address the Assembly at a time when the standing of the United Nations is higher than it has been for some time. Even the fountain works. The mood has changed distinctly since the fortieth commemorative session, because, despite the difficulties and uncertainties it has faced, the Organization has pursued its diverse agenda while tackling a major programme of administrative reform. The record in recent times has been one of solid achievement.
The changing international climate has helped this process. In this Hall on Monday, President Reagan in his valedictory address spoke to us of his satisfaction at the movement towards a more constructive relationship between his country and the Soviet Union. Foreign Minister Shevardnadze pursued the same theme. In certain regions of the world there has been welcome progress in resolving conflicts that had been festering for some time„ Many of the signs are favourable.
That will be a matter of particular satisfaction to the smaller members of the international community, including my own country. We have always attached importance to the principle that the collective effort of that community should above all be applied to the task of keeping the peace. That was the central purpose of those who founded the Organization. Today it remains a goal of no less importance. Thus far 1988 has been a year of significant peacemaking, from which the world can take heart and upon which it can build. As one who stood here to address the fortieth anniversary session, I am pleased that we are now seeing renewed recognition of the value of the role and achievements of the United Nations.
Recent developments have highlighted the continuing value of this Organization's efforts in the settlement of international conflict. The accords reached on Afghanistan and the cease-fire in the devastating Gulf War required the co-operation of those directly involved. But a particular tribute must go to the dedication of the Secretary-General. The people who ate saved from further threat or have the hope of peace are indebted to his patience, skill, perseverance and unquenchable optimism. We welcome the role he has played.
There are other situations that still need the resources the United Nations can offer by way of mediation or assistance with peacemaking. Western Sahara, Namibia, Cyprus and Cambodia are all affected by unresolved conflicts. But even here the auguries are promising.
In this age regional tensions cannot be isolated from the mainstream of international life. There are dangers for all of us in conflict wherever it occurs. It follows that we share a responsibility to do all that we can to eliminate the conditions in which conflict breeds and to restore the peace if it is broken. At times the principle of collective security has commanded more support than the practice. I hope the success of current peace-keeping efforts under United Nations auspices will reinvigorate the principle of collective security and lead to its wider application.
My Government pledged last year to expand our practical contribution to the United Nations peace-keeping efforts. I am pleased that we have been able to give effect to that undertaking. Our existing commitment to the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization has been maintained. In the past month we were pleased to be able to respond to the Secretary-General's request for a contribution to the United Nations Iran-Iraq Military Observer Group (UNIIMOG). A contingent of New Zealand army officers was deployed to UNIIMOG following the cease-fire. Earlier this week a Royal New Zealand Air Force Andover transport aircraft with flight crews and maintenance personnel left New Zealand to become an important national contribution to UNIIMOG's air capacity. We stand ready to assist in a practical way if, as we hope, solutions are found to other long-standing conflicts.
I have already welcomed the signing of the Geneva Accords on Afghanistan. Noteworthy as they were, the Accords did not put a final end to the conflict in Afghanistan nor did they bring into being a fully representative government enjoying the confidence of the people of Afghanistan. New Zealand hopes that the withdrawal of the remaining Soviet forces will be accompanied by real progress in addressing those unresolved problems. As Mr. Shevardnadze said:
"The Geneva Accords" [should be] "the first step in a chain reaction leading to a healthier world." (A/43/PV.6, p. 66)
The values of tolerance and respect for the dignity and worth of human beings can be seen by us all in the current Olympic Games. They are a sign of that healthier world and we congratulate the Republic of Korea on its role as host. But it is a matter for regret that divisiveness has persisted on the Korean peninsula for so long. We look for an easing of tensions and an improvement in relations between the Koreas.
Cambodia, too, has been a tragic source of international tension for many years. That impasse has come to seem rather less intractable during 1988. In each of the past nine years, this Assembly has rightly emphasized Vietnam's violation of the Charter of the United Nations by its invasion and occupation of Cambodia. That remains a fundamental issue.
But we must insist also on a settlement there which will prevent a return to power by the Khmer Rouge. The international community was slow to accept the evidence of genocide committed by the Pol Pot Government and we have had to deal with the consequences ever since. We have a responsibility to ensure that such atrocities are never again committed against the peoples of Cambodia. 
Harrowing images of mass persecution, unfortunately not confined to a single country or continent, remain fresh in our memories as we commemorate the fortieth anniversary of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Much has nevertheless been achieved in the intervening years. But it cannot be denied that gross and massive abuses of human rights continue.
The problem of human rights is more and more the focus of the attention of the Members of the United Nations. All of us are bound to speak up and, if we do not, we bear a responsibility for continuing and future evils. The authority of this Organization as it deals with human rights must rest on a commitment by all to objectivity. South Africa's system of apartheid is an abuse in a category of its own. Events of the last year have shown the South African Government clinging tenaciously to its course, in spite of the international community's abhorrence of its apartheid policies.
It has so far spurned all the voices of reason and moderation. Nelson Mandela, the most respected leader in South Africa, remains incarcerated. The Sharpeville Six are still under sentence of death. The intercessions of the Security Council have been ignored. The country lives in a continuing state of emergency; it experiences increasing repression. The South African response to protests from neighbouring States is to make repeated terrorist attacks on them and to undermine their economic stability - all totally unacceptable.
New Zealand has implemented wide-ranging sanctions against South Africa. We believe that such sanctions are an effective means of changing the attitude of the white minority. New Zealand is ready to implement further measures. Our goal is non-violent progress to a non-racial, democratic and just society in South Africa.
There has been an encouraging movement recently towards peace in Angola. In Namibia, the United Nations has faced an enormous task. At last α settlement there appears tantalizingly close. We trust that Namibia's independence can be secured peacefully and soon in accordance with Security Council resolution 435 (1978). That would present a further major achievement in the work of the United Nations on decolonization.
On the initiative of the seven South Pacific member countries of the United Nations, New Caledonia was re-inscribed in 1986 on the United Nations list of Non-Self-Governing Territories, thus invoking a United Nations responsibility for the future of the progress of the Territory to self-determination. The tragic events at Ouvea in New Caledonia earlier this year demonstrated the consequences of ignoring United Nations principles and also the aspirations of a major communal group. New Zealand therefore welcomed the decision in June by the new Prime Minister of France and the leaders of the loyalist and independence movements in New Caledonia to move together on a plan for political development. That plan rightly takes account of the interests of all genuine New Caledonians.
That development was recognized last month by the Special Committee on Decolonization in a resolution which was adopted by consensus and has since been endorsed by the South Pacific Forum at its annual meeting last week. No one should underestimate the difficulties that may lie ahead, but everything is looking better. We look forward to a free and genuine act of self-determination in New Caledonia which is consistent with United Nations principles and leads to a settlement safeguarding the rights of all New Caledonians, including the indigenous Kanak people. 
Some argue that while the United Nations has a vital role in dealing with regional issues of the kind I have mentioned, the scope for its involvement in the balance between the super-Powers is a limited one. I do not accept that. We have seen how the super-Powers inevitably become involved in the troubles of the world's regions. Equally, issues of disarmament - including those which vitally involve the super-Powers cannot be considered as anything but questions involving all members of the international community for we are all affected, by choice or otherwise.
The issue of nuclear disarmament has taken on new urgency. Nuclear weapons technology no longer remains the exclusive preserve of the five permanent Members of the Security Council. The capacity to build a nuclear weapon is now possessed by a larger number of countries, and soon even more will have it. There are indications that some of those countries have nuclear ambitions. Whatever their motivation, such ambitions have to be curtailed.
There is a real risk here. Regional conflicts, and their tendency to attract external intervention, are dangerous enough as it is. But the prospect of nuclear weapons being deployed in such situations must now be taken into account. In that event, the dangers we would all face would be appalling.
This is an added reason why the efforts of the United States and the Soviet Union to agree on further reductions in their nuclear arsenals are so important. What prospect is there of blocking the spread of nuclear weapons if these two nations cannot stop their relentless drive to develop and deploy new nuclear weaponry? In the course of last year's general debate, New Zealand applauded the United States and the Soviet Union for their decision to eliminate their land-based intermediate-range nuclear missiles. The resulting treaty is now for the first time leading to a real reduction in the world's stock of nuclear weapons. With an agreement in the strategic arms reduction talks, the super-Powers would truly have shown the way to the other nuclear weapons States and those which have nuclear ambitions. It is not too much to hope that a corner would be turned and the threat of vertical and horizontal proliferation would no longer hang over us all. 
New Zealand believes that achieving reductions and balances in conventional forces will be central, in the search for nuclear disarmament, to the nuclear-free world seen by President Reagan and General Secretary Gorbachev at Reykjavik. In Europe and many other parts of the globe the accumulation of conventional forces, often without regard to actual defensive requirements, has heightened tensions and led some to look for other mote dangerous means of deterring aggression; so the processes of nuclear and conventional disarmament must take place in step, and must involve all States.
Yet, at the third United Nations special session devoted to disarmament, when we had an opportunity to set up a multilateral disarmament agenda to take us up to the beginning of the next century, we could not take advantage of it. But our failure then does not mean it cannot be done. Instead we have the task now, beginning at this session of the Assembly, to pick up where the special session left off.
Rather than confess disappointment at the special session's results, or conclude that the job is too difficult, we must try all the harder to broaden the areas of international agreement. The search for consensus on the prevention of an arms race in outer space must go on. The campaign must continue unabated to convince those few remaining States which yet doubt it that a comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty is an essential measure to end the proliferation of nuclear weapons.
The world community must at last bring to conclusion the negotiations on a comprehensive chemical-weapons convention. The Secretary-General has been called on time and time again to investigate allegations of chemical weapons use. He should never again have to issue a finding confirming such a charge. These hideous weapons must be outlawed once and for all, so that the world will never again be a horrified witness to chemical warfare. The main elements of a multilateral agreement have now been elaborated by the Conference on Disarmament. It is time to finish the job.
New Zealand has taken substantial disarmament initiatives. We are proud to have been part of the regional drive to create the South Pacific Nuclear-Free Zone, a significant multilateral arms-control measure.
The Treaty of Rarotonga makes a decisive contribution to the stability of the region. The majority of South Pacific Forum members have become parties to the agreement. Two of the nuclear Powers, the Soviet Union and China, have ratified the protocols to the Treaty. We look to the other nuclear Powers to do the same. The Treaty covers a wide area of the region, bordering the Latin American nuclear-weapon-free zone to the east, and the demilitarised Antarctica to the south. We support ongoing co-operation with the Latin American patties to the Treaty of Tlatelolco so that we can each benefit from our mutual experience.
For nearly 30 years the Antarctic Treaty and its associated instruments have provided the framework for effective and peaceful co-operation in Antarctica, keeping that vast area free of all military activities. The Treaty, which is open to all States, has been the basis for a unique programme of scientific research and for the adoption of measures to protect the fragile environment.
A further element was added to the treaty system with the adoption in June this year of the Convention on the regulation of Antarctic mineral resource activities. New Zealand was pleased to host the final session of the negotiation. The Convention provides a strong mechanism for protecting the Antarctic environment if mineral resource activities ever take place. It is a significant strengthening of international co-operation under the Antarctic Treaty. A peaceful Antarctica is of the highest importance for New Zealand. We look for a consensus at this session of the Assembly to preserve the Antarctic Treaty. New Zealand is strongly opposed to any efforts to undermine it.
The world economy offers us little cause for satisfaction or confidence. Trade growth is uncertain. The economic difficulties facing many developing countries seem almost intractable. Indebtedness and underdevelopment are threats to global economic stability. Much is at stake for developed and developing countries alike in the present round of multilateral trade negotiations. New Zealand calls on all member countries of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade to go to the forthcoming mid-term review in Montreal in a positive mood, determined to achieve real progress.
New Zealand places special important on achieving from the Uruguay Round a liberalization of world agricultural trade and the elimination of domestic and international policies which distort such trade. There would be no better single way of solving the menacing problems of indebtedness and underdevelopment of which I have spoken.
There have been significant moves recently towards regional free-trade areas, including an agreement between New Zealand and Australia to establish a single trans-Tasman market by 1990. It is vital, however, that the international community should continue at the same time to move along the road to an open, market-oriented, multilateral trading system. We must look for strong leadership here from the major economies, which have a special responsibility to apply, fairly and across the board, the principles of comparative advantage and fair competition. Smaller countries like my own, dependent on primary production, require the reassurance that we will not continue to be subjected unreasonably to artificial restraints on trade. 
It is a paradox that the United Nations is demonstrating renewed vitality and relevance at a time when it faces major financial uncertainties. It is unacceptable that Member States should fail to carry out their legal obligations to contribute their assessed financial dues in good time.
We must recognize, nevertheless, that constraints on available resources are likely to remain while at the same time the demands upon the Organization continue to grow. Accordingly, there is no choice but to maintain the worthwhile progress already achieved towards administrative reform; otherwise, the Organization will be incapable of meeting the critical challenges as they arise.
I speak here as the representative of the Fourth New Zealand Labour Government. The First New Zealand Labour Government, and its Prime Minister Mr. Peter Fraser, played a deeply committed role in the discussions leading to the adoption of the Charter in 1945. New Zealand's hopes of those early days have been exceeded by some of the Organization's achievements - in its economic and social work, for example, and in its human rights and decolonization activities. By contrast, our high hopes for the United Nations peace-making and disarmament roles have yet to be fully realized, but we are optimistic that the log-jam has started to move in those areas.
New Zealand continues to set high store on the work of the United Nations - particularly in its tasks of promoting world peace, preserving the global environment, combating world hunger, removing racial discrimination everywhere and creating equal opportunities for men and women throughout the world. We are determined to maintain New Zealand's strong support in the years ahead.
﻿
As my first duty, permit me, Sir, to congratulate you on your election to the important and honourable post of President of the General Assembly at the current session.
We are meeting at a remarkable time. Though it may appear quite unremarkable on the working calendar of our Organization, it is a time filled with extraordinary events - events that can become the norm for the life of mankind if we succeed in turning them into a trend. Such, in our view, should be the main thrust of the current session, which in many respects is a watershed for the world community. I am referring to a new world calendar which is being created by the efforts of States and peoples, by the efforts of the United Nations. 
A character in the classical comedy "Woe from Wit" exclaims, "Calendars all lie". However, the calendar that has taken shape today does not deceive us. It tells of change in the world; change that is a product of reason. We find on that calendar the Moscow summit meeting, at which Mikhail Gorbachev and Ronald Reagan exchanged the instruments marking the entry into force of the Treaty on the elimination of intermediate- and shorter-range missiles; the conclusion of the Geneva Accords on political settlement around Afghanistan; the first ever public destruction of nuclear missiles; and the cease-fire in the Iran-Iraq war. 
All this is a product of reason, of a new political intellect, which has superseded the dark legacy of the past. It is destroying the reciprocal "enemy images" that have existed and is shaping the image of co-operative partners. 
It has made it possible to discuss a world without arms in the emerging context of real disarmament, as was recently demonstrated at the third special session of the General Assembly on disarmament. It offers us a chance for the successful conclusion of the Vienna meeting, which is a major milestone in the process of the Helsinki Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) .
All that has occurred in the year 1988, which has witnessed many other remarkable events. This year has witnessed the four-party talks on southern Africa; the movement towards a political settlement around Kampuchea; contacts to resolve problems existing on the Korean peninsula; dialogue between the leaders of the two communities in divided Cyprus that were until recently irreconcilable; and the positive response to the initiative of the United Nations Secretary-General concerning a settlement of the problem of Western Sahara. I shall permit myself to include among the year's landmark events the Party Conference in my own country. Its main conclusion was that perestroika is irreversible. It is irreversible in both our domestic and our foreign policy. Radical change in our own house - and here I am quoting Mikhail Gorbachev - has engendered new approaches by us to international affairs too. In a sense, the calendar that I have brought to your attention is one of the consequences of that process.
Two years ago we said here that group, bloc or ideological considerations were beginning to give way to an understanding of peace as the supreme value. Only peace, translated from the language of declarations into practical action, can give mankind a chance of survival. The Soviet Union has grasped this world-wide trend and coupled it with its own perestroika, its process of renewal.
Today the world is changing along new lines. Through the joint efforts of States and by implementing the principles of the new political thinking, it has become possible to avert the threat of war. To a large extent this is due to the political will demonstrated by the leaders of States, and here I can only agree with President Reagan's remarks yesterday about the beneficial impact on that process of Soviet-American political dialogue.
We are now moving further ahead - towards comprehensive security. This requires truly international co-operation. This universal international alliance must rise above differences, which, to use the words of Albert Einstein, are infinitely small compared to the danger that threatens us all.
The formation of this alliance is being facilitated by the emergence of mechanisms of interaction among States and peoples, first and foremost through the United Nations and its institutions. Its main working unit, its engine, its heart, is here, in our house of peace, as are the people who have found way to increase the power of the instruments of peace-making, and we thank them for that. There is however, no better way of expressing gratitude than by a collective effort to enhance the role of the United Nations and make it stronger not only as a unique international forum but also as an equally unique global centre for ensuring universal and regional security and the security of each country. 
In this capacity the United Nations should, in our view, play a more active and direct role in eliminating the main threat to mankind - the threat of a nuclear catastrophe. We would like to see greater involvement by the United Nations in the process of nuclear disarmament, in reaching a global agreement on the cessation and prohibition of nuclear-weapons testing, and in creating nuclear-free zones in various parts of the world.
Space should become an area for the priority attention of the United Nations. The international community has a vital interest in preventing it from becoming an arena for military rivalry. Today this can still be done; tomorrow will be too late.
The Soviet Union has made the case for setting up a world space organization, which could include a centre for international co-operation in the peaceful uses of outer space, to be established on the basis of the Krasnoyarsk radar, as proposed by Mikhail Gorbachev.
We call upon the Government of the United states to follow that example, and thus allay our concern with respect to United States radar facilities in Greenland and Great Britain. By doing that, we would not only lay the material groundwork for international co-operation in space but also strengthen the ABM Treaty regime.
This Organization could become involved, in practical terms, in resolving the issue of conventional arms limitation. The Soviet Union supports the idea of setting up, within the United Nations, a register of conventional arms sales and transfers, and is ready to take part in developing the parameters of such a register. 
The arms race cannot be curbed without putting under control the use of scientific and technological achievements for military purposes. We support the proposal by India and other countries to set up a group, under the United Nations Secretary-General, to provide assessments and forecasts in the area of new technology.
The United Nations will measure up to all these tasks if we take a fresh look at the practical aspects of our work. First of all, the General Assembly, as one of the principal bodies of the Organization, should substantially increase its contribution towards finding ways and means of solving international problems, inter alia, through renewing and improving its methods and procedures.
There is but one criterion here - that decisions be productive and democratically worked out and adopted. A first step in this direction would he to adopt an increased proportion of United Nations decisions by consensus, though it is important that General Assembly resolutions adopted by a vote should not be devalued.
It is also necessary to reinvigorate the work of the Security Council, and to ensure closer interaction among its members. At consultations among the five permanent members of the Council, attended by the Secretary-General, it would be useful to hold periodic reviews of situations in areas of conflict and to identify priority measures to improve the situation. It is felt that there is a need for periodic meetings of the Security Council at the foreign-minister level, as envisaged by the Charter.
The idea of convening special expanded Security Council meetings in regions of tension is worthy of consideration. Such meetings could also be held in the capitals of the Council's permanent members. The Soviet Union confirms its readiness to host such a meeting in Moscow. We all owe a debt to the United Nations, and it is in our common interest to repay our debts. We can repay them in full if, in addition to dollar contributions, we invest innovative thought in the activity of the Organization's institutions, if we revive its main function - as a centre for the settlement of international conflicts through united efforts.
Let there be no lament, then, over the sacred national prerogatives. The Soviet Union is a firm advocate of strengthening national sovereignty, particularly wherever infringements of it are most keenly and painfully felt. We regard as highly objectionable the anomaly of foreign military presence - military bases in other States' territories - as well as violations of national sovereignty by the undeclared arrival of nuclear arms in, or their transit through, ports of other countries. We have stated clearly what we believe: that any military presence must be confined within national borders.
But what we are speaking of now is voluntarily delegating a portion of national rights in the interests of all - paradoxically enough, to strengthen national security, while at the same time strengthening universal security.
The interrelationship of events in an interdependent world increasingly compels us to delegate some national prerogatives to an international organization. In fact, this is happening already. Military activity is ceasing to be taboo. Having cleared the verification barrier, and having initiated the process of real nuclear disarmament, the Soviet Union and the United States, the German Democratic Republic and Czechoslovakia, the United Kingdom, the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, Belgium and the Netherlands gave up some of their rights when they permitted the inspection of facilities in their territories. This was done in the interests of universal security. By establishing new, previously inconceivable, rules of openness in the military sphere, the world is undoubtedly moving towards the creation of a common sovereign right - the right to survive. When the United States Secretary of Defence sits at the controls of a top-secret Soviet bomber, and the Chief of the General Staff of the Soviet armed forces tours an equally secret United States base, that is something more than a mere exchange of protocol courtesies in the spirit of the times; it indicates that the elimination of secrecy is becoming a factor of security.
We draw this conclusion from the conviction that, today, it is no longer possible to achieve political goals by means of war. To put it simply, war is ceasing to be - indeed, it has already ceased to be - an instrument of rational policy.
Let us consider this from the perspective of regional conflicts, while they flare up and develop in different ways, they still have one feature in common - they drag on intolerably long, without delivering positive political results.
However, positive political results are not slow in coming when interference in regional conflicts gives way to the efforts of the world community to promote their settlement. No one should hinder this process. In this context we have to speak of Afghanistan.
The Geneva Accords are not just an isolated local instance of the settlement of a regional conflict. They ate the first step in a chain reaction leading to a healthier world. They are a new promising beginning in world politics, attesting to a qualitative change in political thinking. They are a message of good news to other regions. Any violation of the Geneva Accords undermines those achievements.
The Soviet Union and the Republic of Afghanistan are observing their obligations under those Accords faithfully, to the letter. There is no need to prove that. However attempts are being made arbitrarily to alter the formula established by the Geneva Accords, thus significantly changing its meaning.
As soon as the Soviet troops began to withdraw, a non-stop production line of violations was set in motion. The list of them would totally refute the assertion heard here yesterday that bloodshed has diminished in that region. On the contrary, terror has been mounting sharply and is increasingly directed against civilians.
In the circumstances, the fact is that faithful compliance by some with their obligations creates conditions for others to commit new crimes, of which the most heinous is the destruction of hard-won hopes. This must not be allowed to happen. The chain of conflict settlement generated by Afghanistan must not be allowed to break.
We are not complaining to anyone. We have the means to make things fall into place. But we are responsible to the United Nations, and therefore we are appealing to it. We are proposing that a meeting of the permanent members of the Security Council, hosted by the United Nations Secretary-General, discuss the question of compliance with the Geneva Accords. It would also be appropriate to invite to such a meeting representatives of the parties directly concerned. 
The deep involvement of the United Nations in the resolution of major international problems has spotlighted the acute need for new mechanisms of verification and control. We propose that consideration be given to the idea of an international monitoring and verification agency within the framework of the United Nations.
That body's terms of reference could be very broad. Disarmament and security in all its aspects are becoming an increasingly multilateral and truly international process. The institution for monitoring and verification should also be international.
Many countries feel the need for it. Thus Japan is proposing an interesting idea for the world-wide seismic monitoring of nuclear explosions. France has what we regard as the reasonable idea of setting up an international satellite monitoring system.
These are interesting ideas, but how could they be implemented? Naturally, the most sensible way is to make their, part of a universal monitoring and verification mechanism that would operate under United Nations auspices or within its structure.
Verification is no longer a preference but an imperative of our time. It is an imperative of our time to search for forms and methods for the development of societies that would be in keeping with modern requirements. Certainly this is true with respect to socialism, but with equal certainty it applies to other socio-political systems. While we are changing in both our own and international interests, we are entitled to expect the same kind of perestroika from others.
Separating the wheat from the chaff, distinguishing the right choice from the wrong, and achievements from deterioration, we are unforgiving in judging the past. To be self-critical is the canonical rule for politicians who believe in their people and want the people to believe them. But we expect certain leaders of States who address the international community to be equally self-critical in assessing the past.
It is appropriate to mention this in the year that marks the anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which some are marking by reasserting the supremacy of law, and others by preaching their own faultlessness. We could list numerous international instruments on human rights that have not been ratified by the countries represented here by some speakers. We could talk of the continuous practice of violations of civil rights in those countries. But we prefer to speak of ourselves.
The supremacy of law is the corner-stone of political renewal in our country. Creating a State based on the rule of law also has a direct bearing on our foreign policy.
A constitutionally authorized mechanism for working out and adopting strategic foreign-policy decisions is being put in place in our country. Questions such as military budgets, the use of troops outside the country, and innovations in the development of the armed forces will also be subject to constitutional and legal scrutiny.
For us, the principle of the supremacy of law and the policy of democratising our society ace indivisible. The emergence of a State based on the rule of law links with the world-wide will to assert the primacy of international law as the standard for mankind's existence. Among politico-military, economic, humanitarian and environmental guarantees of universal security, we view its legal guarantees as paramount.
From States based on the rule of law to a world based on the rule of law - such is the logic of the movement. A starting-point on this path could be the elaboration of a major long-term programme for the development of international law. Its thrust could be expressed in the motto "Security, trust and co-operation through law". 
We must also work persistently to enhance the effectiveness of the International Court of Justice on the basis of developing a common approach by all States to that main judicial body of the United Nations. Completion of the preparation of a code of crimes against peace and the security of mankind would be a major step.
Probably nowhere is the role of law so important as in ensuring freedom of choice, which is the linchpin of the new political thinking. For how can there be any freedom to choose one's own course in situations in which international law is constantly violated - as in southern Africa, the Middle East, Central America and elsewhere?
Freedom of choice defies confinement within ideological borders or geographical zones. It cannot be stopped by "crusades"; it can only be recognized. It is absolute, and equally -resolute is our respect for it, regardless of the orientation of any particular country.
By defining freedom of choice as the key link in the new political thinking, we hope to use that key to open many doors that until now have been tightly locked. Recognition of the diversity of interests, the priority of universal human values and the supremacy of political means in solving international problems, and replacing confrontation with dialogue - those and other components of the new political thinking have resulted in substantial and, we trust, irreversible positive changes. Yet, the fires of political inquisition ace still blazing in the world, and some would try to bring to the stake entire nations and movements accused of the heresy of having freely chosen their own course. Ideology in the shape of missile projectiles crushes them with the cruelty of a medieval axe. I should like to stress that our sympathy is on the side of those who seek to achieve freedom of choice.
Why, for instance, can the great American people have their own great dream, and why should the Cuban or the Nicaraguan, the Angolan or the Vietnamese people, the Ethiopian people be deprived of the right to have their own ideals? Why cannot the Palestinian people have their homeland? Why should other nations, countries and movements be humiliated by great Power arrogance? While not renouncing any of our values or denying to others the right to have their own, while continuing to respect the yearning of peoples for national self-assertion and liberation from economic subjugation and political dependence, the Soviet Union supports the de-ideologization of international relations and the exclusion of the overwhelming component of ideological differences from foreign policy and diplomacy. It expects and hopes that others will do likewise.
It expects the problem of how to pool our efforts to be recognized as commensurate with the problem of the survival of mankind. It expects the force of peace-making policy to prevail over the policy of force which has run its historical course.
The division of mankind into great and small countries is something which has also run its historical course. And, if the term "great Powers" is to be kept at all, it is only in the sense of great responsibility towards the rest of the world. Divisions and re-divisions of the world into spheres of influence are historically pointless. Today, we must all have only one sphere of influence – our planet. It will perish if our influence on the threatening course of destructive developments is divided and fragmented into blocs and systems. Therefore, the Soviet leadership has attempted to reinterpret more profoundly the idea, originally inherent in Marxism, of the interrelationship between class and universal human values, according priority to the interests shared by all nations. In our vision of peaceful coexistence as the universal principle of international relations, it does not emerge as a special form of class struggle.
A rigid polarization of the world, which is becoming increasingly diverse, must give way to its consolidation, which allows the rivalry of two different systems to take on non-confrontational forms. This, if you will, is also a choice, the freedom of which is born of the new political thinking and of its dialectics- which makes it possible to put policies to the test of real life.
But it would appear that not everyone measures up to this freedom. Obstinately clinging to divisive fetishes, some would try to put a brake on the action of the centrifugal forces. As a result, any red-letter days have not appeared on the new calendar of peace this year. For example, it does not include the date marking the completion of a treaty on 50 per cent reductions in strategic arms. The pace of real disarmament set by the Treaty on the Elimination of Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles is slowing down as negotiations proceed.
We seemed to have dealt once and for all with the issue of verification, but it has arisen again because of the negative position of our negotiating partners. It looks as if the Russian proverb "Trust but verify" is good only when applied to the Soviet Union but is not applicable to the United States.
Once again we call on the United States of America to reconsider its attitude to verification of the process of reducing and eliminating nuclear arsenals. For verification is something more than the technical checking on the parties compliance with their obligations. It is the material expression of sincerity and honesty, without which it is impossible to make policy today. It is also regrettable that an agreement barring weapons from outer space has not been concluded in 1988.
We had every reason to hope that 1988 would see the signing of a history-making global convention on the complete prohibition and destruction of chemical weapons. Indeed, most of the complex fundamental issues have either been settled already or ace close to agreement. But once again, the sticky quagmire of procrastination is thwarting the final step towards victory. Meanwhile, in the absence of progress an alarming trend towards the spread of chemical weapons and what I would call chemical permissiveness is surreptitiously beginning to develop.
We do not object to the exploration of alternative ways. The Soviet Union takes a positive view of the proposal made yesterday by the President of the United States to convene a conference of the parties to the 1925 Geneva Protocol. At the same time we, of course, assume that the drafting of the convention banning chemical weapons will be continued and, of course, completed.
The beginning of the process of nuclear disarmament has brought into sharper focus the problem of conventional armed forces and armaments, including naval armaments. Here, too, great hopes were being pinned on this year. The programme of radical reductions in the military capabilities of the two opposing political-military alliances proposed by Warsaw Treaty countries has put the problem on the track of practical solution.
We have a clear goal - to achieve a situation in which the two sides would . have only the forces and capabilities sufficient for defence but insufficient for launching a surprise attack or conducting offensive operations. 
There is also another priority problem. Access to conventional weapons in their most modern modifications is expanding. Their technological sophistication makes it easier to use them. There is now no need to spend much time or money on special training, and anyone can easily operate those infernal devices. In other words, conventional weapons are becoming part of everyday life, a common tool in the hands of too many people. This dangerous situation, which is particularly typical of regional conflicts, calls for joint efforts to constrain international arms markets.
Working out a mandate for the future negotiations is also a collective undertaking. Jointly with our allies, we have been finding solutions which bring general agreement closer.
On the question of unfulfilled hopes, we must mention the lack of progress in settling some of the most pressing problems, such as those of the Middle East, Central America, and certain others.
Today, it is clearer than ever what needs to be done. Elementary common sense enjoins that consolidation of forces must be placed above their fragmentation, and constructive dialogue must be placed above destructive scepticism. None of us can any longer waste our time on mutual fault-finding, on mutual recrimination and reproaches. The growing physical destruction of our planet is the verdict against the existing division of the world. It is because of that division that so many pages in the 1988 calendar have not been filled. It is foe the same reason that this year has had such a generous supply of sombre dates.
It is perhaps for the first time that we have seen the stark reality of the threat to our environment - a second front fast approaching and acquiring urgency equal to that of the nuclear and space threat. For the first time we have seen clearly that, in the absence of any global control, man's so-called peaceful constructive activity is turning into global aggression against the very foundations of life on earth. For the first time we have understood clearly what we had guessed: that the traditional view of national and universal security, based primarily on military means of defence, is now totally obsolete and must be urgently revised.
Faced with the threat of environmental catastrophe, the dividing lines of the bipolar ideological world are receding. The biosphere recognizes no division into blocs, alliances or systems. All share the same climatic system and no one is in a position to build his own isolated and independent line of environmental defence.
Man-made "second nature" - the technosphere - has turned out to be dangerously fragile. The consequences of many of its breakdowns are becoming international and global.
The environmental crisis is being exported on an increasing scale, with toxic technologies, facilities, products and wastes spreading, overtly or covertly, through the channels of economic relations.
Quite deliberate attempts are being made to turn densely populated areas of the third world into toxic waste dumps.
In a situation like this it is suicidal to try economically to rein in progressive national developments, to wear down an imaginary enemy by economic pressure. That is the kind of thinking that belongs to the Stone Age.
It is unreasonable to impede the economic reconstruction of countries that seek to restructure the energy industries and to introduce resource-saving and waste-free technologies, thus making the world less dangerous.
How much more sensible it is, as we ate proposing to the United States and other countries, to abolish some planned or ongoing military programmes and channel the funds thus released towards instituting an international regime of environmental security.
All the environmental disasters of this year have placed in the forefront the task of pooling and co-ordinating efforts to develop a global strategy for a rational management of the environment.
All of us - and I emphasize this, all of us - need an international programme to manage the risks involved in economic activities and to shift to alternative technologies that spare both man and nature.
We need resources to save our planet, instead of destroying it. I believe that the world community possesses such resources. But they have to be supplemented, first, by the will and readiness to act and, secondly, by an effective mechanism for international ecological co-operation.
It is quite clear that in this area, too, nothing can be done without the tools of the new political thinking. In this area, too, it must emphasize the factor of time. We have too little of it - very little - and problems are piling up faster than they can be solved.
Even the implementation of the positive decisions already adopted could take years and years. Just the physical elimination of intermediate- and shorter-range missiles will take three years of continuous daily work and the Treaty's entire sequence of implementation will take 13 years. This makes it incumbent upon us to take responsible decisions today.
What are our liabilities? Tens of thousands of nuclear warheads and hundreds of thousands of tons of toxic agents; mountains of conventional armaments; holes burnt in the ozone layer and the eroding biosphere; the greenhouse effect and the depletion of non-renewable sources of energy; acid rains and deserts devouring the green world; forest fires-and floods; drying up seas and dying fauna; terrorism against the peoples and aggression against nature.
What are cur assets? The world's growing maturity which makes it possible to raise and solve global problems on a planetary scale; a growing world-wide "Green Peace" movement; shared perceptions of environmental scientists and policy-makers who are becoming increasingly active as environmentalists, as demonstrated by the document of the States Parties to the Warsaw Treaty and the recent appeal issued by the peace movement; the report entitled "Our Common Future", prepared by the World Commission headed by Mrs. Brundtland, and the United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP) models of environmental renascence to counter environmental apocalypse; the experience of the past three years which attests to the possibility of removing corrosive growths from the body of the earth; the experience of pooling the efforts of States in the use of advanced technology, such as thermonuclear fusion and superconductivity, in the interests of human survival.
This year's calendar has also included another event; the inauguration of the Centre for the development of an international experimental thermonuclear reactor by scientists from very many countries who will chart the way towards inexhaustible sources of energy for the coming century and at the same time develop a model for concerting efforts in the interests of all peoples. 
Among our assets is the realization that a monopoly of a small number of countries over advanced technologies and attempts at all costs to keep others on the sidelines of the emerging science-and-information world may boomerang against the monopolists.
Among our assets is the United Nations, whose high efficiency has been so graphically demonstrated by the events of 1988. They have also highlighted a simple but very profound truth; when nations, particularly the great Powers, begin to co-operate, the United Nations gains in influence and strength, once again recapturing the spirit of its initial objectives.
It is true that the fable about two elephants stamping our grass is still popular. President Reagan's statement yesterday would seem to indicate that this grass is not being threatened.
We do not want to fight, and love is still a remote possibility.
But speaking seriously, the world community has gained much from the improvement in Soviet-American relations.
In this regard I am pleased to cite a remark by Mr. Perez de Cuellar.
The meeting between Gorbachev and Reagan, he said, has shown the world community an example of voluntary dialogue. Governments have suddenly realized that the United Nations is an entirely appropriate place for negotiations and solving problems. Precisely, but I would say "the most appropriate place". If in the past it has not always been that, the Organization itself is least to blame.
Let us speak frankly and say that many of us, including particularly the permanent members of the Security Council, are to blame for the fact that at some point certain fundamental values of our Organization embodied in its Charter were devalued. Now that they are regaining their initial level, it is our duty to learn the bitter lessons of the past for the sake of the future.
Today, for instance, the Soviet Union is reconsidering its previous attitude to the Organization's economic institutions. In particular, we attach great importance to the activities of the United Nations Economic and Social Council and would like to contribute to enhancing its effectiveness.
No country stands to gain by remaining aloof from the international forums of our Organization. Having drawn this more than obvious conclusion, we are asking: should not some of our partners take a fresh look at their attitude to the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)?
The permanent members of the Security Council should set an example in strengthening the authority of the united Nations, enhancing its role and expanding and enriching its peace-making functions. All of us here are witnesses to the beginning of the renaissance of our Organization. At the same time we are architects of this process. We shall enhance the role of the United Nations even more by concerted efforts to combat the threats to our environment. It is, we believe, precisely within the framework of the United Nations that international machinery should be established to formulate urgent decisions on pressing global problems, above all economic and environmental problems. 
The Soviet Union proposes a discussion on the question of how to turn the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) into an environmental council capable of taking effective decisions to ensure ecological security. It proposes that a three-event series of emergency meetings be held - of course, under the auspices of the United nations - to co-ordinate efforts in the field of ecological security; a consultative meeting of experts to discuss the health of the Earth, in 1989? a summit meeting of the leaders of, say, 15 or 20 States representing all continents, and the influential force of our time, the Non-Aligned Movement, in 1992 the holding of the second United Nations international conference on the environment, as planned, in 1992, or even earlier, but in any event at summit level.
We have been speaking of a calendar of real achievements, a calendar of ideas as yet unrealised, a calendar of hopes and plans for the future. The review of this year that we have undertaken is not an end in itself. What can be an end in itself is the inner moral objective of achieving progress and acceptance of the political need to identify the moment of truth, which from time immemorial has tended towards movement, towards overcoming inaction.
This year has been full of both movement and slow-downs. It has shown that Mikhail Gorbachev was right when he said;
"A complex and in many respects unusual situation is developing in the world. We are at the beginning of a new, long road that offers new prospects and new problems" Which tendency will prevail? What will gain the upper hand - the tendency towards further movement ahead or the inertia of stagnation?
The answer is to be found in abandoning certain dogmas, even though cast in the form of eternal truths. We have to write a new catechism of international existence, in which the beginning will be thought and reason, followed by deeds for the sake of our common salvation and development. We must stop sermonizing from lofty international rostrums and recognize the principle of equality in international dialogue.
As for the dogma of "peace through strength", let us leave it to those who worship the faded commandments of the past. The keynote of history is peace through reason, and this, too, is a commandment foe the future.
The past has great power over us, but although that is true, the future has an even greater gravitational pull. The poetic metaphor, "to win the affection of space, to heed the call of the future", takes on a lofty political meaning.
Let us not be deaf to that call. Let us respond to it by really uniting to save life on our Earth.
Let us begin now.
﻿
Half a world away from this place of peace, the firing, the killing, the bloodshed in two merciless conflicts have for the first time in recent memory diminished. After terrible new names, names such as Halabja, Maidan Shahr and Spin Buldak, have been added to the toll-call of human horror, there is today hope of peace in the Persian Gulf and Afghanistan.
So too, in the highlands and coastal cities of southern Africa, places of civil war, places of occupation by foreign troops, talk of peace is heard, peace for the tortured nation of Angola. Sixty-five hundred miles east, in the South-East Asian country of Cambodia, there is hope now of a settlement and the removal of Viet Nam's occupying forces. Finally, in this hemisphere, where only 12 years ago one third of the people of Latin America lived under democratic rule, some 90 per cent do so today. And especially in Central America, nations such as El Salvador, once threatened by the anarchy of the death squad and the spectre of totalitarian rule, now know the hope of self-government and the prospect of economic growth. 
Another change, a change that if it endures may go down as one of the signal accomplishments of our history, a change that is cause for shaking the head in wonder, is also upon us; a change going to the source of post-war tensions and to the once seemingly impossible dream of ending the twin threats of our time - totalitarianism and thermonuclear world war.
For the first time, the differences between East and West - fundamental differences over important moral questions dealing with the worth of the individual and whether Governments shall control people or people control Governments - for the first time these differences have shown signs of easing, easing to the point where there are not just troop withdrawals from places such as Afghanistan, but also talk in the East of reform and greater freedom of the press, of assembly and of religion. Yes, fundamental differences remain, but should talk of reform become more than that, should it become reality, there is the prospect of not only a new era in Soviet-United States relations but a new age of world peace; for such reform can bring peace. History teaches, and my country has always believed that, where the rights of the individual and the people are enshrined, war is a distant prospect. For it is not people who make war; only Governments do that.
I stand at this rostrum, then, at a moment of hope; hope not just for the peoples of the United States and the Soviet Union, but for all the peoples of the world, and hope too for the dream of peace among nations, the dream that began the United Nations. Precisely because of these changes, today the United Nations has the opportunity to live and breathe and work as never before.
Already, Mr. Secretary-General, you, through your persistence, patience and unyielding will, have shown in working towards peace in Afghanistan and the Persian Gulf how valuable the United Nations can be. We salute you for these accomplishments. In Geneva at this very hour there are numerous negotiations under way: multilateral negotiations at the Conference on Disarmament, as well as bilateral negotiations on a range of issues between the Soviets and ourselves. These negotiations, some of them under United Nations auspices, involve a broad arms-control agenda: strategic offensive weapons, strategic defence and space, nuclear testing, and chemical warfare - whose urgency we have witnessed anew in recent days.
And the negotiators ate busy. Over the last few years they h iv/e been engaged in more than an academic exercise. There is movement; the log-jam is broken. Only recently, when the United States and the Soviet Union signed the intermediate-range nuclear forces (INF) agreement, an entire class of United States and Soviet nuclear missiles was eliminated for the first time in history. Progress continues on negotiations to reduce strategic weapons in massive number, with effective verification, and talks will begin soon on conventional reductions in Europe.
Much of the reason for all this goes back, I believe, to Geneva, to the small chateau beside the lake where I and the Soviet General Secretary had the first of several fireside chats - exchanges characterized by frankness, but friendliness too. I said at the first meeting in Geneva that this was a unique encounter between two people who had the power to start a third world war or to begin a new age of peace among nations. I also said that peace conferences, arms negotiations and proposals for treaties could make sense only if they were part of a wider context, a context in which we sought to explore and resolve the deeper underlying differences between us. I said to Mr. Gorbachev then, as I have said to the Assembly before, that nations do not mistrust each other because they are armed; they are armed because they mistrust each other. 

In that place, by that peaceful lake in neutral Switzerland, Mr. Gorbachev and I did begin a new relationship based not just on engagement over the single issue of arras control but on a broader agenda about our deeper differences, an agenda of human rights, regional conflicts and bilateral exchanges between our peoples. Even on the arms-control issue itself we agreed to go beyond the past, to seek not just treaties that permitted building weapons to higher levels, but revolutionary agreements that actually reduced and even eliminated a whole class of nuclear weapons.
What was begun that morning in Geneva has shown results: in the INF Treaty? in my recent visit to Moscow; in my opportunity to meet there with Soviet citizens and dissidents and speak of human rights; and to speak too, in the Lenin Hills of Moscow, to the young people of the Soviet Union about the wonder and splendour of human freedom. The results of that morning in Geneva are seen in peace conferences now under way around the world on regional conflicts and in the work of the United Nations here in New York as well as in Geneva.
But history teaches caution. Indeed, that very building in Geneva, where important negotiations have taken place - those on the Geneva Accords on Afghanistan, and the Iran-Iraq negotiations, for example - we see today as stone-like testimony to a failed dream of peace in another time. The Palais des Nations was the headquarters of the League of Nations, an institution that was to symbolize an end to all war. Yet that institution and its noble purpose ended with the Second World War; ended because the chance of peace was not seized in the 1930s by the nations of the world, ended because humanity did not find the courage to isolate the aggressors, to reject schemes of government that served the State, not the people. We are here today determined that no such fate shall befall the United Nations. We are determined that the United Nations shall succeed and serve the cause of peace for humankind.
So we realize that, even in this time of hope, the chance of failure is teal, but this knowledge does not discourage us: it spurs us on. For the stakes are high; do we falter and fail now, and bring down upon ourselves the just anger of future generations? Or do we continue the work of the founders of this institution, and see to it that, at last, freedom is enshrined and humanity knows war no longer, and that this place, this floor, shall be truly "the world's last battlefield"?
We are determined that it shall be so. So we turn now to the agenda of peace. Let us begin by addressing a concern that was much on my mind when I met with Mr. Gorbachev in the Kremlin as well as on the minds of Soviet citizens I met in Moscow. It is also an issue that I know is of immediate importance to the members of this Assembly who, this fall, commemorate the fortieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
That Declaration says plainly what those who seek peace can forget only at the greatest peril that peace rests on one foundation; observance of the "inalienable rights of all members of the human family". In a century where human rights have been denied by totalitarian governments on a scale never before seen in history, with so many millions deliberately starved or eliminated as a matter of State policy - a history, it has been said, of blood, stupidity and barbed wire - few can wonder why peace has proved so elusive.	
Well, let us understand. If we would have peace, we must acknowledge the elementary rights of our fellow human beings, in our own land and in other lands. If we would have peace, the trampling of the human spirit must cease. Human rights is not for some, some of the time. Human rights, as the Universal Declaration adopted by this Assembly in 1948 proclaims, is "for all peoples and all nations". And for all time.
This regard for human rights as the foundation of peace is at the heart of the United Nations. Those who starve in Ethiopia, those who die among the Kurds, those who face racial injustice in South Africa, those who still cannot write or speak freely in the Soviet Union, those who cannot worship in the Ukraine, those who struggle for life and freedom on boats in the South China Sea, those who cannot publish or assemble in Managua - all of these are more than just an item on your agenda. It must be a first concern, an issue above others. For when human rights concerns are not paramount at the United Nations - when the Universal Declaration of Human Rights is not honoured in these halls and meeting rooms - then the very credibility of this Organization is at stake, the very purpose of its existence in question.
That is why, when progress is made in human rights, the United Nations grows stronger and the United States is glad of it. For example, following a two-year ¡ effort led by the United States, the United Nations Commission on Human Rights took a major step towards ending the double standards and cynicism that had characterized too much of its past. For years, Cuba, a blatant violator of its citizens' human rights, has escaped United Nations censure or even scrutiny. This year, Cuba has responded to pressure generated by the Commission on Human Rights by accepting an investigation into its human rights abuses. Fidel Castro has already begun to free some political prisoners, improve prison conditions, and tolerate the existence of a small, independent national human rights group.
More must be done. The United Nations must be relentless and unyielding in seeking change, in Cuba and elsewhere. And we must also see to it that the Universal Declaration itself is not debased with episodes like the resolution "Zionism is racism". Respect for human rights is the first and fundamental mission of this body, the most elementary obligation of its members. Indeed, wherever one turns in the world today, there is a new awareness, a growing passion for human rights. The people of the world become united: new groups, new coalitions form, coalitions that commit: government, that work against discrimination, that fight religious or political repression, unlawful imprisonment, torture or execution. As those I spoke to at Spaso House said to me last June: Such movements make a difference.
Turning now to regional conflicts, we feel again the uplift of hope. In the Gulf War between Iran and Iraq - one of the bloodiest conflicts since the Second World War - we have a cease-fire. The resolution and the firmness of the allied nations in keeping the Persian Gulf open to international shipping not only upheld the rule of law, it helped prevent further spread of the conflict and laid the basis for peace. So, too, the Security Council's decisive resolution in July a year ago has become the blueprint for a peaceful Gulf. Let this war - a war in which there has been no victor or vanquished, only victims - let this war end now. Let both Iran and Iraq co-operate with the Secretary-General and the Security Council in implementing resolution 598 (1978). Let peace come.
Moving on to a second region, I would recall that when I first addressed the United Nations General Assembly in 1983, world attention was focused on the brutal invasion and illegal occupation of Afghanistan. After nearly nine long years of war, the courage and determination of the Afghan people and the Afghan freedom fighters have held sway - and today, an end to the occupation is in sight. On April 14, the USSR signed the Geneva Accords, which were negotiated under United Nations auspices by Pakistan and the Kabul regime. We encourage the Soviet Union to complete its troop withdrawal at the earliest possible date, so that the Afghan people can freely determine their future without further outside interference.
In southern Africa, too, years of patient diplomacy and support for those in Angola who seek self-determination are having their effect. We look forward to an accord between the Governments of Angola, Cuba, and South Africa that will bring about a complete withdrawal of all foreign troops - primarily Cuban - from Angola. We look forward as well to full implementation of United Nations Security Council resolution 435 (1978) and our longstanding goal of independence for Namibia. We continue to support a growing consensus among African leaders who also believe there can be no end to conflict in the region until there is national reconciliation within Angola.
There are new hopes for Cambodia, a nation whose freedom and independence we seek just as avidly as we sought the freedom and independence of Afghanistan. We urge the rapid removal of all Vietnamese troops and a settlement that will prevent the return of the Khmer Rouge to power, permitting instead the establishment of a genuinely representative government - a government that will, at last, respect fully the rights of the people of Cambodia and end the hideous suffering they have so bravely and needlessly borne.
In other critical areas, we applaud the Secretary-General's efforts to structure a referendum on the Western Sahara. In the Mediterranean, direct talks between Greek and Turkish Cypriot common ties hold much promise for accord in that divided island nation. Finally, we look to a peaceful solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict. So, too, the unnatural division of Europe remains a critical obstacle to Soviet-American relations. 
In most of these areas, then, we see progress and, again, we are glad of it. Only a few years ago, all of these and other conflicts were burning dangerously out of control. Indeed, the invasion of Afghanistan and the apparent failure of will among democratic and peace-loving nations to deter such events seemed to cause a climate where aggression by nations large and small was epidemic, a climate the world had not seen since the 1930s. Only this time, larger war was avoided - avoided because the free and peaceful nations of the world recovered their strength of purpose and will. And now the United Nations is providing valuable assistance in helping this epidemic to recede.
And because we are resolved to keep it so, I would be remiss in my duty if I did not now take note here of the one exception to progress in regional conflicts. I refer here to the continuing deterioration of human rights in Nicaragua and the refusal of the tiny elite now ruling that nation to honour promises of democracy made to their own people and to the international community. This elite - in calling itself revolutionary - seeks no real revolution; the use of the term is subterfuge, deception for hiding the oldest, most corrupt vice of alls man's age-old will to power, his lust to control the lives and steal the freedom of others.
That is why, as President, I will continue to urge the Congress and the American public to stand behind those who resist this attempt to impose a totalitarian regime on the people of Nicaragua; that the United States will continue to stand with those who are threatened by this regime's aggression against its neighbours in Central America.
Today, I also call on the Soviet Union to show in Central America the same spirit of constructive realism it has shown in other regional conflicts; to assist in bringing conflict in Central America to a close by halting the flow of billions of dollars worth of arms and ammunition to the Sandinista regime; a regime whose goals of regional domination, while ultimately doomed, can continue to cause great suffering to the people of that area and risk to Soviet-American relations unless action is taken now.
With regard to the arms reduction agenda, I have already mentioned the importance of the INF Treaty and the momentum developed in the strategic arms reduction talks (START). The draft START treaty is a lengthy process filled with bracketed language designating sections of disagreement between the two sides. But through this summer in Geneva, those brackets have diminished; there is every reason to believe this process can continue. I can tell this Assembly that it is highly doubtful such a treaty can be accomplished in a few months, but I can tell you that a year from now is a possibility - more than a possibility. But we have no deadline. No agreement is better than a bad agreement. The United States remains hopeful, and we acknowledge the spirit of co-operation shown by the Soviet Union in these negotiations. We also look for that spirit to be applied to our concerns about compliance with existing agreements.
So, too, our discussions on nuclear testing and defence and space have been useful. But let me here stress to the General Assembly that much of the momentum in nuclear-arms-control negotiations is due to technological progress itself, especially in the potential for space-based defensive systems. I believe that the determination of the United States to research and develop and, when ready, deploy such defensive systems - systems targeted to destroy missiles, not people - accounts for a large share of the progress made in recent years in Geneva. With such systems, for the first time, in case of accidental launch or the act of a madman somewhere, major Powers will not be faced with the single option of massive retaliation, but will instead have the chance of a saner choice: to shield against an attack instead of avenging it. So, too, as defensive systems grow in effectiveness, they reduce the threat and the value of greater and greater offensive arsenals. Only recently, briefings I have received in the Oval Office indicate that progress toward such systems may be even more rapid and less costly than we had at first thought. Today, the United States reaffirms its commitment to its strategic defence initiative and our offer to share the benefits of strategic defences with others.
And yet, even as diplomatic and technological progress holds out the hope of at last diminishing the awful cloud of nuclear terror we have lived under in the post-war era, even at this moment another ominous terror is loose once again in the world, a terror we thought the world had put behind, a terror that looms at us now from the long-buried past, from ghostly, scarring trenches and the haunting, wan faces of millions dead in one of the most inhumane conflicts of all time.
Poison gas; chemical warfare: the terror of it; the horror of it! We condemn it. The use of chemical weapons in the Iran-Iraq war, beyond its tragic human toll, jeopardizes the moral and legal strictures that have held those weapons in check since the First World War. Let this tragedy spark reaffirmation of the Geneva Protocol outlawing the use of chemical weapons. I call upon the signatories to that Protocol, as well as other concerned States, to convene a conference to consider actions that we can take together to reverse the serious erosion of this treaty. We urge all nations to co-operate in negotiating a verifiable, truly global ban on chemical weapons at the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva.
It is incumbent upon all civilized nations to ban, once and for all - and on a verifiable and global basis - the use of chemical and gas warfare.
Finally, we must redouble our efforts to stop further proliferation of nuclear weapons in the world. Likewise, proliferation in other high-technology weapons such as ballistic missiles, is reaching global proportions, exacerbating regional rivalries in ways that can have global implications. The number of potential suppliers is growing at an alarming rate, and more must be done to halt the spread of these weapons. This was a matter of discussion last week between Secretary Shultz and Foreign Minister Shevardnadze. Talks between American and Soviet experts begin on this today; and we hope to see a multilateral effort to avoid having areas of tension like the Middle East becoming even more deadly battlegrounds than they already are.
Rut in most of these areas we see not only progress but also the potential for an increasingly vital role for multilateral efforts and institutions like the United Nations. That is why now more than ever the United Nations must continue to increase its effectiveness through budget and programme reform. The United Nations already is enacting sweeping measures affecting personnel reductions, budgeting by consensus, and the establishment of programme priorities. These actions are extremely important. The progress on reforms has allowed me to release funds withheld under congressional restrictions. I expect that the reform programme will continue and that further funds will be released in our new fiscal year.
Let me say here that we congratulate the United Nations on the work it has done in three areas of special concern. First, our struggle against the scourge of terrorism and State-sponsored terrorism must continue; and we must also end the scourge of hostage-taking. Second, the work of the World Health Organization in co-ordinating and advancing research on AIDS is vital. All international efforts in this area must be redoubled. The AIDS crisis is a grave one; we must move as one to meet it. 
So, too, is the drug crisis. We are moving now toward a new anti-drug-trafficking convention. This important treaty will be completed in December. I am confident that other strong United Nations drug-control programmes will also follow. The American people are profoundly concerned and deeply angered. We will not tolerate the drug traffickers. We mean to make war on them - and we believe this is one war the United Nations can endorse and participate in. Yes, the United Nations is a better place than it was eight years ago - and so, too, is the world. But the real issue of reform in the United Nations is not limited to fiscal and administrative improvements; it includes also a higher sort of reform, an intellectual and philosophical reform, a reform of old views about the relationship between the individual and the State. 
Few developments, for example, have been more encouraging to the United States than the special session on Africa that this body held two and a half years ago - a session at which the Members of the United Nations joined in calling as one for free-market incentives and a lessening of State controls to spur economic development. 
At one of the first international assemblies of my presidency, in Cancun, Mexico, I said that history demonstrates that, time and again, in place after place, economic growth and human progress make their greatest strides in countries that encourage economic freedom; that individual farmers, labourers, owners, traders and managers are the heart and soul of development. Trust them, because where they are allowed to create and build, where they are given a personal stake in deciding economic policies and benefiting from their success, societies become more dynamic, prosperous, progressive and free. We believe in freedom; we know that it works.
This is the immutable lesson of the post-war era: that freedom works; that, even more, freedom and peace work together. Every year that passes, everywhere in the world, this lesson is taking hold - from the People's Republic of China to Cameroon, from Bolivia to Botswana, and, yes, in the citadel of Marxism-Leninism itself. No, my country did not invent this synergy of peace and freedom, but, believe me, we impose no restrictions on the free export of our more than two centuries of experience with it. Free people, blessed by economic opportunity and protected by laws that respect the dignity of the individual, are not driven towards war or the domination of others. Here, then, is the way to world peace. But we Americans champion freedom not only because it is practical and beneficial but because it is also just, morally right.
Here I should like to note that I have addressed this assemblage more often than any of my predecessors and that this is the last occasion on which I shall do so. Therefore I hope that I may be permitted some closing reflections.
The world is currently witnessing another celebration of international co-operation. At the Olympics we see nations joining together in the competition of sports, and we see young people, who know precious little of the resentments of their elders, coming together as one.
One of our young athletes, from a home of modest means, said that she drew the strength for her achievement from another source of wealth. "We were rich as a family" she said about the love she was given and the values she was taught. I dare to hope that in the sentiment of that young athlete we see a sign of the rediscovery of old and tested values; values such as family - the first and most important unit of society, where all values and learning begin, an institution to be cherished and protected·, values, too, such as work, community, freedom and faith, for it is here we find the deeper rationale for the cause of human rights and world peace.
Our own experience on this continent, the American experience, though brief, has had one unmistakable encounter, an insistence on the preservation of one sacred truth: it is a truth that our first President, our founding father, passed on in the first farewell address made to the American people; it is a truth that I hope you will permit me to mention in these remarks of farewell, a truth embodied in our Declaration of Independence: that the case for inalienable rights, the idea of human dignity, the notion of conscience above compulsion, can be made only in the context of higher law, only in the context of what one of the founders of this Organization, Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjöld, called "devotion to something which is greater and higher than we are ourselves."
This is the endless cycle, the final truth to which humankind seems always to return - that religion and morality, faith in something higher, are prerequisites for freedom, and that justice and peace within ourselves is the first step toward justice and peace in the world and for the ages.
Yes, this is a place of great debate and grave discussion. Yet I cannot help but note here that one of our founding fathers - the most worldly of men, an internationalist, Benjamin Franklin - interrupted the proceedings of our own constitutional convention to make much the same point.
I cannot help but think this morning of other beginnings - of where and when I first read those words "and they shall beat their swords into ploughshares" and "your young men shall see visions and your old men shall dream dreams". This morning, my thoughts go to her who gave me many things in life but whose most important gift was the knowledge of the happiness and solace to be gained in prayer. It is the greatest help I have had in my presidency, and I recall here Lincoln's words when he said
"Only the most foolish of men would think he could confront the duties of the office I now hold without turning to someone stronger, a power above all others. "
I think, then, of her and others like her in that small town in Illinois, gentle people who possessed something that those who hold positions of power sometimes forget to prize. No one of them could ever have imagined that the boy from the banks of the Rock River would come to this moment and have this opportunity. But, had they been told that it would happen, I think they would have been a bit disappointed if I had not spoken here for what they knew so wells that when we grow weary of the world and its troubles, when our faith in humanity falters, it is then that we must seek contort and refreshment of spirit in a deeper source of wisdom, one greater than ourselves.
So, if future generations do say of us that in our time peace came closer, that we did bring about new seasons of truth and justice, it will be cause for pride. But it will be a cause of greater pride still if it is also said that we were wise enough to know that the deliberations of great leaders and great bodies are but an overture, that the truly majestic music, the music of freedom, justice and peace, is the music made in forgetting self and seeking in silence the will of Him who made us.
Thank you for your hospitality over the years. I bid you now farewell, and God bless you.
