
Permit me to begin by warmly congratulating you. Sir on your election to the presidency of the current session of the General Assembly: I am sure that this session will be a success. I also wish to take this opportunity to express my sincere thanks to the President of the last session, Mr. Dante Caputo. For his outstanding contribution in fulfilling his high mission.
The past year has been marked by fresh achievements in the efforts of various countries to seek solutions to regional conflicts, reduce the threat of war and improve the international situation, and by new prospects for world peace. However, ours is not a trouble-free world. regional conflicts have not yet come to a halt. The arms race is still going on. Certain international contradictions have sharpened, owing to violation of the established norms of international law. The economic situation in the developing countries is further deteriorating. All this demonstrates that the source of world turbulence and tension still exists. The Chinese delegation would like to expound its position on the major questions confronting the world today. 
The first question is regional conflicts. regional conflicts affect peace and tranquillity in the world and have caused direct, tremendous losses, particularly to many third-world countries. As a third-world country and a permanent member of the Security Council, China is naturally very much concerned about the issue of regional conflicts. The Chinese Government has all along stood for a fair and reasonable political settlement of those conflicts, and has played a constructive role in this regard.
In accordance with the Geneva Agreements on the settlement of the Afghan question, the Soviet Union has withdrawn its troops from Afghanistan. That is a positive development. Genuine peace, however, has yet to come to the land of Afghanistan. We hope that the various political forces there will set up a broadly based coalition Government through consultation and achieve peace in that land so that the Afghan people may rebuild its country.
Iran and Iraq reached a cease-fire a year ago on the basis of mutual acceptance of Security Council resolution 598 (1987), and each is now busy rebuilding its war-ravaged economy. We hope that these two developing countries, with which China enjoys friendly relations, will soon resume contacts and negotiations so as to turn their cease-fire into a lasting peace.
The recent summit conference of the five Central American States has been well received by the international community, as it produced important new agreements on promoting the peace process in Central America. It is our hope that the United States also will respect the peace efforts of these countries. The smooth implementation of the agreements will benefit the stability and development of the region.
Over the past year positive changes have occurred on the scene of southern Africa. With the start of the process of Namibian independence, the ultimate accomplishment of the historic mission of decolonisation on the African continent is now in sight. Angola has made headway in trying to bring peace to the country. The Government of Mozambique is working hard to end the unrest in its country. The Chinese Government has always sympathized with and supported the Namibian people in their struggle for independence. We hope that Security Council resolution 435 (1978) and other relevant agreements will be seriously implemented and that the South African authorities will honour their commitment, so as to ensure the holding of a free and fair general election under effective United Nations supervision and to bring about Namibian independence as scheduled. We call on the international community to be watchful, to work to eliminate obstacles to the Namibian independence process and guard against any incident that may arise to the detriment of a free and fair general election.
The Chinese Government has always supported the African countries in their just struggle against racism, and the efforts made by the front-line States and people in southern Africa to achieve peace and stability in the region and develop the national economy. We hope that their efforts will enjoy broad sympathy and vigorous support from the international community. The black people in South Africa are entitled to racial equality and democratic rights. We strongly demand that the South African authorities abrogate the universally condemned apartheid system, which is contrary to the spirit of our times.
Since the last session of the General Assembly there has been an ever-stronger call for a political settlement of the Middle East question. The just struggle of the Palestinians living in the West Rank and the Gaza Strip has clearly demonstrated that the question of ending the Israeli occupation and solving the Palestinian issue with no further delay. The Palestine Liberation organization has adopted a series of flexible and practical policies, winning wide appreciation and support from the international community. It is high time the Israeli Government went along with the trend of history by replacing its rigid position by a flexible approach.
The Chinese Government stands for a settlement of the Middle East question through political means without resorting to force. We support the convocation of the International Conference on the Middle East under United Nations auspices with the participation of the parties concerned, including the five permanent members of the Security Council. We appreciate the efforts of the parties concerned in the Middle East question to conduct dialogues of such diverse forms as they deem appropriate. We demand that Israel stop forthwith its suppression of Palestinian residents in occupation zones and that it withdraw from the occupied Arab territories. We hope to see mutual recognition between the State of Palestine and Israel, guaranteed security both for Arab States and for Israel, and the peaceful coexistence of the Arab nation and the Jewish nation. That, in our opinion, is the correct way to lead a Middle East long plagued by turmoil to peace and tranquillity.
Together with the other justice-upholding countries concerned, the Chinese Government has over the past 11 years consistently worked for a fair and reasonable settlement of the Cambodian question. To that end the United Nations has adopted 10 successive resolutions. The Cambodian question arose as a result of the Vietnamese invasion. Therefore, a comprehensive settlement of the question calls for an end to the Vietnamese invasion and the removal of its consequences. That is the very essence of the successive resolutions adopted by the United Nations on the Cambodian situation, and it is also the consistent position of the Chinese Government. during the transitional period from the withdrawal of Vietnamese forces to the holding of a general election in Cambodia, the only way to ensure peace and forestall a dangerous situation in the country is to set up a provisional coalition Government headed by Prince Sihanouk and composed of the four parties in Cambodia. Cambodia should be restored to its independent, neutral and non-aligned status, while the countries concerned should provide an international guarantee for that status. Recently, the International Conference on Cambodia was held in Paris; it was attended by foreign ministers of many countries and leaders of the four parties in Cambodia. This in itself is of major significance, but regrettably, the Conference did not produce the anticipated results, owing to the rigid position taken by Viet Nam and Phnom Penh on the proposal put forward by the majority of the States participating in the Conference for an international control mechanism under United Nations auspices, the establishment of a provisional quadripartite coalition Government headed by Prince Sihanouk, and a comprehensive settlement of the Cambodian question. As for the withdrawal of forces from Cambodia promised by Viet Nam, without the necessary international supervision people have reason to doubt whether Viet Nam has genuinely pulled out all its forces and military personnel of other categories. We hope that the international community will continue to follow the situation in Cambodia closely, render sympathy and support to the Cambodian people in their just cause, and keep working for a fair and reasonable ultimate settlement of the Cambodian question so as to remove completely this regional hot spot.
The second question is disarmament.
The past year has witnessed new progress in the field of international disarmament. The Treaty between the United States and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the Elimination of Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles - the INF Treaty - is being implemented. Positive results emerged from the International Conference on the prohibition of chemical weapons held in Paris last January. With the start last March in Vienna of. the negotiation on conventional armed forces in Europe and the subsequent specific proposals put forward by each side, long-deadlocked European conventional disarmament has taken a turn for the better. Moreover, the Soviet Union and some East European countries have decided to carry out a unilateral reduction in their forces and armament or withdraw some of them from abroad.
Nevertheless, it is noted that the arms race between the United States and the Soviet Union has not come to a stop. They continue to vie with each other in developing high-technology weapons systems and in going all out to upgrade their nuclear weapons and have even extended their arms race into outer space. So the halting of the arms race and the achievement of effective disarmament remains an arduous task.
The international community expects the United States and the Soviet Union to shoulder their special responsibility for disarmament by taking the lead in drastically reducing their nuclear arsenals and conventional armaments and by stopping their arms race in all forms, including that in outer space. It is our consistent view that chemical weapons should be completely banned and thoroughly destroyed. At the present session of the General Assembly, the United States and the Soviet Union have made proposals on the question of chemical weapons. We hope that they will take practical steps to stop production and development of those weapons and destroy their existing stockpiles, so as to facilitate the conclusion of an international convention on a comprehensive ban on chemical weapons.
Disarmament is a question bearing on world peace and the security of all countries. Therefore, all countries, big or small, strong or weak, nuclear or non-nuclear, should have an equal say in the question, and each can play an active role. The reasonable demands and propositions of the many small and medium-sized countries ought to be respected, and full play should be given to the role of the United Nations and the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva on disarmament issues. All this is highly necessary for the healthy development of the international disarmament process.
The third question is the proper handling of State-to-State relations.
Over the past year a number of countries have improved their relations with each other to varying degrees, which is a valuable contribution to world peace. What is particularly encouraging is that the Arab States have closed their ranks, in a spirit of conciliation. Countries in Africa are working for increased peaceful co-operation on that continent, while Latin American countries have made further headway in their regional co-operation.
China has all along devoted its efforts to the establishment and development of friendly relations and co-operation with other countries on the basis of the five principles of mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence. The past year saw even better and stronger relations between China and many other countries, especially its neighbours.
China maintains a traditional friendship with the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. We are interested in peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula. We support the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's reasonable proposition on the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea, and wish to see positive results flow from the dialogue and contacts between the North and South of Korea. We have always enjoyed good relations with Pakistan, Bangladesh, Nepal, Sri Lanka, Thailand and many other neighbours in South and South-East Asia. We have normalized our relations with the People's Republic of Mongolia and Laos. Our relations with India are improving in many fields. The consultations on normalization of Sino-Indonesian relations are proceeding smoothly. The solidarity and co-operation between China and Arab States, African States and Latin American States have also made new progress.
In May this year, China and the Soviet Union held a top-level meeting, thereby normalizing their bilateral relations. In a spirit of bidding farewell to the past and opening up the future, leaders of the two countries reviewed and summed up the history of Sino-Soviet relations and agreed to develop the bilateral relations on the basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. good-neighbourliness between the two big countries, China and the Soviet Union, is in the interests of not only their two peoples but also peace and stability in Asia and the world at large. This has been well received by the international community as it benefits the whole of mankind.
China's relations with Western countries were on a course of steady development. However, difficulties of varying degrees have emerged over the past few months in our relations with certain Western countries. What has exactly happened? Has China acted contrary to the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence in its relations with these Western countries? No. Has China encroached upon their interests in any way? No. It is known to all that in late spring and early summer this year turmoil occurred in China's capital Beijing, which was aimed at subverting the Government of the People's Republic of China and overthrowing the socialist system stipulated in the Constitution of the People's Republic. It goes without saying that how to deal with this problem is China's internal affair. The whole world witnessed the fact that for almost two months the Chinese Government had exercised the utmost restraint and tried to solve the problem by persuasion and education rather than compulsory measures. It was not until the critical moment when the events had turned into an anti-government rebellion that the Chinese Government was compelled to take decisive measures to quell the rebellion. The overwhelming majority of countries in the world have expressed their understanding of this action by our Government. Only certain Western Governments, ignoring the facts and basing themselves on nothing but distorted news reports and misinformation, levelled unwarranted charges against the Chinese Government and applied pressure on it. It should also be noted that there is much evidence pointing to involvement in the above-mentioned events by some hostile foreign forces, which added fuel to the flames. They know full well what role they have played. In order to maintain State sovereignty and national dignity, it is only natural that the Chinese Government should have firmly rejected their meddling in the events in China and interference in its internal affairs, which contravene the norms governing international relations and the fundamental principles of the United Nations Charter. In their statements at the General Assembly in the past few days, the delegates of some countries continued to attack the Chinese Government groundlessly. To harp on "democracy" and "freedom" while indulging in the habit of making arbitrary criticisms and imposing one's own will on others in State-to-State relations represents precisely the kind of behaviour that goes against the historical tide. This is indeed regrettable.
The day after tomorrow, the People's Republic of China will celebrate its fortieth anniversary. For China, 1 October 1949 is a day of great historic significance, marking the end of an era in which the Chinese people were subjected to every kind of national humiliation. Over the past four decades, foreign pressure on New China has never ceased, but what has come of it? New China is ever forging ahead. It has never feared, and will in no way bend to any foreign pressure. China's affairs can only be decided by the Chinese people, and China's policy can only be determined by the Chinese Government. Through long years of practice, we have found a development path suited to China's conditions, and we will continue along that path. We have formulated an independent foreign policy of peace attuned to the fundamental interests of the people of China and the world, and we will keep pursuing that policy. China will adhere to its policy of reform and opening to the outside world and continue to work for development of relations with other countries throughout the world.
A normal relationship between China and a foreign country serves mutual interests, whereas in case of a disruption of such a relationship, China will by no means be the only one to suffer. Past experience has repeatedly proved that normal State-to-State relations can only be based on the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. China abides by these principles, and if other countries also do so, normal relations can certainly be established and developed between them. Herein lies the way out of the current difficulties in the relations of some Western countries with China.
The fourth question is the establishment of a new international political order.
Now that the world has advanced to a stage where most former colonies and dependencies have won independence, all States should treat one another as equals and an end should be put to hegemonic practice. Yet, facts show that hegemonic practice and power politics still exist. From time to time, there are cases in international relations, such as the big bullying the small, the strong domineering over the weak, the imposition of one's own will on others, or even armed encroachment upon the sovereignty of another State and damage to its territorial integrity by force. Should these acts which contravene the norms governing international relations remain unchecked, there can be no tranquillity in the world or guarantee of peace.
With the concerted efforts of the international community, the world now witnesses a trend towards relaxation of tension and increased contacts among nations. This is a good thing. But meanwhile, in international contacts, there are still obvious attempts to interfere in the internal affairs of other countries by various means in violation of the basic norms governing international relations. It is dangerous for State policies to be formulated and pursued with such attempts in mind, as it will detract from relaxation of international tension and lead to the continuation of the cold war. This is a question which merits the attention of the international community.
On the one hand, there are vast numbers of countries in the world with quite different social systems, ideologies, values, historical backgrounds, cultural traditions and religious beliefs, and on the other hand, their interests predetermine the need for contacts with one another. Consequently, all countries are required to adopt a realistic attitude by recognising the diversity of the world, refraining from interfering in each other's internal affairs, and observing in their contacts the mutually accepted norms governing international relations. We firmly believe that such a world will be in line with the interests and aspirations of the people of all countries. I wish to use the forum of the United Nations to present this idea of the Chinese Government, hoping that statesmen of various countries will give it serious consideration when exploring the future of the world.
The fifth question is the establishment of a new international economic order.
For a long time developing countries have suffered greatly from inequitable exchanges, owing to irrationality in existing international economic relations. For them the recent years have seen worsening terms of trade, plummeting export earnings, dwindling production investment and heavy debt burdens. There has been even the phenomenon of reverse capital flow from poor to rich countries for many years running. So the tendency of poor countries to become poorer and rich countries richer is more pronounced than it was a decade ago. If allowed to continue, this situation will bring in its wake even more serious consequences for the whole world, including both the developing and the developed countries. The economic development of the third world has become a pressing issue affecting the global scene. Current international economic relations should not and cannot remain completely unchanged in the time to coma. The establishment of a new international economic order is the need of the times.
In our view, the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence should also be abided by in the conduct of economic relations between countries. A country's economic problems can be solved only by the government and people of that country with policies appropriate to their national conditions. Economic contacts between countries should serve friendly co-operation between them and not be turned into means of exerting pressure on other countries or interfering in their internal affairs. Any attempt to impose a certain economic system or developmental model on other countries and to interfere in the economic policies or development efforts of developing countries means power politics in the economic sphere, it runs counter to norms of international relations and the current historical trend and will not work in practice.
To promote the establishment of the new international economic order in the interest of common development of all countries, what is urgently needed at present is a new round of truly substantive North-South dialogue with emphasis on solving the pressing problems facing the developing countries, such as debt, trade, capital and finance. We call on the developed countries to respond constructively to the proposals for reviving the North-South dialogue made by the Conference of Heads of State and Government of the Non-Aligned Countries held in Belgrade in Sept either this year and the Special Ministerial Meeting of the Group of 77 held last June in Caracas. We hope that the special session of the General Assembly devoted to growth and development, scheduled for April next year, will arrive at a fresh common understanding on future international economic co-operation and will provide a sound guideline for it. We also hope that the new international development strategy being worked out will offer effective measures in this regard.
Protecting the environment has become a pressing issue of universal concern? it must be given full attention while efforts are made to solve the question of development. China has made the protection of the environment its State policy, we attach importance to and will participate in the United Nations conference on environment and development scheduled for 1992, and are ready to make necessary preparations for its convocation with other countries and relevant international organizations. We note with pleasure that, as the most influential international organization, the United Nations has in recent years had some outstanding achievements in facilitating the political settlement of regional conflicts, maintaining world peace, and promoting international co-operation and economic and social development. As a result, there is universal recognition of the importance of the United Nations. The positive efforts made by the Secretary-General have also won extensive acclaim from the international community.
The final decade of the twentieth century is approaching. A new century is setting in, the times are progressing and the face of the world is changing. Like the entire international community, the United Nations is faced with unprecedented opportunities and extraordinary challenges. In order to adapt better to an ever-changing world, the United Nations needs to continue its own reform and further improve its efficiency. World peace and development need the United Nations, while the success of the United Nations depends on the support and co-operation of all its Member States. Together with the many other United Nations Member States, China is ready to fulfil the duties prescribed in the United Nations Charter and to contribute its share to a strengthened role of the organization in world affairs.
﻿
I congratulate you, Sir, on your election as President of the General Assembly. Your experience and the esteem in which you are held as the former Foreign Minister of Nigeria, as its Permanent Representative to the United Nations and as Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid guarantee that you will excellently perform the duties of your office. At the same time I wish to pay deepest respect to your predecessor, Mr. Dante Caputo of Argentina, and thank him for the exemplary and successful conduct of his functions.
Foreign Minister Dumas of France presented the views of the members of the European Community yesterday. I thank him for his clear statement. Now, at the closing of this millennium we are moving towards a new phase in world politics. The old structures still largely determine the political scene. but new structures are already becoming visible everywhere. We are confronted with global challenges. The natural sources of life are increasingly being jeopardized. In the last two years, world food production dropped for the first time. Plants and animals are becoming extinct. New epidemics are spreading. A large part of mankind lives in dire poverty. Terrorism and illicit drug trafficking call for joint action by the international community. Underdevelopment and the debt burden deprive a large section of mankind of any hope. Excessive armaments and regional conflicts, as well as violations of human rights and of the right of nations to self-determination, require fundamental new thinking and actions, m Europe there is fresh hope for a better future. This will have positive effects on the entire world.
In the year 2030 there will be 10 billion people on earth. For their sake -and it is not for distant descendants whose faces are hidden from us by the mist of distant centuries; it is for our children, our grandchildren - we must today lay the groundwork so that the glebe will remain habitable. No single country on Earth, however rich and powerful, is able to handle this task by itself and through its own ability. Joint efforts by all mankind are needed. First and foremost this means that we must move away from confrontation towards co-operation, we require co-operative structures.
Precisely because we Germans are aware of our responsibility for the Second World war we perceive our duty to work for a better world, for a world of peace, democracy and solidarity between nations, for a world of freedom and human rights, for a world at peace with nature. The Polish nation was the first victim of the war deliberately unleashed by Hitlerian Germany 50 years ago. And I am turning to You Mr. Skubiszewski, Foreign Minister of the new Poland, to say that the Polish people are assured that their right to live in secure borders will not be called into question, not now nor in the future, through territorial claims by us Germans. The wheel of history will not be turned back. Together with Poland we want to work for a better future for Europe. The inviolability of borders is the basis of peaceful relations in Europe.
Ever since its inception the Federal Republic of Germany has framed a European peace policy. As a member of the European Community and of the Atlantic Alliance, we belong to the family of Western democracies. To the United States we are linked through deep friendship, through the Alliance and through a commitment to common values. President Bush impressively reaffirmed this in his speech at Mainz, with France we have established a unique partnership and co-operation, as reflected in the Franco-German Treaty and in our day-today politics. This points to the future. The groundwork for the developments we are today witnessing in Europe, for the prospects that are now discernible, was laid by the founding of the European Community, by the treaties of Moscow and Warsaw, by the treaty with the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, by the Basic Treaty with the German Democratic Republic and by the Helsinki Final Act. These are European paths that come towards each other; they must therefore be strengthened and extended. Nobody will be allowed to stray from them. We shall remain committed to the letter and spirit of those treaties.
Major elements of that peaceful order are the European Community and the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe process. The European Community, which is heading for a European Union, sees itself as a factor for economic and political stability in the world, it maintains closer relations, including those based on agreements with its neighbours in Europe and with States and groupings of States in all other continents. It strongly promotes voluntary regional associations in other parts of the world. It has to be open to multifaceted and broad-based co-operation with those countries of Central and Eastern Europe that desire it. New forms of co-operation and exchange are required. EUREKA is an offer open to all those who are interested. The new environment agency set up by the European Community can become the starting-point of new pan-European co-operation in the area of the protection of the environment.
Transport structures covering the whole of Europe are needed. We are receptive to ideas and suggestions from others. The trade limitations introduced for strategic reasons must be adapted to the changed quality of political, security-policy, economic and technological co-operation between West and East. They must not become an obstacle to a far-sighted policy.
East and West have opted for the path of co-operation. That is a source of hope for the nations of the world - not only the nations of Europe, The vision of a peaceful order in Europe, from the Atlantic to the Urals - as the West proposed in the Harmel report as early as 1967, and as recurs in General Secretary Gorbachev's concept of the common European house - is opening up. The bold reforms in the Soviet Union, in Hungary and in Poland point in that direction.
We agree with our Western friends that the reform processes in Central and Eastern Europe are in the interests of all Europe and of the world. They deserve our support, not least through common, co-ordinated action, through a plan of solidarity for Europe. This process of reform in Central and Eastern Europe is not a case of one side's opinion being adopted by the other; it is a process of self-reflection on the common foundations of European culture and European history, to which all European nations have made great contributions. The reforms have become irreversible because man's yearning for more freedom is irreversible, but the developments are not immune to standstills, or even setbacks. In the long run, however, no country can evade this development. Anyone who hopes that the reforms will fail will be overtaken by the development.
In the West, too, nobody should underestimate the new possibilities; instead, people should make resolute use of them for the benefit of all Europe. History tends not to repeat the opportunities it offers. I appeal to the countries of 
Europe not to let this historic juncture slip by. We Western democracies offer stable-framework conditions for this reform process. Statesmanly foresight and statesmanly responsibility are required now on all sides. Nobody can want others to be destabilized. The Federal Republic of Germany regards a peaceful order in Europe as the framework also for the goal defined in the Letter on German Unity: "to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will recover its unity in free self-determination". We want to attain this goal while fully observing the treaties that we have signed. That can be achieved only together with all other States in Europe - not against them. Nobody in Europe has cause to fear our policy. Our policy is linked to the destiny of the entire continent. It is a European peace policy. This precludes any national solo efforts. We consider it our task to work for a pan-European peaceful order from which no country may be excluded or nay exclude itself, our foreign policy, in accordance with the dictates of our Constitution, rejects any kind of power politics. It is a policy of responsibility, it is determined by the fundamental values of our Constitution, it is based on unconditional fidelity to treaties.
The Federal Republic of Germany, as a country situated in the heart of Europe, brings all its weight to bear for the purpose of co-operation, understanding and disarmament conducive to a better Europe. This includes cooperation with the German Democratic Republic. The two German States are aware of their responsibility for peace in Europe. This responsibility weighs more heavily than do those things that divide us. On the basis of this common responsibility,  the two German States have already made substantial contributions towards detente and disarmament in Europe. In particular, the people in our States have benefited from this. In these endeavours we act on the foundation of the basic Treaty with the German Democratic Republic and are guided by the Joint declarations issued by Chancellor Kohl and General Secretary Honecker on 12 March 1965 and 8 September 1,87. New and closer forms of co-operation are needed in many fields - economic and technological, scientific and cultural, transport and protection of the environment.
The two German states - each in its own fashion - must contribute towards overcoming the things that separate Europeans from each other. They must face the new developments occurring in the whole of Europe and work for their success. The Federal Republic of Germany wholeheartedly supports the process of European unification within the European Community, as well as the efforts of European
countries aimed at reform. The German Democratic Republic, under its own conditions, can contribute, through reforms, towards greater openness in Europe. just as the Soviet Union, Poland and Hungary are doing already. We have been deeply moved as we have witnessed, in recent weeks, the fate of young people who are sorrowfully leaving their home and familiar borrowings. Nobody can want such a development. A policy of reform would open up new prospects for the people of the German Democratic Republic, as in other Central and Eastern European countries. These would encourage the people to stay where they grew up and where they are at home. Today, East and West no longer discuss only the problems that have accused between them since the War. They Jointly focus their attention also on those tasks of the future which, as is stated in the Joint German-Soviet Declaration of June 1989, can be mastered only through concerted action by all states and  peoples. The Moscow Treaty continues to form the foundation of the relationship between our two countries. The German-Soviet Declaration underscores the importance of German-Soviet relations for the whole of Europe. This calls for new thinking by everyone and for everyone.
That declaration defined goals to which we have long been committed along with our Western partners-, the preservation and shaping of peace, the settlement of existing conflicts, the right of nations to self-determination, the precedence of international law in politics, international co-operation in the economic, scientific and technological fields, the results of which should benefit all mankind, the preservation of the natural environment and the overcoming of hunger and poverty in the world, and the combating of new threats such as epidemics and international terrorism. 
A peaceful world of free people subject only to the rule of law and whose dignity is no longer impaired by hunger and poverty: that is seen as the true goal of politics. In that way, the design of a peaceful order for all Europe, the architecture of a pan-European house, is becoming clearly visible. Through arms control and disarmament we want to reduce the military elements of the East-West relationship. We want to demilitarise East-West relations, just as international relations must be demilitarized. We want to create an increasing number of co-operative security structures. We welcome and support the efforts of the United states and the Soviet Union to achieve co-operation marked by increasing mutual trust.
An entire continent is seriously committed to agreed and controlled disarmament. The Treaty on intermediate-range nuclear forces - the INF Treaty - was an important step towards that end. The two sides accept the principle that whoever has more weapons must disarm more. The aim is to ensure that the armed forces of the two sides have the capability of defence only and not of attack, especially surprise attack and large-scale offensive action. Ever more co-operative security structures will emerge, thus providing additional guarantees of security. The negotiations in Vienna on conventional stability and confidence-building measures, as well as the global prohibition of chemical weapons, will lend a new quality to those security structures. The meetings between Secretary of State Baker and Foreign Minister Shevardnadze have provided further signs of hope. In Vienna, Western proposals have created the conditions for far-reaching conventional disarmament. Given good will on the part of all concerned, an initial agreement could be achieved as early as 1990.
We strongly support the United States-Soviet negotiations in Geneva on nuclear and space weapons. By reducing their nuclear weapons, the nuclear Powers are living up to their responsibility towards the international community. The need for all countries to accede to the non-proliferation Treaty is becoming all the more urgent.
The negotiations on a comprehensive, global and verifiable ban on chemical weapons must finally be completed. Only in that way can the spread of those barbaric weapons be prevented. President Bush's declaration here at the United Nations that his country is ready to destroy over 80 per cent of its existing chemical weapons stocks even before the conclusion of a chemical weapons convention, provided that the Soviet Union reduces its chemical weapons to the same level, is unprecedented in the history of disarmament negotiations. The Federal Republic of Germany has constantly striven for the successful completion of the Geneva negotiations. President Bush's remarks concerning verification of compliance with a future chemical weapons convention have a significance that goes far beyond the scope of disarmament negotiations. Openness is becoming a guiding principle in dealings between countries. In fact, every step towards a more open world is a step towards the new world we seek.
The recent Canberra Conference made an important contribution in support of the Geneva negotiations. All producers are called upon to control trade in chemical substances and facilities that are suitable also for the manufacture of chemical weapons. The Federal Republic of Germany has considerably tightened its own control laws; as acknowledged in the final declaration of the Canberra Conference, it has thus made an advance contribution to the implementation of a future chemical weapons convention.
Disarmament is a task not for the industrial nations alone. The developing countries spend $200 billion a year for military purposes. That is four times the official development assistance they receive. Moreover, those resources are unavailable for their development. Regional theatres of conflict are exacerbated by the unbridled trade in arms. The arms trade must become more transparent to the international public. Such transparency forces both the importers and the exporters to account for and justify their actions, which itself has a moderating effect. The wholly disproportionate level of arms in all parts of the world makes disarmament a global task which must be dealt with by the United Nations.
A country's attitude towards disarmament is the most reliable measure of how far it is prepared to abandon old thinking. A State's attitude towards human rights is the most reliable measure of its stance on the inalienable dignity of each individual. A peaceful order in Europe - a peaceful order in the world - can rest only on the universal application of human rights and on the right of nations to self-determination. The future Europe is thus to be a large heterogeneous area based throughout on the rule of law.
To us, respect for human rights is the indispensable basis for any policy. In our view, there is still an urgent need to appoint a United Nations high commissioner for human rights and set up an international court of human rights. We ask that our initiative on abolishing capital punishment be supported also by those countries which, frequently for religious reasons, want to retain such punishment. The form of optional protocol we have chosen leaves the door open to those States that are not yet able to decide in favour of signing it. International terrorism world wide and international drug crimes constitute aggression against human dignity and against mankind. They threaten every political and social order. In future, countries will have to be measured by their efforts in this fight. Anyone who provides refuge for terrorists or spares those who commit drug crimes is placing himself outside the community of nations. The drug problem, that scourge of mankind, has become a global challenge.
This demands resolute co-operation by all countries. The common fight against illicit drug trafficking must be stepped up. Co-operation among all countries in combating cross-border illicit drug trafficking must be intensified. The social causes of drug production must be eliminated in the relevant countries through common efforts, and the social causes of drug dependence in the consumer countries must be eliminated as well.
We shall survive the third millennium only if all countries - large and small, weak and strong alike - unconditionally make international law the yardstick of their political actions. We must overcome force, both within and between States. The decade ahead of us must be a decade of pacifying regional theatres of conflict. A historic opportunity is emerging for the Central American peace process. All Governments interested in the fate of Central America have in the meantime fully endorsed the Esquipulas peace agreement. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany supports the United Nations contribution to that process.
Namibia, the last colony in Africa, will gain independence in a few months' time. The Western Contact Group, to which we belonged, initiated this process and participated substantially in shaping it. We are convinced that the Secretary-General of the United Nations and his special representative will bring the peace process in Namibia to a good conclusion. In so doing, they have the full confidence and support of the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany. Our participation in the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) reflects this, we all hope that an independent Namibia that espouses democracy, pluralism and human rights will send signals to the Republic of South Africa that cannot be ignored. Apartheid is inimical to human rights. It cannot be reformed. It must be eliminated. We call upon the South African Government to terminate the state of emergency, to release all political detainees, Nelson Mandela in the first place, and to admit the opposition. That must pave the way for negotiations involving all the country's political forces for the purpose of developing a just constitutional order. we shall do "whatever is possible to help bring about round-table negotiations.
In the Middle East the objective continues to be a peaceful settlement that guarantees the right of all States in the region, including Israel, to live within secure and recognized boundaries and that enables the Palestinian people finally to exercise its right to self-determination. During the past few months there has been some movement in the Middle East conflict: the Israeli plan for elections in the occupied territories and President Mubarak's proposal to open up prospects for talks between Israel and the Palestinians.
The suffering of the Lebanese nation must be ended through a political solution. The cease-fire brought about by the Arab League's Committee of Three is an encouraging signal. We support all suitable efforts aimed at national reconciliation in Lebanon and the restoration of the country's full sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence.
In view of the dangers constantly generated by regional conflicts, a far-reaching improvement of the United Nations instruments for coping with those conflicts is needed. The Declaration on the prevention of conflicts, which we helped to draft in the Special Committee on the United Nations Charter and which was unanimously adopted at the forty-third session of the General Assembly, is a step towards that end. We have launched a new initiative designed to facilitate early and comprehensive fact-finding by the United Nations, particularly by the Secretary-General. The efforts of the United Nations and the Secretary-General to resolve conflicts must not fail for want of money.
Underdevelopment in large parts of the world is one of the global challenges of our time. People in all countries are entitled to a life that is worth living. Industrial and developing countries must collaborate to achieve economic development and social justice. The debt crisis can only be resolved through joint action by everyone concerned: the debtor and creditor countries, the Governments and the international financial institutions, as well as the private banks. All creditor countries are now, as before, called upon to frame their national regulations in such a way as to encourage participation by banks in debt relief. That is already the case in our country, without considerable funds from private banks the developing countries will not return to the path of growth.
The initiative of United States Secretary of the Treasury Brady is an important step in solving the debt crisis. At the forefront of the intensified debt strategy is the reduction of debts and interest. Fresh money must be made available. The rescheduling agreements with Mexico and the Philippines are major landmarks in the efforts to solve the debt crisis. The debts of the least-developed countries must be cancelled-, the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany has already done so. For years now it has been providing development aid to those countries exclusively in the form of grants.
Many developing countries are carrying out radical and painful reforms in order to reshape their economic structures. They are thereby making a substantial contribution towards the stability of the world economy. These reforms should restore the confidence of domestic and foreign investors.
The prosperity of all countries can be increased most effectively through the free exchange of goods and services. That is why it is so important to make the Uruguay Round a full success. That still calls for considerable exertions and concessions, not least in areas that are sensitive for the industrial nations. All countries must resist the temptations of protectionism. The weakest are always hardest hit by the consequences of protectionism. The basic principles of the new thinking - openness instead of isolation, co-operation instead of confrontation - must also apply to international trade. The Belgrade conference of the Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms this new thinking and reflects the growing awareness of global interdependence.
Today it is a question of reconciling economic and ecological factors. People are increasingly resisting the destruction of the natural sources of life. There is no nation that is not affected, no nation that does not bear responsibility. Global warming, destruction of the ozone layer, desertification, contamination of soil, air and water through pollutants and waste and forest depletion all threaten life on our earth. We have but this one Earth, and it has been entrusted to us. It must remain habitable for all future generations as well. 
Mankind's duty to preserve peace includes making peace with nature. The first steps have been taken with the Vienna Convention and the Montreal Protocol, the Convention on hazardous waste and the Convention to combat marine pollution. Those Conventions must now be applied worldwide. They must constantly be supplemented and improved until all known pollutants are covered. The World Climate Convention and measures to save the forests must be vigorously promoted. Protection of tropical rain forests is also a matter for the United Nations. The Organization must pool and co-ordinate the efforts of the international community in the field of environmental protection. Binding limits and levels must be fixed, and agreed deadlines must be met. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany will do its utmost to support all environmental activities of the United Nations, especially the United Nations conference on the environment which this General Assembly is to decide on at this session. This applies also to the international decade for the prevention of natural disasters. The Federal Government has made substantial efforts to protect natural resources. It will contribute to the work of the United Nations the experience of a country that has a strong environmental awareness, high environmental protection standards and advanced scientific and technological know-how.
The industrial nations must make a special contribution through the transfer of ecologically sound technology and through financial support for environmental projects in the developing countries. We must increase the responsibility of the United Nations for environmental matters and develop further its relevant organs, especially the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), widen their powers and, in particular, provide them with more funds.
The nations will achieve a new spirit of coexistence only if they acknowledge and respect each other's cultural achievements and characteristics. The awareness of mutual dependence in questions concerning our survival must be accompanied by unconditional respect for the dignity and achievements of every nation. The worldwide cultural dialogue should preserve the cultural identity of all nations. This calls for exchange on equal terms through mutual give-and-take.
The prestige of the United Nations increases with the new spirit of coexistence and the awareness of the need for a global domestic policy. This is not least a consequence of the growing understanding between West and East. The turn of the tide in international relations will also enable the United Nations to play the role its founders intended it to have, after the terrible experiences of the Second World War.
We can no longer afford confrontation and national egoism, as our extinction would be the penalty. The United Nations must evolve into a universal community of States and peoples in which everyone can express his views freely and openly, in which the rights of the stronger do not prevail. To all individuals and nations, the United Nations is already a symbol of a new international order founded on human rights and self-determination, on dialogue and co-operation. We are called upon to create peace between individuals, between nations. We are called upon to create peace between man and nature. Inalienable human rights and the right of nations to self-determination must form the bedrock of our actions.
﻿I am speaking on behalf of the European Economic Community. Mr. President, allow me in my turn to extend to you on behalf of the European Community and its member States warmest congratulations on your unanimous election to the office of President of the General Assembly. Your experience in international affairs, your perfect familiarity with the United Nations system and your personal qualities particularly qualify you to occupy that important office. We have no doubt that those attributes will enable you to work wonders.
Let me also include in this tribute your predecessor at the head of the Assembly, Mr. Dante Caputo. The energy and efficiency with which he discharged that office merit the gratitude of the entire Organization.
I should like also, on behalf of the Twelve, to assure the Secretary-General of our unswerving and unqualified support in his weighty task, and to express our admiration for his untiring activity throughout the world in favour of peace.
The European Community and its member States have always considered that they have a special contribution to make to the efforts being made to build a more just and peaceful world bound by ever-closer ties of solidarity.
I should now like to put forward a few thoughts about the main thrust of our external action, by pointing to our common struggle for peace, the outlook for economic development and the fight against the scourges inflicted on our societies by human rights violations, terrorism and drug abuse.
I should like first to say a few words about the hopes that have been kindled by developments in the year gone by. while the progress made is still too fragile for the international community to be certain that it will soon see the dawn of peace break upon the world, and while tensions still exist or are worsening here and there and indeed new conflicts are emerging, the fact is that, all in all, the cause of peace has advanced more than it probably ever has done in recent times.
In relations between the eastern and western parts of Europe, recent developments suggest that the deep wounds of history, once considered as incurable, are now beginning to heal. On both sides, a common language is enabling us to talk to one another, negotiate and reach agreements that only a short time ago seemed beyond our grasp.
The European Council has sought to give fresh impetus to East-West relations, as this is warranted by the changes towards greater political and economic freedom that have taken place in the Soviet Union and several Central and Eastern European countries, notably Poland and Hungary. While we must regret that there remain serious violations of human rights in some of those countries, how could we fail to welcome the reforms on which they have embarked and support and encourage them when they are quite plainly contributing to overcoming the divisions of the last War at a pace and on a scale hitherto unprecedented in Europe.
The proceedings of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe are closely bound up with that prospect. Since the adoption of a closing document last January in Vienna, two key meetings - the Information Forum in London and the first session of the Conference on the Human Dimension in Paris - have made it possible to take greater advantage of the scope of the Helsinki process to advance the cause of fundamental freedoms, the rule of law and the values of democracy.
As for the negotiations on measures aimed at building confidence and security and on conventional forces in Europe, whose purpose is to remove the imbalances liable to undermine the stability and security of the continent, they have taken a decisive turn, and there are hopes that in the coming months significant progress can be made which would have major importance for the future of East-West relations.
In the broader setting of the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva, there have been encouraging results following the impetus created by the Conference on chemical disarmament held in Paris in January 1989. The Twelve would like to see the conclusion at the earliest possible opportunity of a comprehensive, verifiable treaty banning chemical weapons. The results achieved in that field at the recent United States-Soviet meetings are a most encouraging sign in this respect.
By the same token, I welcome the progress announced yesterday by the President of the United states and moments ago by the Soviet Foreign Minister with regard to their bilateral negotiations on reducing by half their stockpiles of strategic weapons. We hope there will be an early outcome to these negotiations and that the significant gains of the past, such as the anti-ballistic missile Treaty, will be preserved.
But Europe is not the only theatre in the struggle for peace, to which our Organization attaches universal significance. Encouraging signs have emerged in many parts of the world, holding out promise of the settlement of some conflicts. The utmost must be done to give added impetus to those favourable develops, and the Twelve are setting about that task.
In Namibia, the process towards independence and peace is under way. The twelve unreservedly support the action of the Secretary-General and earnestly call on all the parties not to impede the movement towards peace. The European community stands ready to welcome an independent Namibia among its partners under the Lome Convention.
The rewarding dialogue started with the front-line States, notably in Luxembourg last June, shows that everyone aspires to an early settlement of these long-standing conflicts which have delayed or thwarted the region's development plans. Here again, the Community is more than ready to foster reconstruction and, whether it be in Angola, Mozambique or elsewhere, to help the population build a new era of peace. 
In that connection, the Community and its member States have always insisted on the need to put an end to the apartheid system and bring about the establishment of a just, democratic society in South Africa. I shall come back to that basic demand.
The Twelve are particularly attentive to the implementation of the Secretary-General's peace plan for Western Sahara, which is expected to lead to a referendum on self-determination and holds out hopes for a settlement of this issue. They are convinced that the creation of the Arab Maghreb Union will contribute to that end.
Through the recent Tela agreements, the countries of Central America have demonstrated their determination to take their destiny in their own hands. This is a source of satisfaction to us. The success of the exercise will depend on the different parties abiding by the undertakings they have given. It is also envisaged that the United Nations and the Organization of American States (OAS) will lend their support to the implementation of the peace agreements.
The Community and its member States wish to pay a tribute to the sense of moderation and dialogue displayed by the Central American Heads of State, moved as they have been by the spirit of democracy. The San Pedro Sula Conference, held in February 1989, showed the determination of the European Community and the Contadora group of countries to give their support to the process of negotiation and economic integration which the Central American Governments have set as their goals.
The Twelve also note with satisfaction the progress made by democracy in South
America, and especially the prospect of positive developments in Chile, heralded by free elections.
Since the announcement of the cease-fire between Iran and Iraq, which was welcomed by the entire international community, the Secretary-General has, with the Twelve's support, pursued his endeavours to ensure that the negotiations move progressively towards a final settlement. But we should not be content with the current "no war - no peace" situation. The Twelve accordingly wish to launch an appeal to the Governments of the two countries to contribute to the efforts of the
Secretary-General and his colleagues to transform the present armistice into a lasting peace and to lose no more time in fully implementing Security Council resolution 598 (1987).
The Twelve express the hope that the Iranian leaders will demonstrate their readiness to contribute to international life in a constructive and peaceful manner consonant with the norms governing relations among States, so that that country can again take its rightful place in its region and in the international community at large.
The withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan was a necessary, but not sufficient, condition for a political solution. As long as the conflict continues, there will still be a need for all the Afghan parties to seek ways and means of bringing about a genuine process of self-determination, leading to the formation of a fully representative government and the existence of a truly independent and non-aligned Afghanistan. The Twelve confirm their support for the United Nations Secretary-General in the efforts he is making to facilitate a settlement, in the hope that the refugees will be able to return to their homes in freedom and dignity, the Community and its member States stand ready, once a settlement has been reached, to contribute to the reconstruction of Afghanistan, in the same way as they are already contributing to the humanitarian assistance being provided for the long-suffering people of that country.
In Cambodia, signs have emerged in recent months, albeit tentatively, of a possible return to peace. The Twelve have welcomed the decision of Viet Nam to withdraw its troops and consider that their withdrawal has made it possible to seek an overall political solution to the Cambodian conflict. The Twelve's support could not but encourage France to take the initiative of convening an international conference in Paris, with the co-presidency of Indonesia, bringing together all the 
Khmer parties and the countries most directly involved, in the presence of the UN Secretary General. Although the meeting did not make it possible to reach an agreement, it can be said to have marked a very important turning point in the search for a peaceful solution. The process which has now started should be pursued, with the requisite determination, with the aim of arriving at least at an overall settlement guaranteeing the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and neutrality of Cambodia and enabling the Cambodian people to control its own destiny through free end internationally supervised elections. The temptation of the different parties involved to seek a solution in the field still by force of arms could lead only to a stalemate.
The Twelve are convinced that the only way out of this long-drawn-out conflict lies in dialogue and national reconciliation. The continuing instability in that region is also adding to the tragedy of the Vietnamese boat people. The Twelve share the determination of the Secretary-General and the international community to find a solution to this problem. In the case of the Korean peninsula. we should like again to voice the hope that, in accordance with the principle of universality enshrined in our Organization, the Korean people may enjoy full representation in the United Nations at an early date.
The progress that has been accomplished and the stronger conviction we now have that peace is possible everywhere can only strengthen our resolve to work the Middle East. In the Middle East at a time when, on the Palestinian  side, a number of important decisions have opened up fresh prospects for a realistic search for a settlement of the Israeli conflict and the Palestinian question, no real progress has yet been made in responding to those moves. Yet the passage of time is not working to anybody's advantage. Let us beware of the disappointment that is bound to be aroused by such missed opportunities.
The Community is making the same message plain to one and all: if a peace settlement is to be reached, then it is necessary to recognize, both in the Middle East and elsewhere in the world, the right of all States, and of Israel in particular, to security and the right of all peoples to justice - in other words, the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination, with everything which that implies. In the Community's view, the appropriate way to attain those goals remains the organization of an international peace conference under the auspices of the United Nations.
The situation in the occupied territories provides a dramatic illustration of the effects of the lack of progress in seeking a settlement. The measures taken against the population in those territories - the continued closure of the universities, the expulsions, the extension and increase in the number of detentions on administrative grounds - have prompted the Twelve to appeal yet again to the Israeli authorities to abide by their obligations as the occupying Power, in accordance with the Security Council resolutions.
The Twelve, in the Madrid Declaration, have made their position known on the Israeli plan for organizing elections and granting provisional self-governing status to the territories. For the impact of such elections to be really meaningful, they should form part of a comprehensive settlement process based on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the application of the principle of land for peace, and they should be held with adequate guarantees of freedom throughout the occupied territories, including East Jerusalem. In the same spirit and on the basis of the same principles, the Twelve welcome Egypt's contribution to the peace process, as set out in the 10 Points  which President Mubarak has Put forward. The Twelve hope that this will
make it possible, in particular, to set in motion the necessary dialogue between Israelis and Palestinians.
Without waiting for the settlement which, they so earnestly desire, the Community and its member states plan to step up their cooperation with the occupied territories and to develop their program of assistance to the population, which has suffered so severely from the continuing occupation and its attendant restrictions. 
I now  wish to refer to Lebanon. In Lebanon, the tragedy of a nation that has been torn apart has lasted for 14 years now. Never has the suffering been so great as over the past few months, nor the battles so bloody, nor the ordeals borne by everybody so horrendous.
It is this that has prompted the Community and its Member States to call for an effective cease-fire and the lifting of the blockades and for a start to be made towards a process of national reconciliation ensuring the full restoration of Lebanese sovereignty on the basis of fresh institutions. They have constantly given their support to the moves made by the Arab League, which were initially led by the Committee of Six and subsequently by that of the three Heads of State. They welcome that top-level Committee's resumption of its mission, which they fully support, and hope that once the parties have all agreed to its proposals, dialogue and the quest for peace will prevail.
It is now essential that, at a moment when dialogue is being renewed, all Lebanese parties be freed from external pressures so that they may be able to agree on a new system for living side by side, one that takes into account the existing demographic and social situation. Through the introduction of such a system and the withdrawal of all foreign forces - with the exception of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) - Lebanon must regain its full sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity. 
This is what France has been endeavouring to do, and will continue to do with the support of its partners in the Community, while making it its constant concern to support the Arab moves led by the Tripartite Committee until hope is rekindled in Lebanon.
At the same time the Community and its member States have signified their solidarity with the entire Lebanese people by undertaking an assistance programme aimed at alleviating their suffering and at contributing to the restoration of normal living conditions and the resumption of economic and social activities.
We cannot speak of Lebanon without referring to the fate of the hostages, several of whom are nationals of the Community's member States. How can we forget Colonel Higgins, who was serving the United Nations? The Twelve condemn the taking of hostages, which must be fought with all the means at our disposal in the spirit of the relevant resolutions adopted by the Security Council. The Twelve wish to appeal to those countries which might be able to exert some influence in secure the liberation of the hostages.
I should like to state the Community's unchanging position with regard to Cyprus, a member of the European family. The Twelve call on all the parties to co-operate with the Secretary-General and his Representative on the spot with a view to overcoming the existing obstacles and finding the paths to dialogue. The Twelve ask them not to let slip the opportunity now available for a just and lasting settlement that will safeguard the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of Cyprus in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations.
We all know that world peace is a sacred cause. It warrants all the energy and resolve we can devote to it. It calls for determination and obstinacy. We may. no doubt, feel rather discouraged when no sooner has one hotbed of tension died down than others flare up, for we are then dogged by feelings of hopelessness, like those which Sisyphus may be felt at the top of his mountain before the stone started to roll down again.
And yet, hope remains alive when the chain of men and women epitomized by our Assembly are still linked together in the service of peace. We know that that unremitting task is a collective one and that progress cannot be made unless we are all mobilized.
Hence it is with the same determination, the same degree of hope and the same trust in good fortune that we have to tackle other conflicts and other areas of tension, evidence of further rifts here and there.
I should here like to turn to the case of those two countries, Senegal and Mauritania, which were living in harmony and united by a common design, but which have suddenly been rocked by violence to the point where they have now become brother enemies. Can Senegal and Mauritania soon return to the path of understanding and dialogue? The Twelve earnestly hope so. This is why they are supporting the mediation efforts of President Mubarak and hope that conciliation and reason will prevail.
Other tragedies are being played out. In Ethiopia, where the civil war continues to rage bringing in its wake a host of displaced populations, suffering and poverty, prospects for dialogue seem nevertheless to be emerging. The Twelve hope to do all they can to pave the way for negotiation and reconciliation. The same holds true for the Sudan and Somalia.
In this connexion I should like to pay a tribute to the action of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), whose work everyone considers irreplaceable.
Lastly, I should like to mention the hopes aroused by the discussions between the Governments at Colombo and New Delhi in a bid to restore peace and national unity in Sri Lanka. 
In the case of East Timor, the Twelve reaffirm their support for the contacts between Portugal and Indonesia under the auspices of the Secretary-General. They hope that early progress will lead to a just and comprehensive settlement, accepted internationally.
The cause of peace is making progress in spite of everything, as we can see, and our Assembly bears special witness to the fact. It is making progress through multilateral and bilateral dialogue, through the readiness of States to renounce war in settling their differences, and through the action of the United Nations in every instance where its mediation is imperative. The Twelve intend to associate themselves fully with this ever renewed task and they will play a major role in quelling conflicts, by reasons, I would say, of their very nature and calling, and through the example they are setting through the agreement among them and their prospective union.
Yet peace-making, the reduction of tensions and the banishment of violence cannot be dissociated from the struggle against the inequalities marking international economic development. We must take care - I say again - not to provoke new trouble spots that might be stirred up by the revolt of the poor. We must make sure that growth world-wide is shared more fairly and is more balanced and more geared to coping with the abject poverty of those countries which have few natural endowments or which have been ill-treated by history or crushed by the burden of debt. Action in favour of growth and development is, more than ever, an integral part of the struggle for peace. The Community has made that fact a key feature of its relations with the rest of the world.
Since the beginning of the 1980s, economic growth has recovered and has brought about a sharp increase in trade. Our aim is to consolidate that trend while at the same time continuing the struggle against inflation and unemployment. We have to ensure that everybody benefits from the movement. The fact that whole regions, in particular in Africa and Latin America, are continuing to lag behind
would reduce all efforts to naught if priority were not given to North-South solidarity.
As the world's foremost trading power and its leading provider of aid, the European Community considers that tangible steps have to be taken in the three key areas of international economic co-operation, development and the environment, about which I shall now say a few words.
In recent years Europe, together with Japan and a number of other Asian partners, has progressively taken over the momentum formerly generated by growth in the United States. Such growth is healthy and is the outcome of efforts of investment and modernization and the determined and convergent action of member States to hold down inflation and, above all, to finalize the establishment of the internal market by 1993.
This internal market will not be self-contained. The Europe of 1993 will be a "Europe of partners". The programme for finalizing the creation of the internal market will not entail any weakening of the Community's international obligations. All its multilateral or bilateral commitments are and will be respected. It is in our very interest to preserve and encourage a free and open trading system.
All Europe's partners will benefit from the single market of 1993 as a result of the dismantling of frontiers, the improvement of access procedures and the greater degree of transparency. The economic growth generated by the merger of 12 markets into a single market of 320 million consumers will work to the advantage of everybody when it is borne in mind that imports, which already account for one quarter of its gross domestic product, are expected to progress even further.
In more specific areas, the efforts deployed by the Community at the internal level will also have positive effects for third countries. For instance, the progressive accomplishment of economic and monetary union - which will be one of our major priorities in the coming months - will be instrumental in contributing to the stability of the international monetary system.
The reform of the Common Agricultural Policy, on which work started five years ago, is continuing, it is contributing to the improvement of the world market situation. The Co-unity reaffirms the undertakings it gave at the mid-term meeting of the Uruguay Round negotiations in April 1989. The efforts it is making
are considerable, and I would recall that it remains the world's largest importer of agricultural products.
In 1989 the Community has continued to strengthen its relations with all the regions of the world. First, it is making preparations with the European Free Trade Association for a renewed framework for dialogue and co-operation. Then, a series of agreements have been concluded with the countries of Eastern Europe: with Hungary, Czechoslovakia and, even more recently, with Poland, to which Commissioner Adriessen and myself paid a visit. Developments in this last-named country make it increasingly urgent to dispatch the aid that was decided on at the Summit of the Arch and accepted by 24 countries. We must force the pace to respond to the extent of the need.
Negotiations are being conducted with the Soviet Union and Bulgaria, and are being envisaged with the German Democratic Republic. This is the basis on which the Community plans to engage in a variety of forms of co-operation to supplement that in which its member States are already engaging.
The creation of the Arab Maghreb Union will enable the European Economic to step up and diversify the already very rewarding relations it maintains with those Mediterranean countries. Discussions are proceeding with the countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council for the purpose of supplementing the Cooperation Agreed signed in 1988 by means Of a fresh trade agreement.
In Asia, 1989 has been a year marked by new joint steps taken by the EEC and the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN, in their bid to further industrial cooperation by stepping up investments. With its Latin American partners, the Community is pursuing its efforts to diversify cooperation and trade. in Central America, it is developing it cooperation under the San Jose Agreements, thereby enhancing the efforts being made by the countries of the isthmus.
Lastly, I should like to express my deep satisfaction at the improvement in the Community's trade relations with its main partners in the developed world, where willingness to negotiate is now the overriding consideration.
This improvement in the climate is fragile, and our best chance of consolidating it is to complete the Uruguay Round negotiations by the date scheduled and to secure substantive results in all areas.
In the coming months, North-South solidarity will be in the international headlines: the renewal of the lome Convention, the special session of the United Nations General Assembly on economic cooperation and development, the second international conference on the least developed countries in Paris, and the launching of the fourth development decade.
Let us grasp the opportunity offered by these various occasions, for they will make it possible to take stock of what has been achieved and also to realize that we need to go further. Development depends to a large degree on the domestic strategies adopted by the countries concerned themselves. A large number of developing countries have embarked on a courageous adjustment process that is an essential requirement, even though it may sometimes give rise to problems from the social and political standpoints. I wish to pay tribute to their efforts which often demand heavy sacrifices.
However, these efforts will be useful only if they are made in a favourable international environment. In the first place, it is absolutely essential to lighten the burden of excessive indebtedness which has now become intolerable. In this crucial area, the concerted and constructive approach that has prevailed has already made it possible to overcome the inhibiting factors and to record some measure of progress.
Several of the Community's  member States have taken additional steps in favour of the poorest countries by cancelling official development assistance loans. France, for its part, has announced through the President of the Republic an across-the-board cancellation of the debts accruing from development assistance in the case of 35 of the poorest African entries. This measure will come into force on 1 January 1990 and is - I must say here - free of any conditions.
At the same time, other countries which are certainly not as poor but which are grappling with a heavy burden of indebtedness to the banks are having to face difficult political and economic choices. This is particularly the case in Latin America where solving the debt problem should make it possible to consolidate and strengthen democracy in the region. 
Two countries, Mexico and the Philippines, have already successfully embarked on that path. But progress in coping with indebtedness cannot be sufficient in itself to ensure development, and fresh resources are necessary. Such resources must, in the first instance, be generated by trade. The Community has already, to a large extent, opened up its market to products from the developing countries, without awaiting the conclusion of the Uruguay Round, it has recently made significant improvements in the access of tropical products to its market.
In the ongoing renegotiation of the Lome Convention, it will endeavour to improve further an arrangement that is already proving advantageous. Even so, for the vast majority of the developing countries, dependent as they are on a handful of export comities, access to the markets of the industrialized countries is not enough. The Common Fund for commodities, should now come into force. For its part, the Community plans to strengthen the STABEX and SYSMIN mechanisms for the stabilization of export earnings under the Lome Convention.
Alongside these measures, official development assistance still represents a lifeline, and the Community is already making a considerable effort in that regard. The assistance proved by its member States taken together has been quite clearly moving in the direction of the 0.7 per cent target since the early 1980s.
In the final analysis, however, economic development hinges on an unfailing international mobilization of forces to protect our environment. The heating up of the atmosphere, the deterioration of the ozone layer, the pollution of the oceans and freshwater resources and desertification - all pose a threat to our entire planet.
Contending with this threat at an early date is a responsibility that is incumbent upon all of us.
Many developing countries do not always have sufficient funds for that purpose. An effort by the industrialized countries to introduce new forms of co-operation and financing will make it easier for the individual countries in the world to take care of the environment and to manage their natural resources in a common endeavour. This must surely be one of the most necessary forms that international solidarity can take.
Such solidarity is exemplary when it takes the form of protecting the tropical forests, helping Bangladesh to combat the incalculable consequences of flooding, or setting up an observatory in the Sahara.
The planetary scale of the threat is such that international negotiations are needed to spell out the objectives of common interest.
With that prospect in mind, the conference on the environment and development, which the United Nations Secretary-General is convening in 1992, will represent a major turning-point. Before then, the world climate conference which will take place in 1990 should afford an opportunity for making significant progress on the question of the greenhouse effect. The Community earnestly calls for the conclusion of an international agreement on climatic changes, and it would also like a dialogue to be started on ocean-bed mining. The Community has already taken, or is about to take, a number of decisions having immediate effects the early implementation, and at a faster pace, of the Helsinki decisions on the eradication of chlorofluorocarbons; the launching of a programme of action on the greenhouse effect; accession to the Basle Convention on movements of dangerous waste; the creation of a European environmental agency and the drawing-up of a tropical forest assistance programme.
These actions, coupled with support for the current international negotiations and with the integration of environmental issues into co-operation with the developing countries, are indicative of the Community's growing commitment to the preservation of our planetary environment.
There are other threats that also call for our vigilance and decisive action. We likewise cannot keep silent at the violations of mankind's most fundamental freedoms and rights. There are many such violations and they unfortunately continue to exist in too many countries on all the continents.
The Twelve are constantly waging war on behalf of human rights, which are the foundation of the United Nations, for they cannot remain indifferent to the intolerable violations to which those rights are being subjected. It is not that they are trying to behave as a censor, rather their fight is inspired by the values which underpin the Community and have brought its member States together.
The events of Tiananmen Square are still present in our memories, we may ask whether the European Community's relations with Beijing have been compromised for a long time to case. We sincerely hope that this will not be the case. We shall show vigilance, however, in the hope that the leaders of the People's Republic of China will eventually heed the appeals addressed to them by the entire international community. 
We also attach considerable importance to ensuring that China fully abides by the undertakings it has given in respect of the constitutional instruments for Hong Kong.
The Twelve wish to launch a further appeal for the Burmese people to be allied freely to exercise its right of expression.
Free elections have been held in Panama also. The Twelve are giving their support to the efforts of the Organization of American States to put forward a solution to the crisis, they reaffirm their reservations about the new regime currently in power, which does not enjoy any form of institutional legitimacy.
I turn now to South Africa - yet again. It has to be asked whether the winds of change bluing over southern Africa as a whole will also have a positive impact in South Africa. The Twelve, which have constantly denounced the particularly odious apartheid regime, have taken note of the statements made by the South African leaders asserting their determination to embark on reforms. However, the
twelve likewise note - and deplore - the extension of the state of emergency, the continuing ban on anti-apartheid organizations, the pursuit of repression and the continued detention of a large number of political prisoners, starting with Nelson Mandela. They will not let up the pressure until the aims being sought have been attained.
Violations of human rights are the blight of international relations, the leprosy of modern times. The Assembly has been witness to the emergence of the most admirable legal instruments and high-minded resolutions, which every State has accepted. How can one not speak here of the emotion of people who are suffering and whose hopes have been suddenly dashed in the face of brute force and the abuse of authority or merely a lack of understanding at man's relentless and courageous march towards freedom? I should like to pay tribute to the Commission on Human Rights, which is striving with all its might to win respect for the values enshrined in the United Nations. This year the Commission has submitted two particularly important drafts to the Assembly, after some years spent on the
difficult task of putting them together. These are the draft of the second optional protocol covering the abolition of the death penalty and the draft of a convention on the rights of the child. I hope that final consultations will permit the General Assembly to adopt these two drafts by consensus at this session.
Respect for freedom cannot be dissociated from the rejection of terrorism. Resorting to the barbaric practices of terrorism is unwarranted, whatever the circumstances. All terrorists have to be brought to justice. That means that every country must adopt a very firm attitude and that there has to be a concerted response.
With the early prospect of the creation of a Community area without internal borders, there is increased collaboration between the agencies responsible for public order in the Twelve, which consider that, as the threat stands at present, there are no grounds for relaxing their vigilance.
But there is another challenge to democratic values which cannot go un-mentioned: the scourge of drug abuse. The tragic events in Colombia last month, when the drug traffickers demonstrated their deadly power, have once again underscored the need to strengthen international cooperation in the fight against drugs. I wish to pay tribute to the authorities of Colombia for their coverage. The Community gives its full backing to them and to the measures taken by the President of the United States. Over and above the action being taken at the regional level, the Twelve consider that an effective solution to drug problems has to be sought in an international context involving producer countries, consumer countries and the countries of transit. It is with that in mind that the Twelve consider that the right forum for this purpose is the United Nations, with its Commission on Narcotic Drugs and the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control, and that they have contributed to the adoption of the new United Nations Convention against illicit drug trafficking, opened for signature on 20 December 1988.
The Community attaches the utmost importance to the work of the United Nations, as demonstrated by its very active participation in peace-keeping operations. That is why our first concern is to see the efficiency of the United  Nations enhanced and to learn about the initial results of the reforms undertaken for that purpose.
This is the first time that it has fallen to France, which is the current President of the Council of the European Communities, to speak in this capacity before the Assembly on behalf of the Europe of the Twelve. I am conscious of the honour that has been done to me. In France's eyes, the European Community is a very great undertaking whose scope it readily adopts as its own. I hope that the Community's identity will grow stronger as it increasingly opens to the world. Through its voice in international organizations and the presence and action of the "troika" when urgent issues arise, the Community sends out a message of peace from its own people to the other peoples of the world. I am happy to have been able to speak on behalf of Europe.
Allow me, in conclusion, to say a few words on behalf of my own country. The ardent desire for peace, the aspiration for progress and the sacred defence of the law all represent, for every man and woman on our planet, the sum total of hope that no force on earth can ever stifle. That is the significance of the steps which France has taken in 1989, with the Conference on the prohibition of chemical weapons, action on human rights, action on behalf of Lebanon, and the Paris Conference on Cambodia. That is also why France has resolutely chosen, in the family of nations, to support the most impoverished and least favoured peoples. 
On the threshold of the year 2000, we are faced with and involved in fresh struggles. Let us wage them without beating around the bush and without asking futile questions. Future generations will judge us by the manner in which we have responded to the major challenges of the present, such as the threat to the environment, the crushing poverty of millions of human beings, and the violation of rights and freedoms. 
  The key word in response to all these problems is .is solidarity. It is France's fervent hope that voices will speak out in unison from this prestigious forum to enjoin the international community to give fresh impetus everywhere to dialogue, development and peace.
﻿
Let me first, if I my, sir, add my congratulations to those you have already received on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly. The first country .that I ever lived and worked in outside my own was Nigeria - in Jos, your home town - and I have a very great affection for the country and for its citizens. I wish you the greatest possible success in your presidency. I wish also to thank the outgoing President, Mr. Dante Caputo, and to pay a tribute to the tireless work of the Secretary-General throughout the past year.
Fifty years ago this month, war began in Europe and spread throughout the world. Fifty-five million people died. The landscape of international relations was profoundly changed. That war inspired the creation of this Organization. The United Nations, conceived out of war, was the best framework our predecessors could devise for law, for order, and for peace. Hopes for it then were high, but they did not last. Even as the General Assembly was meeting for the first time, in London, divisions were opening between the two halves of Europe. The peoples of the East, for whom my country went to war, found that victory had been secured at an appalling price. They had won the peace, but they had lost their freedom. That division of Europe and that loss of freedom imposed a polarity on world affairs which has bedevilled international politics for over 40 years. Today, I am struck by the enormous and cheering contrast with those times. I believe that the feeling of hope and opportunity in world affairs is greater today than at any time since the Assembly first met, in London, my home town. 
The hopes of the early days have been revived. Ideologies have become less Potent: it is less and less relevant to talk of Easiest, or North-South, or the first, second, third or even fourth worlds. Instead, we should talk of a world whose nation States have reciprocal rights, responsibilities and obligations. There is only one world. We all share in it and must make of it what we can. Today, the opportunities for the United Nations to make good use of that fine framework for law, order and peace I spoke of have suddenly become real. There are new problems that we must face together. We have moved from cold war to global warming. Fresh ideas and attitudes are changing the face of the Soviet Union and
Eastern Europe. I agree with Mr. Shevardnadze that it is in the interests of all of us for perestroika to succeed.
Liberty is reasserting itself in Poland and in Hungary and is drawing thousands of Germans from East to West. The cold war is ending where it started. Even the Berlin Wall cannot stem the exodus of people seeking a new life in freedom. No one doubts, I think, that we are only at the beginning of a long and difficult process. Patience and goodwill are necessary on a11 sides. Yesterday, Mr. Shevardnadze offered an authoritative Soviet view of recent events in Poland. I warmly welcome his remarks. I hope and believe that in making them he was burying, once and for all, the so-called Brezhnev doctrine, which was used to justify the invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968. with freedom no longer seen as a threat, there is a real opportunity to build a new Europe.
The first priority for East-West relations must be to support and encourage the process of reform which is now under way. That will reinforce trust and confidence. A co-ordinated approach, including very substantial economic support, is essential. The European Community has made clear its readiness to play its full part, with both short- and long-term measures. Both will be needed. The challenge is to work in partnership with others to bring about a Community of Europe, to stand alongside the Community in Europe. The goal is a Europe of peace, prosperity and freedom, where the terms East and west have more to do with geography than with politics - a Europe without enforced divisions, whose people are at liberty to determine their own future.
Increasing trust will assist the process of arms control. Success in this field is a priority. For the past 40 years the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) has resolutely maintained the peace in Europe. Now it is taking new opportunities to consolidate that peace. NATO countries have tabled far-reaching conventional arms proposals. Their aim is clears it is enhanced security at equal and lower levels of forces in Europe. More peace at less cost is an attractive bargain for everyone.
We are encouraged by the steps agreed upon between the United States and the Soviet Union to achieve faster progress towards an early START agreement. The proposed 50 per cent cuts in their nuclear arsenals will make a major contribution to international security and stability.
We are working also for the achievement of a global chemical weapons ban. I warmly welcome the proposals made by President Bush on Monday and the positive Soviet response to them. The reduction of United States and Soviet stockpiles ahead of a convention will do much to reassure countries that do not possess chemical weapons and will also remove the rationale for other countries to cling to their stocks. It is through practical steps like these that Governments can best show their determination to get rid of these gruesome weapons. My country gave up its chemical weapons 30 years ago. We look forward to other countries destroying theirs.
We should look also for a way to give more impetus and focus to the Geneva negotiations on chemical weapons. Today I propose one way to do this: let us move from the present intermittent pattern of negotiations to round-the-year meetings, as already happens in other areas of arms control. We can also be encouraged by the progress that has been made towards the resolution of regional conflicts in different parts of the world. In Namibia the international community, and the united Nations in particular, has shown what co-operation can achieve. Security Council resolution 435 (1978) is more than a decade old, but its principles have remained valid. That in turn has opened the way to Namibian independence.
The Namibian independence process is the direct responsibility of the United Nations and the Secretary-General personally, since we met last year, there has been major progress towards implementation of the United Nations plan. Now, as Namibia's elections draw near, it is vital for all of us to give our full support to the Secretary-General and the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG). All the parties involved must show restraint, particularly in the face of provocation, such as the recent murder of Anton Lubowski. Violence and intimidation will serve only those who wish to deny Namibia its freedom.
But Namibia will need help after independence as well. Britain will Play a full part in that effort. At the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting next month we shall also be considering what help the Commonwealth can provide. Next year, I hope, a free, independent Namibia will have taken its place in the Assembly and also, I trust, as a welcome new member of the Commonwealth. 
Fighting still continues in Angola and in Mozambique, but there is now some movement towards peace in both of those countries. I urge both sides in Angola to restore the cease-fire and to resume negotiations on the basis of the common ground identified in June. For our part, we shall continue to give full support to President Chissano's efforts to achieve a peaceful settlement with Renamo. We call upon the new South African Government to support those efforts in the letter and spirit of the Nkomati accord. That means making sure that no support - no support - goes from South Africa to Renamo.
South Africa remains the key to lasting stability in that region. In the recent elections, 70 per cent of the white-minority electorate voted for change. One hundred per cent of the black population, denied a vote, are calling urgently for change. Mr. de Klerk campaigned from a platform of reform. He committed himself to work for a new South Africa, in which all the people would be fully represented. He made a clear declaration of intent. There is now a clear mandate. Now the declaration and the mandate must be turned into action.
Of one thing I am sure. Apartheid cannot survive and it does not deserve to survive. It is not something to be tolerated or to be patient with, it is something to oppose constantly and comprehensively. 
Violence is not the answer. Nor are economic sanctions. They weigh the possibility of change against the certainty of immediate, lasting hardship to the black community whose growing economic muscle is already contributing to the erosion of apartheid.
No. The answer to apartheid is unremitting political pressure on South Africa to reform itself, wise policy lies in assistance and support for the innocent victims of apartheid within South Africa - political prisoners and township dwellers alike. It lies also in support for the economies of South Africa's neighbours and help for them to defend themselves against attempts at destabilization. Positive action, constructive action - action in which Britain's record is second to none and will remain so.
 Many brave men and women in South Africa have struggled peacefully and Persistently against apartheid. If I single out Helen Suzman, it is because, for 40 years, often alone in the South African Parliament, often in the face of threats and intimidation, she fought for freedom. She is in London today. I am pleased to tell the Assembly that she will be honoured by Her Majesty the Queen with one of our highest awards for all she has done in the campaign for justice. In her name, Britain will be funding a new scholarship scheme, soon bringing to 1,000 the number of our annual scholarships for black South Africans.  The new Government in South Africa must now move quickly and unambiguously to meet its commitment to fundamental reform. A new and just society cannot be constructed overnight. But we are clear what should happen. We want to see the release of detainees, the lifting of the state of emergency, the suspension of violence and a dialogue with black leaders to consider and to implement the changes that must be made.  I hope that the United Nations will be ready to respond appropriately to clear and practical signs of change. But signs there must be. That should be our common message to South Africa's leaders.
Since we last met, my country and Argentina have taken significant steps towards achieving a more normal relationship, in doing so, the two countries have agreed to set the question of sovereignty over the Falkland Islands on one side. Following preliminary talks here in August, both sides will be meeting again in Madrid this month. For our part, we shall work hard to ensure the success of the process which has now begun. It will not be easy. And our ambitions should not be set too high too soon. But we enter these negotiations hoping for agreement. In the Middle East, the resolutions which are the core of the search for peace are now nearly a generation bid. Another generation of refugees and dispossessed people has new been added to what is first and foremost a human tragedy.
Last year's renunciation of terrorism by the PLO and its willingness to recognize Israel were a major breakthrough. I hope that Israel will come to recognize that. The Israeli Government's proposal for elections in the occupied territories is a positive step too. I hope the PLO will come to recognize that. I pay tribute to the efforts of President Mubarak in taking these ideas forward. Elections must be part of a process leading to final status negotiations on the basis of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). We believe that the best framework for these negotiations is an international conference under United Nations auspices.
In Lebanon, we have witnessed for years a process of national self-destruction. Now it seems there is a glimmer of hope. We have welcomed and supported the efforts of the Arab League Committee of Three. They offer a bridge to peace. We hope all concerned in Lebanon's conflict will cross it. A particular threat hangs over the hostages in Lebanon. They are the victims of a detestable form of blackmail which threatens the entire international community.
It is hard to appreciate the anguish of those held hostage, although I have seen the suffering of some of their families, and seen, too, their courage and determination, which is remarkable. John McCarthy, Terry Waite, and now Jackie Mann, three British hostages, have been held for a total of more than 2,000 days. We must keep them and the other hostages constantly in the public eye. They most not be forgotten or overlooked. We must make every effort to press for their unconditional release. There are countries with influence on the hostage-takers. They should use that influence without delay to secure the hostages, safe release, state terrorism is no more acceptable through agents than carried out directly.  It is time to return the hostages to their families, and that should be the message from this Assembly.  
Upon one further Point we must all be clear. We must and we dare not give in to the blackmail of terrorists. The Security Councils resolution on terrorism last July added the authority of this Organisation to that message. We need to work for the wide adoption of specific counter-measures. After horrific bombing of Pan Am night 103, the United Kingdom, with Czechoslovakia. is seeking an international agreement on the marking of explosives. All of us are naturally concerned at inflict or tension between countries, or within countries. A number of instates were raised on behalf of European Community countries by my colleague, Roland Dumas. yesterday. I would single out only one, Burma, where  here is an urgent need for the restoration of human rights and democracy through free elections. Earlier this year millions of us around the world were shocked to see Chinese troops kill and wound their fellow citizens on the orders of their own Government. 
The measures that we have taken in response to those events are not. however, intended to isolate China. We hope to see China return to genuine reform and to repair the damage done to its international relations. No Government can survive indefinitely by the suppression of peaceful dissent. By treaty. Hong Kong will revert to China in 1997. By treaty, Hong Kong will also preserve its traditional freedoms and way of life. That treaty, the Sino-British Joint Declaration of 1984, is binding. It has been registered as such at the United Nations by both Britain and China.
I welcome unreservedly China's reaffirmation of its commitment to the Joint Declaration. Britain is likewise committed, bindingly and whole-heartedly. But our common commitment must now be reflected in action. And practical reassurances are required from China to the people of Hong Kong, so that they may feel secure in their future, both up to 1997 and beyond. Hong Kong is resilient. Its economy continues to thrive. But it will take time, steady nerves and, above all, an explicitly supportive attitude on the part of China to restore Hong Kong's confidence in its future.
For our part, Britain will continue vigorously to represent the interests of Hong Kong's people in our discussions with China, we intend also to introduce concrete measures to reassure people in the territory about their future. They include-, the early introduction of a Bill of Rights; the development of more representative government; and a package to encourage people essential to Hong Kong's future stability and prosperity to stay there, by giving them guarantees of resettlement in Britain if they wish. That package will be designed not to strip Hong Kong of its people, but to give them hope and confidence to remain in Hong Kong. 
	Hong Kong's continued confidence and success is in the interest of the entire international community. In return, Hong Kong needs international understanding and support. That was recognized by the Paris economic summit, and I hope it will also be recognized by this Assembly. International understanding and support is also required in response to the intractable problem of the Vietnamese boat people.
The continuing human exodus from Viet Nam has imposed an insuperable burden on Places of first asylum in the region. Hong Kong alone has more than 56,000 boat people in its camps-, over 32,000 of them have arrived this year.
Yet the bleak reality is that for most of these people there are no homes to go to outside their own country. They are not political refugees. Under the criteria laid down by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, they have left Viet Nam for economic reasons, and not under political pressure.  In June, at Geneva, the International Conference on Indo-Chinese Refugees agreed that: "Persons determined not to be refugees should return to their country of origin in accordance with international practices reflecting the responsibility of States towards their own citizens." That is surely the only answer. Alas, there is no room for them in Hong Kong. There is no hope of a home in any new country. The existing situation is, therefore, unsustainable.
The international community knows that it cannot simply leave this problem with Hong Kong in the hope that somehow they will cope. They cannot cope. The Government and the people of Hong Kong have done all they can. They have put up 15 camps. They have provided food, clothing, schooling. But the limit of their capacity to help has been reached.
For those boat people who are genuine refugees, homes are being found in countries around the world. That is as it should be. But for those boat people who are not refugees, there can ultimately be only one home: the one they came from, so far, only a few of them have recognized this and volunteered to return. We look to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to step up counselling of the non-refugees to ensure that more of them know that there is no future for them outside their own country.
In mid-October, the international community will review developments since the Geneva Conference. The main purpose must be to agree a programme of repatriation under the good offices of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. That must involve the phased, orderly and monitored return and re-integration in safety and dignity of all those who are not genuine refugees. To achieve that, Viet Nam must assume full responsibility for its own people and co-operate in the programme. We shall work in good faith with the Vietnamese authorities to that end.
The world that many of us grew up in was haunted by memories of war and overshadowed by the threat of nuclear destruction. Yet, for many of us, it was a much more innocent world than today. Our parents did not live in fear that their children could be exposed to the lethal menace of drugs. We as parents today can have no such peace of mind.
That is why the town of Medellin is now a household name throughout the world. That is why Colombia's battle against drugs is a battle on behalf of us all. The power of the traffickers transcends national boundaries. It demands an international response. I can announce today that, following discussions with the Colombian authorities, my Government has approved a substantial package of assistance for Colombia. It draws on our experience in fighting terrorism. It will comprise communications and towards equipment, technical assistance, and training for those in Colombia involved in the anti-drugs campaign. However, it is vital to make intensified efforts to reduce demand in consumer countries - to put the traders in human misery out of business. Britain will be hosting, in close co-operation with the United Nations, a major international conference in London next April to tackle the problems of demand reduction and cocaine.
The United Nations already makes a significant contribution to international efforts to combat the drugs menace. But we must all do more. All states should ratify the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances. Britain will do so and has also signed nine agreements so far with other countries permitting the tracing and confiscation of the assets of drug traffickers. The world in which many of us grew up was also a more ignorant world. Pew then appreciated the fragility of the environment which sustains life. But today, if ever there was an issue that should unite the nations, it is this one. To meet this global challenge we need stronger international institutions and clearer priorities. 
That is why Britain has more than doubled its voluntary financial contribution to the United Nations Environment Programme. That is why Britain called in May for the early negotiation of an international convention on climate change. And that is why Britain is active in helping to protect tropical forests, whose importance in terms of both climate and resources is now far better understood. The priorities of preservation must live alongside the priorities of development and economic growth. A balance has to be struck. Our philosophy has to be sustainable development, development that benefits mankind and protects his environment. Partnership is a new watchword for the relationship between developed and developing countries. The priorities for that partnership are clear. In the first instance it must be for developing countries themselves to pursue sound economic policies. But development aid has an important part to play. So does action by creditor countries to relieve the debt burden on countries pursuing reform, and most especially on the poorest. International trade must be kept open and inflation contained to assist growth. Britain will continue to work for progress in all those areas.
Experience has shown us that focusing tightly and in turn on the key issues is a better approach than looking for generalized global solutions. The international community, with the United Nations as its chosen instrument, faces a formidable range of challenges. But they are matched by opportunities. The demands on the United Nations are growing. But so is its prestige. So is its authority. So too is the extent of its engagement in new areas.
As we recall the conflict which created the United Nations, it is reassuring to find the Organization developing its role so successfully today. With the membership's continued support the process can be taken further still. All of us will gain from that. For, as the then British Prime Minister told the very first session of the General Assembly:  "The United Nations is really a coming together of all peoples in all countries and continents. It is not 'them' - it is; every one of us seeking, as citizens of the world, peace and security for humanity." Now, at last, we cure doing just that.
﻿
My delegation warmly welcomes the assumption by Ambassador Garba of- the stewardship of the forty-fourth session of the General Assembly. He is an eminent personality and distinguished representative of a country with which we have the friendliest of relations. We are confident that, with his well-known diplomatic skill and experience, the deliberations of this session of the Assembly will be both fruitful and purposive.
I should like to pay tribute to my friend Mr. Dante Caputo for the outstanding leadership he provided for the forty-third session of the Assembly. 1989 has been a year of consolidation of the much-enhanced role of the United Nations in international affairs. The Organization has had its peace-keeping or observation teams in almost all the troubled regions of the world, and everywhere they have been creditably discharging their functions. The critical contribution of the United Nations peace-keeping in the world was recognized by the well-merited award last year of the Nobel Peace Prize to the United Nations peace-keeping forces.
We admire the sure touch, assurance and promptness with which the Secretary-General, Mr. Perez de Cuellar, has been discharging the onerous aid growing responsibilities now being entrusted to the United Nations. In this he has displayed quiet competence aid a remarkable insight into the Organization's great potentialities as well as its limitations.
The Secretary-General referred in his report to "the renewal of confidence in multilateralism" (A/44/1, p. 3). Today multilateralism is no longer an ideal; it has become a necessity. Its ultimate validity has been driven home by the threat posed to human survival by the nuclear-arms race, the degradation of the environment and other non-military threats to security, such as poverty, underdevelopment, over-population and inequality, both within and among nations.
Multilateralism today has to deal with a new generation of problems. We have to cope with the rapid changes in the pattern of production, consumption and trade brought about by the technological revolution. We have to give direction to the new integrationist trends in the world economy, with a view to optimising their benefits. We have to evolve new rules, regulations and regimes to cope with new problems and opportunities in the fields of trade, manufactures, services, environment and science and technology.
The United Nations, as a linchpin of this multilateralism, must be strengthened. This is the only organization which is global in scope, universal in membership aid mandated by a treaty in the form of the Chatter. India welcomes the renewed confidence in the United Nations on the part of the major Powers.
Renewal of confidence in multilateralism cannot be partial or selective; it has to be total and all-embracing. It is unfortunate that, whereas the United Nations is now able to assert its rightful role in the political field, it is still not regarded by the major economic Powers as an appropriate forum for serious negotiations on economic issues. My delegation sincerely hopes that this imbalance will soon be redressed. The ongoing process of the formulation of an international development strategy for the 1990s and the forthcoming special session of the General Assembly devoted to international economic co-operation provide an excellent opportunity for it.
On the United Nations lies the onerous responsibility of bringing to the Namibian people their long-awaited independence, for which they have undergone so much suffering and made such heroic sacrifices. The process is well under way. The United Nations Transition Assistance Group, under the guidance of the Secretary-General, has so far done a creditable job under trying conditions. However, the path to Namibian independence is still strewn with many obstacles. To ensure the conduct of free and fair elections, great vigilance and caution need to be exercised, particularly by the Security Council. The lacunae and distortions in the election process should be identified and speedily removed. After the elections the Constituent Assembly should have the sovereign and unfettered right to frame the country's Constitution. The United Nations must ensure that there is no set-back to the process now under way and that the outcome of the elections truly reflects the wishes, hopes and aspirations of the Namibian people.
While Namibia's independence will signify the end of the South African regime's illegal occupation of that country, the citadel of apartheid in South Africa itself will still remain intact. Claims are being matte that the racial atmosphere in South Africa is undergoing change. The world is, however, watching carefully to see the quality, extent and pace of the change that the South African regime is willing to bring about. Apartheid cannot be reformed; it has to be totally dismantled. There is no half-way house to restoring human dignity and protecting human rights. The South African regime must demonstrate its willingness to negotiate unconditionally with the genuine representatives of the people of South Africa. In order to create a suitable climate for negotiation, it should release Nelson Mandela and other political prisoners, lift restrictions on political organizations and end the state of emergency. It must also show a desire to deal with the front-line States without intimidation and on the basis of equality and the principles enshrined in the United Nations Charter.
The forty-third session of the General Assembly closed on a note of optimism on the Palestinian question. The bold and courageous initiative of President Arafat and the initiation of the United States-Palestine Liberation Organization dialogue had created a positive climate. However, the situation still remains deadlocked. The intifadah, the unarmed Palestinian struggle, continues amidst increasing repression.
There can be no durable peace in West Asia without a just and comprehensive settlement, based on the realization by the Palestinian people of their inalienable right to self-determination and the recognition of the rights of all States in the region, including Palestine and Israel, to live in peace and security within internationally recognized borders. We are convinced that for this purpose the United Nations-sponsored International Peace Conference needs to be convened urgently.
The long civil strife in Lebanon has fractured the country's constitutional, political and economic framework. The success of the latest effort of the high-level Committee of the Arab League in bringing about a cease-fire is a glimmer of hope on the horizon. We hope that the current political dialogue will lead to national reconciliation and that peace and stability will soon return to Lebanon.
Two months ago the Conference convened in Paris raised hopes for the future of Cambodia. Significant progress was made at the Conference on many elements of the overall package. However, differences persisted among the Cambodian factions and some of the basic issues, resulting in the Conference's aiding without making any breakthrough. The completion of the withdrawal of the Vietnamese troops from Cambodia is a major, positive development. For further progress now it is necessary to adapt a balanced approach that takes into account the reality prevailing in Cambodia and the security and other interests of the countries of the region, and that provides for the cessation of all foreign interference and intervention in the internal affairs of Cambodia, so that the people of Cambodia can exercise their right to determine their own destiny. It is equally important to ensure at all costs that Cambodia is prevented from becoming once again the victim of the universally condemned genocidal policies and practices of the Pol Pot regime. The danger of the recurrence of fighting in Cambodia, of which the first signs are already visible, must be arrested. For this purpose, there is an imperative need for the cessation of arms supplies to all Cambodian factions.
India is concerned at the blood-bath in Afghanistan, Which has continued even after the Soviet Union completed the withdrawal of its troops on schedule. We call once again upon all parties to observe strictly and implement the Geneva accords in letter and spirit, to give up the futile search for a military solution and to come to the negotiating table for a political solution. Those who are trying to resolve the question by military means ate only prolonging the agony of the people of Afghanistan. President Najibullah recently made a series of far-reaching proposals for national reconciliation which in our opinion deserve serious consideration.
India has maintained traditionally close relations with both Iran and Iraq. We are therefore dismayed at the lack of progress in translating the cease-fire agreed upon last year between the two countries into a durable peace. My delegation supports the Secretary-General in his efforts to secure the implementation of Security Council resolution 598 (1987) and help resolve the vexatious issues between the two countries.
We are encouraged by the optimistic note struck by the Secretary-General regarding the prospects for resolving the long-standing problem in Cyprus on the basis of the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of that country. We urge him to redouble his efforts so as to take full advantage of the present propitious climate.
We are happy at the prospect of peace in Central America and the role the United Nations has been called upon to play in that process. The leaders of five Central American countries and the parties directly involved in the problems besetting Central America deserve our compliments for their statesmanship and foresight. We wish them success in implementing the Esquipulas process and the Tela agreement in their collective bid to restore peace.
In the Korean peninsula, which unhappily remains divided, there is an overwhelming sentiment in favour of peace, reconciliation and dialogue. India supports all efforts aimed at the peaceful reunification of Korea. In conformity with the principle of universality, India supports the aspirations of the Korean people to contribute actively towards the realization of the purposes aid principles of the United Nations through representation in this world body.
The international community should oppose racial discrimination wherever it is practiced. In Fiji efforts to institutionalise racial discrimination are continuing with hardly any resistance from the international community. The report of the Constitution Inquiry Advisory Committee does very little to eliminate the racially discriminatory character of the draft constitution. As the Foreign Minister of New Zealand has pointed out, "the Committee has failed to question the serious departure from fundamental democratic principles". We hope better sense will prevail before it is too late.
In Myanmar, the situation remains unstable as a result of the continuing repression of the democratic aspirations of the people. We sincerely hope the Burmese authorities will respond to the urging of their people for freedom and democracy and work with them to bring the present tensions to an end.
The recent breakthrough on some crucial aspects of the negotiations in the framework of the Strategic Arms Reduction Talks (START) has come as a welcome relief and has brightened hopes of an early conclusion of the negotiations. It is essential that the agreement be clinched without further loss of momentum.
In the meantime, the arms race moves apace without any sign of a let-up. Nuclear-weapons testing goes on unchecked, and so does the search for new systems and technologies and the modernization of existing weapon systems. The continued testing of nuclear particle beams, stealth bombers, smart weapons and new missiles is hardly going to inspire confidence in the world at large, much less among the interlocutors themselves. Those developments tend to confirm our basic apprehensions regarding the qualitative arms race, as clearly referred to by the Secretary-General in his report. Hence India's proposal for monitoring scientific and technological developments which have a bearing on international security.
There can be no meaningful progress either in nuclear disarmament or in achieving nuclear non-proliferation in the true sense of the term unless the doctrines of nuclear deterrence which underpin the present nuclear-arms race are discarded. In our view, that is at the root of the present dithering.
It was in view of those considerations that at the third special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi presented India's action plan for the total elimination of nuclear weapons by the year 2010. I call once again upon all countries, particularly the nuclear-weapon States, to initiate the necessary multilateral negotiations with the overall aim of moving towards a nuclear-weapon-free and non-violent world.
For the past several years, the international community has been pressing for a comprehensive chemical-weapons convention. The agreement recently reached between the United States and the Soviet Union, and the statements made last week in this Assembly by President Bush and Foreign Minister Shevardnadze, will no doubt facilitate an early conclusion of such a convention. We hope that all outstanding issues will be resolved and a chemical-weapons convention signed during 1990.
With the positive prospect of disarmament there is now a real opportunity to release resources from the military sector for development purposes. Even if such resources are utilized for development in the countries involved in the process of disarmament, it will bring some benefit to the world economy. However, a conscious effort must be made to ensure that pert of those resources go where they are most needed: to the developing countries. Appropriate institutional arrangements should be made within the United Nations for giving concrete shape to the link between disarmament and development so that the present opportunities are harnessed in the direction of global peace and security.
In recent years the world has witnessed a cancerous growth of terrorism at all levels. India supports all measures that would discourage terrorist acts, particularly the taking of innocent men and women as hostages. The recent international awareness against this menace must be translated into concrete actions to curb terrorism.
Since the General Assembly last met there has been an encouraging expansion in world trade aid output. However, the external environment for the development of developing countries continues to remain unfavourable. Official development assistance has been stagnating in real terms well below the internationally-agreed target of 0.7 per cent of gross national product. Other financial flows, particularly commercial flows, virtually dried up in the latter half of the 1980s. Commodity prices, in real terms, remained at the lowest levels reached in the past 50 years. Protectionism continues to constrain developing countries in their efforts to increase their exports. Decisions can global economic issues that affect developing countries continue to be taken in forums which exclude them.
Many developing countries are carrying out structural adjustments in their economies, as part of their effort to interact more closely with the mainstream of the world economy. This task can be performed in the context of a much more open, co-operative and growing world economy. The major challenge is to work out a package of policies which should ensure the return of the world economy to higher growth conditions shared by all groups of countries.
It is essential for this purpose to revitalize the north-south dialogue on the basis of mutuality of interest. Hence the Presidents of Egypt, Venezuela and Senegal and the Prime Minister of India took the initiative, in Paris in July this year, to call for the commencement of a process of summit-level consultations among developed and developing countries on global economic and environmental issues. Some major industrialized countries, such as France and Canada, have already responded positively to this initiative. We hope for a positive response from others.
The debt problem is shackling the growth of the heavily indebted countries. A welcome development in this regard is that various plans have been mooted and in a few cases, notably Mexico, elaborate packages involving cancellation or reduction of debts, have been negotiated. However, the level of resources required for these plans to make a real dent on the problems of indebtedness, while putting their economies back on the path of growth, are not forthcoming. And the conditionalities attached are far too onerous.
The debt problem threatens to engulf even those developing countries which despite severe difficulties, have so far managed their debts and balance-of- payments accounts well. In most of these countries, the debt-gross national product ratio has increased rapidly. This has coincided with a decline in real terms in concessional flows of resources which has pushed these countries towards higher commercial borrowings. This, in turn, has aggravated their already serious debt-servicing burden. Any comprehensive solution to the debt problem should include a set of anticipatory measures to prevent this category of developing countries from falling into the debt trap, by increasing the flow of development finance, particularly concessional resources, to them.
The Uruguay Round of trade negotiations provides an excellent opportunity to the international community to address itself to the asymmetries and distortions in the international trading system and to take measures for preserving and strengthening it. We are, however, concerned over the emerging imbalances in the negotiations because of the inadequate priority being given to the areas of special interest to developing countries and the growing pressures on these countries to undertake new obligations. In the new areas, the developmental, technological and public-interest needs of the developing countries should be taken fully into consideration. High priority should be given to the removal of barriers to the transfer of technology to these countries, and to the elimination of restrictive business practices followed by transnational corporations. Specific measures should be provided for the promotion of service industries of importance to developing countries.
There is, unfortunately, a tendency in some major industrialized countries to force their will on trading partners and to adopt unilateral coercive means to penetrate their markets in the name of liberalization. Such measures are unjust and irrational. They are hardly conducive to the success of a ma jot multilateral undertaking like the Uruguay Round.
The new centres of economic power are becoming the focal points for regional integration efforts. But we are concerned that this new economic regionalism may lead to the vivisection of the world economic system. Answers to our present-day complex economic problems do not lie in the narrow havens of regionally integrated markets but in a larger harbour of truly multilateral exchanges aid interactions.
Collective self-reliance through south-south co-operation constitutes a principal plank of the platform of the non-aligned arid other developing countries. Unfortunately, progress in this field has so far lagged behind expectations. A more determined effort backed by political will at the highest level is required. We look forward to the recommendations of the South Commission on this important subject.
Drug abuse and illicit trafficking in drugs have become the scourge of the present-day world. Hardly any corn try is immune from it. It is imperative, consequently, that the entire international community co-operate in the urgent task of combating this menace. In this connection, I welcome the proposal made by the distinguished President of Colombia calling for a special session of the General Assembly to deal with the drug problem.
Environmental issues have recently surged to the forefront of international concern. This is one of the major items on the General Assembly's agenda end, as we prepare for the world conference on environment and development proposed to be held in 1992, India strongly supports a comprehensive multilateral approach to solving the environmental problems.
Environmental issues are closely related to development and they cannot be viewed in isolation. In the first World Conference on Environment and Development held in Stockholm in 1972, the then Prime Minister of India, Shrineti Indira Gandhi, had driven home the crucial link between economic development and the protection of the environment by characterizing poverty as the greatest pollutant.
Here in the General Assembly, environment has been an area of consensus, a unifying concern. We hope it will remain so. This can happen only if the legitimate concerns of the developing countries are addressed adequately in any global endeavour to tackle environmental problems. International measures to deal with these problems should not attempt to freeze development and progress at the present unequal level.
Since the process of development in developed countries has led to the present environmental predicament, these countries have the major responsibility for taking corrective action, apart from the fact that they have also the wherewithal, both financial and technological, for this, unfortunately, the tendency recently has been to rely on regulatory measures which do not fully take into account the existing asymmetries in the level of industrialization and modernization of the developed and developing countries. From the point of view of the developing countries, supportive measures that enable them to protect the environment without compromising their development needs and priorities are of greater importance.
Turning to the practical aspect of the question, the proposal of the Prime Minister of India, Shri Rajiv Gandhi, made at the Ninth Summit Conference of the Non-Aligned Countries held in Belgrade in September, for the creation of a Planet Protection Fund (PPF), has received wide attention and support. 
We are particularly encouraged by the support extended by the PPF by President Vassiliou of Cyprus and the Prime Minister Brundtland of Norway. The proposal envisages a fund to which all countries, developing and developed, will contribute, except the least developed countries. The fund will be used to protect the environment by developing and purchasing conservation-compatible technologies in critical areas that can then be brought into, the public domain for the benefit of both developed and developing countries. In our view, the creation of such a Fund is sine qua non for arriving at a global compact for combating environmental degradation. I hope the General assembly will be able to lend its support to that proposal. 
As I speak here in my capacity as representative of India, my mind inevitably goes to a date next month, 14 November. It was on that day, 100 years ago, in 1889, that a great Indian was born. His name was Jawaharlal Nehru. He was born in riches, but sacrificed his all to join the struggle for India's freedom. In 1947, when India became free, the mantle of leading independent India fell upon him.  
Having see, the atrocities and indignities heaped upon man by man, having imbibed the lesson of truth and non-violence from his mentor Mahatma Gandhi, he emerged with a vision for India and for the world that was different from conventional wisdom. He spoke of the opportunity of moral force over military force. He spoke of non-alignment against bloc politics. He spoke of one world even as the world itself was being pulled asunder.  
In the beginning, his was a lone voice. But soon his association with Tito, Nasser and many other leaders led to the birth of the Non-Aligned Movement. Today, a vast majority of the nations of the world are members of the Movement; and those who are outside it recognize it as a major force in world politics and seek to associate themselves with it. Jawaharlal Nehru brought to the Non-Aligned movement the age-old message of peace - a precious heritage of all the great civilizations of the world. It was that message of peace that rescinded at the ninth Summit of the Nan-Aligned Movement, which happened to coincide with the centenary of Nehru's birth. Let me conclude with the message of peace that Nehru gave to the Assembly 33 years ago. He said-.
-I have no doubt that all the peoples of the world are passionately desirous of peace. I doubt if there are any people anywhere who desire war. Certainly the common man all over the world desires peace passionately, if that is so, why should we not follow the path of peace? Why should we be led away by fears, apprehensions, hatred and violence?"
﻿The United Nations was founded by the nations that had fought and won the most terrible war mankind has known - a war against racism, fascism, and man's inhumanity to man. This war began with Hitler's onslaught on Poland.
Fifty years ago this week, after intense fighting, the German army entered Warsaw, it was the inevitable outcome of the agreement reached at Munich a year earlier, in which Britain and France surrendered to Hitler's demands and sacrificed democratic Czechoslovakia in the name of self-determination and for the sake of what they thought was "peace in our time".
The month of September 1939 marked the beginning of the greatest and most terrible war known to mankind. That war will for ever be associated with the Holocaust - the systematic attempt by Nazi Germany to annihilate the Jewish people. Six million Jews - almost all of Europe's Jews - were murdered, first by being starved, beaten and shot to death, and later by being gassed in industrialized murder factories designed and installed for the express purpose of mass murder of Jews at Auschwitz, Majdanek, Treblinka, Sobibor, Dachau, Bergen-Belsen and other now infamous sites. Wherever the German army reached, no Jewish community escaped. In every town and village occupied by the Wehrmacht scarcely any Jews survived.
At first, no one knew; and then no one believed. And then when it was already known in the capitals of the Allied Powers that day by day thousands of Jews - men, women and children - were being put to death, nothing was done to help. Many still prefer to believe that nothing could have been done - that the German army was too powerful, the Allies too weak, the distances too great. But now we know. Much could have been done; many could have been saved. In April of 1943, the Jews of the Warsaw Ghetto revolted. A handful of men and women, almost unarmed, facing impossible odds, they held out against the German army for one whole month. At that time, von Paulus' army had already been crushed at Stalingrad, Rommel had been defeated in the Western Desert and Allied armies had landed in North Africa. Allied forces were bombing the cities of Germany by day and night. The Allies were winning the war on land, at sea, and in the air.
But no help, not even a sign of encouragement, was extended to the Jewish fighters of the Warsaw Ghetto.
It was in the two following years, leading up to the Nazi surrender, that the Nazi murder machine moved into high gear and millions of Jews were murdered. In the closing months of the war in Europe, while the German army was reeling in defeat on all fronts, the crematoria continued to devour their victims. It was during the very last months of the war that Hungarian Jewry perished.
Many of those Jews who succeeded to escape Hitler's Europe and tried to reach the shores of Palestine were turned back to certain death.
The Holocaust, the murder of six million by Nazi Germany and its henchmen, the abandonment of the Jews by the rest of the world, remains engraved forever in the heart and soul of mankind.
In November 1947, the Holocaust still a vivid memory, the United Nations General Assembly reaffirmed a decision taken by the League of Nations 26 years earlier. Then the League had given international recognition to the Zionist movement and its goal - the establishment of a Jewish State in Palestine. In 1947, the United Nations called for the establishment of the Jewish State in a fraction of the territory originally designated for this purpose by the League of Nations.
That decision was rejected by the Arab world, just as the Arab world had over the years consistently denied the rights of the Jewish people in their ancient
homeland. As the British Mandate expired on 15 May 1948 and Israel's independence was declared, Israel was invaded by the armies of the surrounding Arab States. In those days, Israel stood alone, 650,000 Jews fighting for their lives only a few years after Europe had been turned into a Jewish graveyard. Israel had no choice but to win that war, just as it had to win four succeeding wars launched against it by the surrounding Arab countries.
The United Nations resolution of 1947 is today part of Israel's history, an expression of support for Zionism - the right of the Jewish people to their own State in their ancient homeland. But in 1975, the United Nations General Assembly, greatly enlarged, but unfortunately not grown in moral stature, adopted the infamous "Zionism is racism" resolution that makes a sham of the United Nations resolution adopted 2 8 years earlier, and that continues to this day to be a stain on the record of the Organization. As long as this resolution is not revoked, no moral authority can accompany United Nations decisions, and an air of hypocrisy continues to envelop its debates.
Israel has learned to be in the minority at the United Nations, just as we have learned to exist in the dangerous environment of the Middle East. We live in a constant state of alert, allocating a great part of our resources to defence, determined to fight terrorism and ward off aggression.
Some say that this is paranoia - a paranoia engendered by the Holocaust, the Jews still living in fear of their very existence, preparing to defend themselves against imaginary enemies. But is this really a figment of Israel's imagination? The Arab armies surrounding Israel maintain an inventory of modern weaponry - tanks, aircraft, missiles, artillery - larger than all the weaponry of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. During the past decade, military equipment valued at about 100 billion dollars was purchased by the countries of that area. We
ask ourselves, why is this weaponry there, most of it directed against Israel? Is it possible that these weapons might be used against Israel, and against Israel's civilian population?
We have already experienced five wars? we have lost thousands of our sons in Israel's defence. We see around us a Middle East that is brutal and fanatic, where no mercy is shown even to civilians. A million soldiers were killed in the Iraqi-Iranian war, where the most modern weapons of mass destruction were applied, including chemical warfare used on a massive scale by the Iraqi army. The universal agreement against the use of chemical warfare was broken not only in attacks against combatants, but also against Kurdish civilian villages. These outrages went almost unnoticed by the world, but not by us in Israel, remembering our own experience and knowing that Iraq is closer to Israel than New York is to Washington.
In recent months, the civilian population of Beirut and the Christian enclave north of Beirut were under fire from Syrian army artillery. The killing of innocent civilians went on day by day, the attackers gaining confidence that they can continue the killings with impunity. Is it then paranoia when Israel, in this environment and under these circumstances, feels itself threatened?
Are we aspiring to a needless luxury when we put forth the claim to secure and recognized boundaries? Are we wasting our resources when we maintain an army capable of defending ourselves? Are we imposing on the great nations of the world when we plead with them not to arm those of our neighbours that daily announce their hostility to Israel? Are we wrong when we ask that no encouragement be given to terrorists who in their war on Israel have committed some of the worst atrocities the world has seen since the Second World War? And yet Israel, embattled and beleaguered, continues in the quest for peace. Many of the Arab rulers seem to have no desire for peace with Israel, no matter what the conditions. Worse yet, it is the aim of these rulers to prevent others from making peace with us.
As a result, the peace process in the Middle East moves at a glacial pace. It took 30 years before Egypt reached out to meet Israel's outstretched hand - 30 years and five wars. Israel paid a tremendous price for the Israeli-Egyptian peace Treaty, a price unprecedented in the annals of conflict resolution between nations, with the signing of that Treaty 10 years ago, we had hoped that the other Arab States would quickly enter into negotiations with us, but this has not happened - at least not yet.
In May of 1983 we signed an agreement with Lebanon that would have normalized relations between our two countries and that entailed the withdrawal of the Israel Defence Forces from Southern Lebanon. But that agreement was scuttled by Syrian interference. They had other plans for Lebanon. Six years have passed and the Lebanese tragedy continues. Southern Lebanon is still a staging-ground for terrorist attacks by the PLO and the Hezbollah against the towns and villages on Israel's northern border.
This is the threatening nature of our environment, and we ignore it only at our peril. However, we will not resign ourselves to this cruel reality. We will leave no stone unturned in our quest for peace.
That is why, in April of this year, Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir unveiled Israel's four-point peace initiative. We call for a common Israeli-Egyptian effort to build, on the foundations of the Camp David accords that brought about the Israeli-Egyptian peace treaty, a comprehensive peace for the Middle East. We call on the 20 Arab countries, at present in a state of war with Israel, to cease hostile propaganda and economic boycott and begin a process of normalizing their relations with Israel. We call on the international community of nations to participate in an effort to rehabilitate the Palestinian refugee camps in Judea, Samaria and Gaza.
We call on the Palestinian Arab population in Judea, Samaria and Gaza to cease acts of terrorism and violence, and we announce our readiness to hold free democratic elections so that they can choose their representatives for negotiations with Israel on an interim agreement and eventually on the terms of a permanent settlement. There is no alternative way to move the Middle Eastern peace process forward. Rejection of this initiative is synonymous with rejecting progress towards peace. We call on all nations to support Israel's peace initiative, and we call on the Arab world to respond favourably to it. This is not the time to attempt to
wring concessions from Israel that relate to the permanent settlement. Our immediate objective must be to put an end to violence and to get negotiations going. Putting the cart before the horse can only stall the process itself.
If the representatives of the Palestinian Arab population in Judea, Samaria and Gaza will come to the negotiating table cognizant not only of the rights and aspirations of the population that will have freely chosen them, but also aware of Israel's rights and legitimate concerns, there is an excellent chance that negotiations will lead to agreement. Moreover, the democratic experience not as yet prevalent in the Middle East will no doubt serve as an example to all nations of the region. That in itself will be an important contribution to peace in the area, because war and terrorism do not flourish in democratic societies. I urge all member nations of this Organization to lend their support to Israel's continuing efforts to end warfare and bloodshed in the Middle East.
I call on the representatives of Algeria, Bahrain, Djibouti, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, Mauritania, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, the United Arab Emirates, the Yemen Arab Republic and the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen to utilize the opportunity of our presence at the United Nations General Assembly and to meet with me to discuss how we can move from belligerency to peace, and from hostility to friendship.
I call on the Palestinian Arab population in Judea, Samaria and Gaza to desist from violent acts and to make every effort to help establish the conditions that will permit the holding of free, democratic elections.
The peace process in the Middle East requires courage, patience and perseverance. We in Israel are dedicated to the peace process. We shall continue to pursue it despite all obstacles. We expect your support.
﻿
It is a great pleasure to see a distinguished leader such as Ambassador Garba presiding over this Assembly. We have come to know him well from contacts between New Zealand and Nigeria, and we are confident that the Assembly is in very good hands.
I last attended the General Assembly in 1985. I was then the Deputy Prime Minister of a recently elected Labour Government. I spoke on behalf of New Zealand in the general debate during the fortieth session. That year, of course, we celebrated the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations.
We all spoke with pride and enthusiasm about the Charter. We analysed its potential and looked at what had been achieved in the United Nations system over 40 years. And it was true much had been accomplished. But we all knew in our heart of hearts that despite the praise, the plaudits and the peace, it threatened to be a hollow anniversary.
The failure to make progress on nuclear disarmament had distorted the fabric of international life. Seemingly intractable conflicts proliferated in many parts of the world. The peace-keeping machinery of the United Nations lay almost dormant and apparently dismissed. In our own region, the South Pacific, we watched anxiously the process of decolonisation and self-determination in New Caledonia, where violence seemed imminent. Sadly, these fears proved well founded. In South Africa, the regime in Pretoria continued year by year its unremitting and abhorrent practice of apartheid and its illegal occupation of Namibia. In 1985 there was all too much evidence that respect for international law and the basic norms of the United Nations Charter were being ignored. We saw the International Court being treated with cynical disdain. There was a steady erosion of State willingness to accept the rule of law and compulsory jurisdiction. New Zealand itself, in 1985, had been the victim of an unlawful act of force during the Rainbow Warrior incident. I was obliged to draw that incident to the Assembly's attention in some detail.
But times have changed. Four years later I am back in New York and I find a new picture. We have turned a corner. There have been encouraging signs concerning many of the intractable problems that we faced in 1985. It is a matter of enormous satisfaction to New Zealand that the United Nations, has been a key component in these developments. Even in the darkest days of cynicism about the United Nations, New Zealand stood up and spoke out in support of the United Nations, the Charter principles and the rule of law. We applaud what has happened and what is continuing to happen. Let me cite some examples.
In the area of peace-keeping, we see the United Nations proving what can be done, with hard-won progress in the conflict between Iran and Iraq. In southern Africa, a very important step has been taken in Namibia. New Zealand is pleased to have been able to contribute personnel to United Nations forces in both those situations, and also in Afghanistan. In the Pacific, we see grounds for hope in New Caledonia. We look forward to a genuine act of self-determination in accordance with United Nations principles.
On disarmament, we have also seen a marked change in the atmosphere, in the attitudes of the two super-Powers. One major agreement has been achieved: the intermediate-nuclear-forces Treaty. Other agreements, on strategic nuclear forces and conventional forces, are being negotiated. We in New Zealand appreciate the complexities of these negotiations. We applaud what has been achieved and what is being done. But our message must continue to be put bluntly: Do not return to the snail's pace of the 1970s and early 1980s. Deep cuts in strategic weapons and conventional forces are urgent. We have a historical opportunity that may not come again for a very long time. If the momentum slows and the moment is lost, history and all humanity will judge those responsible very harshly indeed.
I also have to say quite plainly that we remain disappointed that the United Nations plays a less than central role in key disarmament negotiations. The United Nations must be a primary forum for the discussion of disarmament issues and the eventual negotiation of disarmament treaties. New Zealand, together with Australia, has a special interest in promoting, through the United Nations system, progress towards a comprehensive test ban. We again urge in the strongest terms that the powerful few reconsider our resolution with an open mind.
New Zealand has a particularly well known position on the question of nuclear weapons. I want to reiterate what I said to the Assembly in 1985:
"We have ... declared unambiguously that we do not want any country to defend New Zealand with nuclear weapons ..„ We will not have any nuclear weapons on our territory." (A/40/PV.7, p. 66) Since 1985 this policy has attracted widespread public support in New Zealand. This support continues to grow. It is clearly reflected in public opinion polls. New Zealand is, and will remain, a nuclear-weapon-free State. Consistent with that position we urge, in the strongest terms, that nuclear testing and nuclear weapons themselves be eliminated at the earliest possible date.
Another field in which we have observed significant developments in recent years is the rule of international law. It was a matter of great encouragement to many small countries when last year, in the Assembly, President Gorbachev announced that the Soviet Union was adopting a new policy towards the International Court of Justice. We also warmly welcome the fact that the Foreign Ministers of the Non-Aligned Movement, at their meeting at The Hague in July, began a constructive analysis of the Court and the role of international law. These developments went further and were reinforced by the welcome news of the recent agreement between the United States and the Soviet Union on the compulsory settlement of disputes in the fields of drug trafficking and terrorism. New Zealand urges all countries to review their positions on compulsory jurisdiction and the settlement of disputes by third-party mechanisms. In this context I would also refer to the variety of roles that the Secretary-General can play to resolve disputes.
I should also like to acknowledge in this Hall the people in the United Nations system who have done so much to ensure the progress made over the past few years. I do not mean only the staff that supports meetings here and in Geneva. I remember also the unseen United Nations employees and volunteers who work in the field, often in very dangerous environments and suffering considerable hardship, negotiating cease-fires, organizing peace-keeping forces, serving in peace-keeping operations and running emergency relief and development assistance programmes. I want them to know that the people of New Zealand welcome and appreciate their very real contributions.
It would be tempting at this point to conclude that the United Nations is in good shape, that things are all headed in the right direction and that we can all go home feeling good about what we have achieved. But that is not the case. The United Nations system is still struggling with major problems. The evil of apartheid is still with us. We have not done enough to reduce poverty and indebtedness. Political solutions still elude us in the Middle East and Cambodia. But I have to tell the Assembly that, in New Zealand's assessment, a much larger
problem has crept up on the world's leaders. It has caught us unawares. The problem I refer to is the health of the planet Earth itself.
I know that the United Nations has not ignored the environment. Mr. Tolba and his staff in the United Nations Environment Programme have laboured valiantly. They have had real success on ozone depletion with the Montreal Protocol and, more recently, with the Helsinki Declaration. We in New Zealand have worked very hard indeed to support their efforts, end we shall continue to do so.
The general debate is itself demonstrating the growing international concern about the global environment. Action is under way in other parts of the United Nations system as well. A major United Nations conference on environment and development is scheduled for 1992, and it will offer a timely opportunity to take stock of the measures necessary to protect planet Earth.
New Zealand strongly endorsed the decision of the UNEP Governing Council in May this year to identify, in preparation for the 1992 conference, the eight critical global environmental problems: atmospheric degradation, fresh-water limitations, pollution of the oceans, deforestation and the others. 1 also want to acknowledge the work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. It is proving to be a very useful and effective mechanism, and New Zealand is playing an active role in its work.
All these measures are consuming a great deal of time and energy. Environmental statements, seminars and conferences have become the political flavour of the month. But it sometimes seems that a lot of talk takes the place of action.
The 1992 conference will give us an ideal chance to prove to all the doubters and denigrators of the United Nations the real worth of the Organization. Our efforts in the coming weeks must be focused and they must be effective. We need vision, courage and action on the environment, not just talk. I want to ask some hard questions.
Politicians are sometimes accused of getting on the green bandwagon because it is politically safe, simplistic and relatively cost-free. But I want to put it to the Assembly that anyone here who believes that environment issues are a soft option is sadly misguided. The global environmental crisis is real. Human development has altered the global ecosystem in which we live. We have been taking the good out of the air, the sea and the land and putting back poison. For most of human history the impact was so slight as to barely affect the balance. But in the last 50 years humanity has wrought havoc on this Earth. We have suddenly come to the knowledge that we can affect the ecological balance very seriously. More frighteningly, we have discovered that the balance has already been changed. The question now is, have we damaged our planet beyond repair? Can we get back to equilibrium? Can we arrest the process of change? The jury, of course, is still out on these questions. If the answer is that the change is irreversible, the ultimate effects could be just as catastrophic for humanity as global nuclear war.
I saw a cartoon recently. It pictured some aliens from outer space landing on a ravaged Earth where human life had ceased. One alien says to the other, "It's too bad. They just achieved general and complete disarmament and some hole in the ozone layer got them".
The message I have for the United Nations system is that we must look urgently at our priorities and our institutions. We must give real priority to the problems of the environment. We must give them attention at least equal to that which we devote to the political and security issues which have mesmerized the United Nations system and Governments for so long.
Degradation of the environment is a problem that threatens out security every bit as gravely as the arms race. It affects everyone. But we must recognize that, unlike the issue of nuclear disarmament, where a few very powerful countries have control of the means of destruction, every country in the United Nations, no matter how small, contributes in some way to the threat of environmental destruction. All contribute? all suffer. Pollution recognizes no political boundaries. It is therefore beyond any doubt a problem for the United Nations.
	
Of course, not every country is equally responsible, and not every country stands to be equally or as rapidly affected. Sometimes the innocent will suffer more than the guilty. It is a fact that more than 80 per cent of the greenhouse gases are produced by a small group of economically privileged countries. It is also a fact that the contribution of the developed world to the depletion of the ozone layer is overwhelming. New Zealand understands the anxiety these facts cause to the peoples of the developing world.
We are especially conscious of the plight of the countries of the South Pacific. Last year I represented New Zealand at the South Pacific Forum meeting. We discussed climate change and the disastrous impact of possible sea-level rises. Imagine being the President or leader of an atoll country in the Pacific, such as Tuvalu or Kiribati or Tokelau, and learning that the effluent and by-products of other people's development not only threaten sustainable development in your small island country but indeed threaten to submerge every bit of land on which your people live. Small island communities in the Caribbean and Indian Ocean face similar problems. Pollution could literally wipe them off the face of the Earth.
Or imagine representing one of the countries in the South Pacific with few or no natural resources other than the fish in the ocean. You discover that foreign fishermen from outside the region have begun to use in your region a fishing technology not used there before, a technology which threatens to collapse the albacore tuna fishery which is of vital economic importance to the coastal States of the region.
I am speaking of the "wall of death": the enormous drift-nets which in the last few years have been employed in the South Pacific by distant water fishermen. The technology is not new in itself. What is new, and what, makes it quite unacceptable, is a new technique for the use of drift-nets. This involves several vessels working in co-operation, each deploying a series of very long nets. Each net can be up to 50 kilometres in length. Each vessel sets a number of these nets in a very long line across the ocean. They sometimes cover thousands of kilometres of ocean. In the North Pacific, at the height of the season, an estimated 50,000 kilometres of drift-nets are set nightly. They then drift, literally like a wall of death. They catch and kill, like a vacuum cleaner, virtually every living creature, including some endangered species, that comes in contact with them.
The indiscriminate nature of the catch makes this an unacceptable fishing technology. Turtles, whales, dolphins, birds: all are trapped and killed. Large percentages of the catch are lost or wasted when the nets are recovered. In the North Pacific, drift-net fishing has seriously damaged valuable salmon stocks.
I have to say that this technology was rejected unanimously by the countries of the South Pacific. In July of this year at the South Pacific Forum meeting at Tarawa, South Pacific Heads of Government adopted a Declaration condemning the practice of large-scale drift-net fishing. But "wall-of-death" fishing is not just a moral problem. It is a legal, political and economic problem, and has global implications. Freedom of the high seas cannot be invoked to protect what is in effect a systematic assault on the regional marine ecosystem. There was a time when some argued that freedom of the high seas legitimised unacceptable and illegal practices. But customary international law has responded over the years to outlaw unreasonable and repugnant practices. At the present time, international law is again responding to the unacceptable and unreasonable use of the high seas for drift-net fishing.
There is already some evidence of the international community's response to this unreasonable use of the high seas. Many Pacific island States, including New Zealand, have already taken action to outlaw the practice in their domestic regulations and in their 200-mile acres. The Declaration was vigorously supported only four weeks ago at the South Pacific Conference on Nature and Conservation of Protected Areas. It will be reinforced and codified later this year when the South Pacific countries adopt a regional convention to prevent "wall-of-death" fishing in our region.
I want to make it clear that what is troubling the South Pacific nations is not the practice of small-scale in-shore use of drift-nets of limited size, which are used by various developing countries. Our concern is with the new and highly destructive phenomenon of very long pelagic drift-nets. The Tarawa Declaration called on the international community to support the position of the South Pacific countries on drift-netting. We have asked the Secretary-General to circulate the Tarawa Declaration as a United Nations document for the information of all delegations.
The South Pacific will be vigorously pursuing this issue bilaterally, regionally and globally. We will be proceeding in a dispassionate, rational and reasonable way. But those who engage in this ecologically irresponsible activity should be in no doubt that the techniques they use are unacceptable wherever they are used. New Zealand looks to the United Nations to support the Tarawa Declaration. Resolutions in the United Nations system to combat drift-netting are inevitable if these practices are not phased out quickly. New Zealand, in close co-operation with the South Pacific countries and other Members of the United Nations who have declared their abhorrence of the new drift-net technology, will be pursuing this issue within the United Nations system. At the present session opportunities exist under agenda items before several Committees of this Assembly.
We note that the Government of the Republic of Korea has temporarily halted drift-net fishing in the South Pacific. That is welcome. We also welcome the decision by Japan in the past few weeks to reduce its drift-net fishing fleet. This is a step in the right direction. But a cessation of this fishing technique is the only ecologically acceptable solution. Only Taiwan has yet to respond to the concerns of the Pacific countries on this matter. We urge all concerned to act quickly. Indeed, the state of our global fisheries is a good example of the broader' environmental problems that our planet is facing.
There is really only one international measure regulating fisheries that proceeds on acceptably sound ecosystem principles. That is the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine and Living Resources. In this connection, I would remind the Assembly of the important and valuable environmental protection measures that have been achieved under the Antarctic Treaty, and note that further significant steps will be sponsored by New Zealand at the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in Paris next week. The Antarctic Treaty is an effective institution. We are making it even more effective in the environmental field. It is an institution that should be supported by the United Nations General Assembly.
Even 20 years ago it was generally assumed that the fish in the open sea were inexhaustible. In general, anyone could go fishing without limitation. Yet we all now know that the biomass of any fishery can easily be over fished. We face a situation where the world's fishing capacity may already be close to, or in excess of, sustainable yield from the commercial fisheries in the world's oceans. We are technically capable of catching fish faster than they can breed. Fishing rights are therefore tightly regulated and licensed. Will we soon have to apply to our atmosphere regulatory principles similar to those we are now applying to out fisheries.
I have to say that, if this is the case, then the example we have set with our fisheries is a frightening one. Drift-netting is simply the latest in a long history of irresponsible fishing practices. It is just as well that humanity has not depended on fisheries alone for its survival. The record of international fisheries management is such a sorry one that, if that had been the case, whole populations would have long since perished in the wake of collapsed fisheries.
But the reality is that there is no alternative atmosphere to breathe. There is only one global climate. We must do better than the halting attempts at fisheries conservation in that respect. I have some very specific and challenging thoughts about where we go from here to deal with the problems of the global environment generally.
The intimate connection between the global environment and the global economy is beyond dispute. It does not need to be argued here. The conclusion of the Brundtland report that development only makes sense if it is sustainable has been widely recognized.

The concept of sustainable development is, in its own right, an enormous challenge for the international community. But we must add to that challenge the need to address the disturbances that have been caused to the natural ecosystems. The ozone layer is already seriously depleted. Disposal of hazardous and toxic wastes has become a global threat through dumping in the oceans. We have already witnessed unacceptable attempts to pay developing countries to accept a role as waste receivers. Acid rain and desertification threaten economic progress on several continents, reforestation is limiting the environment's capacity to heal itself and, more importantly, our atmosphere and our climate itself are threatened. Restoring the equilibrium, in all of these areas is going to involve quite significant impacts on the global economy.
I do not believe that the full extent of those impacts is yet appreciated by the general public in any of our countries. It is time that ordinary people everywhere stopped and thought for a moment. It is time to acknowledge that we are all adding to the environmental problems every day and that there are no free rides. In the end, we are all going to have to contribute to the solutions, and this will require a major change of attitude all over the world.
In this connection I want to pay tribute to the foresight shown by the Prime Ministers of the Netherlands, France and Norway, who in March this year brought together 24 Heads of government to consider the solutions. I was privileged to represent New Zealand at that meeting. We adopted the Hague Declaration. That document called for the development of some very new and important principles to protect the global environment.
What then does all this mean in practice? The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and its Working Groups are focusing on that issue in a great deal of detail. But it seems to me that there are two very clear messages for the future: first, if effective measures are to be taken to reduce greenhouse emissions some quite radical economic measures will be required. Secondly, as is clearly spelt out in the Hague Declaration, some major institutional changes are going; to be required. As to economic measures, these will prove particularly radical for some economic theorists in many countries, including New Zealand. As many of you will know, my Government has drastically reformed the New Zealand economy. We have eliminated subsidies, deregulated commercial activity and reversed the stultifying effects of unnecessary governmental intervention in the economy. And it has proved to be good economic medicine.
But it is abundantly clear from the evidence of environmental impacts that the definition of "necessary governmental intervention" is going to have to change. Indeed, in New Zealand we have already begun to implement interventions co protect the global environment. The first step was the implementation of the Montreal Protocol in 1988. As a second step, I will shortly be putting before our Parliament legislation going beyond the Montreal Protocol. By 1994 we shall reduce consumption of chlorofluorocarbons to only 5 per cent of 1986 levels, and we shall phase them out altogether by the year 2000. Thirdly, to address our national policies for resource management, I have commissioned the complete overhaul of our law relating to land use, water use, minerals, pollution and hazardous substances, legislation radically reforming all these areas will be submitted to our Parliament before the end of the year. The New Zealand Government will make sustainable development the guiding principle behind decision-making in each of these areas.
But it is clear that these interventions will be insignificant by comparison with what will be required to combat the greenhouse effect. I am aware that there are still many unknowns relating to the greenhouse effect, but the evidence overwhelmingly points to the need to act.
Effective action will require measures to reduce carbon dioxide and other industrial emissions. We shall have to look at ways to encourage measures of reforestation that absorb carbon dioxide. We shall have to look at energy use, and that will have spin-off implications for economic activity and development throughout all our economies.
But there are solutions as well as problems. Radical improvements in energy efficiency and energy conservation make sense economically as well as environmentally. But these alone will not be enough. The United Nations may even need to consider the possibility that, within the limitations of present technology, if development is to be sustainable, it must be rationed - in other words, that humanity has reached the point in history where sustainable development is only possible if "rights to pollute" are allocated according to agreed criteria. New Zealand would be the first to acknowledge that this proposition is a frightening one, and it is all the more frightening because of its potential impacts on the aspirations of the developing world for economic and social development.
New Zealand understands that we cannot solve global environmental problems unless we can work simultaneously and in a co-ordinated fashion to eradicate poverty. Sustainable development, in its true sense, will require action: to relieve debt burdens; to liberalize multilateral trade; and to promote flows of development assistance without extra conditions. The burdens of improving the global environment must be shared by us all, and they must be shared fairly. That means that some who are already at higher stages of development will have to carry the greatest part of the burden.
So clearly we are facing an immensely complex negotiating task. It involves balancing a wide range of technical, scientific and political judgements and meshing them with international economic, trade and aid policies. This is a task which requires the most delicate and co-ordinated oversight. Almost by definition it is beyond the mandate of any existing institution.
That brings me to my second major point - institutional reform. We are conscious that a number of proposals have been canvassed in recent times for institutional reform. They range from a new form of Security Council to an ad hoc institution with limited scope and a limited mandate. We are also conscious that existing machinery, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN), and others, must be given the room and support necessary to achieve their functions while we are discussing the institutional reforms of the future.
We accept that reform will have to be evolutionary. But a United Nations declaration on the environment may be needed, and in our view we need a vision that is clear and cogent, because if by 1992 existing institutions are not coping adequately, the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development will need to address squarely the key issue of institutional reform. I have no doubt the issue will not go away. It will have to be faced. In New Zealand's judgement, the traditional response of international law, developing international legal standards in small incremental steps, each of which must subsequently be ratified by all countries, is no longer appropriate to deal with the highly complex environmental problems of the future.
The time has come for something more innovative, for a conceptual leap forward in institutional terms. And we see the need for the establishment of a new organ in the United Nations system - perhaps it could be called the "Environmental Protection Council". The United Nations already has a Security Council. We also have an Economic and Social Council and a Trusteeship Council. We have two chapters of the United Nations Charter on the settlement of disputes and the maintenance of peace. We have a chapter laying down the rules and principles with respect to Non-Self-Governing Territories. I have no doubt that if the Charter were being drawn up today, there would be widespread support for including among the organs of the United Nations a body empowered to take binding decisions on global environmental issues. In our view, nothing less than an institution with this status will command the necessary respect and authority to achieve what is required.
Perhaps the most effective way to achieve this would be through the inclusion in the United Nations Charter of a new chapter dealing with the environment. Another option would be a major declaration of principle adopted by the United Nations. But we do not envisage any new body replacing UNEP. Far from it. UNEP brings together vital scientific and technical expertise. It has demonstrated both skill and ability in constructing and implementing programmes to analyse global issues and to support operational activities at the regional level. This is a vital function. Not only must it continue, but UNEP's role of developing scientific, technical and policy advice must be enhanced. UNEP may need to be built in as an integral part of the new structure. The missing institutional link, however, is the equivalent of a legislature. We would envisage the new environmental protection council becoming the point in the United Nations system which links the streams of economic and environmental advice. It would perform the function that currently falls between the cracks in the mandates of all the existing organizations. It would have responsibility for taking co-ordinated decisions on sustainable policies for global environmental protection. It would be empowered to take binding decisions. And if decisions are to be binding, the membership of the Council may need to be very wide - perhaps including all Members of the United Nations. But the key thing is that it should have power to act - not just to talk. The time is coming for a bold new step in developing the structures of the United Nations. We must show that the United Nations is ready to meet new challenges and meet them by changing itself to cope with the needs of humanity in the course of the next century.
In 1945, the present Charter was born out of the conviction that the horrors of the Second World War must never be repeated. The environmental challenge which we now face may be every bit as devastating for humanity. Let us hope that we have learned from the past and that it will prove possible to put in place effective institutions now, rather than repeat the sad experience of the League of Nations, a well-meaning but inadequate institution. If we wait for the aftermath of an ecological disaster, it may be too late.
May I conclude with a quotation from one of my predecessors, Prime Minister Peter Fraser, who in his statement at San Francisco, on 1 May 1945, at the adoption of the present Charter, had this to say:
"The failure of the League of Nations, one of the noblest conceptions in the history of mankind, was a moral failure on the part of the individual members, and was not due to any fundamental defect of the machinery of the League. [It] failed because its members would not perform what they undertook to perform. It failed because of the recession that took place in public morality ... It failed because the rule of expediency replaced that of moral principles.
"I would therefore stress that unless in the future we have the moral rectitude end determination to stand by our engagements and our principles, then ... this new organization will avail us nothing, the sufferings and the sacrifices our people have endured will avail us nothing, and the countless lives of those who have died in this struggle for security and freedom will have been sacrificed in vain."
These words are a solemn reminder to us all that in the end it is not only a question of institutions, of conventions and protocols. It is, in the final analysis, the scourge of pollution, like the scourge of war, that can arid will destroy us unless we are willing to put principle above expediency. Strong medicine is called for a sick planet. We have no choice. And if we take no action, we will have no future.
﻿My task as head of the delegation of the Soviet Union to the General Assembly has been greatly facilitated by two fundamental statements made by Mikhail S. Gorbachev concerning the place and role of the United Nations in building new international relations at this crucial stage of world development for mankind, at time when it is moving out of the cold war into a period of peace in its development and affirming a new political order resting on a comprehensive approach to security.
The profound analytical report of Mr. Perez de Cuellar on the work of our Organization over the past year has impressed us with its convincing evidence of the expansion of the role of the United Nations as a global peace-maker. Addressing the Assembly, its new President, the representative of Nigeria, Mr. Garba, also referred to that.
The heads of many delegations have put forward some far-reaching and original ideas at this session. Yesterday we listened with close attention to the statement of President George Bush of the United States, which, in our view, contained a number of very important and interesting ideas.
As always, during these days of the General Assembly's regular session representatives of the world community have together been recreating a panorama of the past year in the life of mankind. Its overriding idea is that of peace and security, its ideal composition is harmony of universal human values and national interests.
In making our own national contribution to this grand agreement each of us, I am
sure, wants it to become a part of an organic and unitary whole. Unfortunately, in some places the overall composition is still marred by cracks that impair its integrity. Over the past 12 months we have seen a rather contradictory picture of the state of the world.
Of course, the central concept remains the same and the theme, a product of mankind's thought and suffering, as we were appropriately reminded by the fiftieth anniversary of the outbreak of the Second World War, has not changed: it is the piloting of our common ark towards a new shore and our common desire to chart its course so as to avoid a storm that might destroy it. Nevertheless, there have been some new developments which have aroused concern. It is not just that the ship of the world has not yet negotiated the dangerous straits; it is encountering new threats that could give it a critical lurch.
The twentieth century has released the tremendous energy of nations and peoples, and this has become a major factor in the development of universal civilization. It is capable of and has been working miracles by extricating entire national communities from backwardness and poverty in what is historically an amazingly brief span of time. It is adding to the mosaic of the world more and
more bright and clear-cut elements of progress and prosperity. However, the same national energy, when it takes the form of inflated egotism and self-interest, often makes for aggression and expansion, a grasping for one's own good at the expense of others.
Here the problem of the self-defence of nations arises, the problem of their Physical survival, preserving their unique historical and cultural identities. Action provokes counteraction, which assumes some highly ambivalent forms. Centrifugal tendencies are prevailing over centripetal ones, thus upsetting the balance of world relationships, which is so hard to build.
This diverts the focus of our attention from traditional international issues to domestic and inter-ethnic conflicts. It has now become quite clear that internal strife in some countries extends the process of their destabilization to vast areas and that regional upheavals convulse the whole world. Lebanon is a case in point. It is often much easier to resolve the external issues in a settlement than to deal with its internal conditions, and this is clearly evident in Afghanistan and Cambodia.
Today the notion of "inside the country" often has a bearing on that of "outside". The trouble, however, is that the isolated fragments of the world which yearn for a better life fail to see beyond the mountain ridges, jungles, dunes and other features of their own national landscapes, the threat to their own existence, that might objectively result from such a fragmented view. Equally, those who want to prosper at the expense of others do not see that their own existence is also threatened.
This leads us to the question of the responsibility of the part vis-à-vis the whole and of nations vis-à-vis mankind. This places on our agenda the problem of harmonizing universal and national interests.
Some clarifications and explanations are in order here.
The supremacy of universal human values and observance of universal rules of the world community are the imperatives of our time. The objective requirements of the age we live in, its trends, character and circumstances leave mankind no other choice but to reject the traditional polarization. This is the axiom which underlies both the concept and the practical policies of the new thinking. Of course, it cannot resolve the existing contradictions overnight, but as a start it can alleviate them.
On the question of the primacy of universal human values, we are also implying the mature readiness of nations to accept this. Where that maturity has not yet been attained, and where the national idea is being juxtaposed with the common interest, domestic conflicts directly complement and impel global destructive processes.
Now I should like to stress this: freedom of choice continues to crown the hierarchy of a nation's supreme values. Every nation is free to choose the ways and means of its own development, but to do so in a responsible manner. It must not lock itself in the dark rooms of national selfishness or ignore the interests of other peoples and of the entire community of nations. Freedom does not mean irresponsibility towards others, for in the final analysis that would mean irresponsibility towards oneself.
The time has finally come to realize that not all means are good for attaining even the most noble ends.
The international community has become aware of the danger of narcotics traffic, of terrorism, it condemns and outlaws both phenomena. We need equally determined action against any kind of violence, whatever the motives or excuses for it. Violence by the State against its own people must be totally excluded. Violence on national, ethnic or religious grounds can no longer be tolerated.
To repeat, we advocate freedom of choice. However, we reject its interpretation as the licence to use any means, to commit any violence or to shed blood. Freedom must not be sought at the expense of others. No support or sympathy should be extended to so-called movements that countenance actions"
humiliating to other nations or use terrorist, barbaric and inhuman methods in waging their struggle. It is to be deplored that. 50 years after the Second World War. some politicians have begun to forget its lessons. Let us remember that political and ideological differences did not prevent Comments and nations from joining forces to defend universal human values from nazism and fascism. The dividing line in that battle was drawn not by ideology but by the rules of and attitudes towards morality. The Soviet Union, the United States. Great Britain and other countries and peoples found themselves in the same camp and. fighting side by side, saved civilization.
Fascism, which started the war is the extreme and ugliest form of nationalism and chauvinism. German nazism marched under the banner of revanchism. Now that the forces of revanchism are again becoming active and are seeking to revise and destroy the post-war realities in Europe, it is our duty to warn those who, wittingly or unwittingly, are encouraging those forces. The revanchist movement is dangerous and inimical to the march of peace, to which President Bush referred here yesterday.
While expressing respect for healthy national movements, let me refer to one modern concept of nationhood. it defines a nation as a collective personality, endowed with certain rights, in many respects similar to and even sometimes identical with individual human rights. But there are no rights without responsibilities, either for the individual or for the State.
It is the mission of the United Nations to promote among the world's peoples the idea of the interdependence of national aspirations and the common good of mankind, and to encourage nations to behave responsibly. This fundamental position of the Soviet Union is clearly reflected in our bilateral contacts. Relations between the Soviet Union and the United states Provide the best illustration of this. I will permit myself to touch upon the  United States-Soviet dialogue only because I am convinced that its importance far transcends the frontiers of the two States.  In the view of the Soviet leadership, this is not a kind of privilege but a clearly understood responsibility towards the world community. Therefore my account of the results of our talks with President Bush and Secretary of State Baker is my report to you.
These talks demonstrated increasing awareness by both sides of the need to co-operate for the benefit of mankind and growing confidence that such co-operation, such interaction, is possible.
Agreement to hold a meeting of the top leaders of the Soviet Union and the United States shows that we have moved far ahead in solving a number of major bilateral and international problems. Extraordinary efforts at the highest level will be needed to attain the goal of concluding treaties.
I am referring in particular to the preparation of the agreement on 50 per cent reductions in strategic offensive arms. We have proposed to the United States side options for resolving the key issues in that agreed: the Treaty on the Limitation of Anti-ballistic Missile Systems, space, and long-range sea-launched cruise missiles. Our partners have accommodated us on mobile intercontinental ballistic missiles. Positions on other outstanding problems have come closer to each other. In our view, by the time the summit meeting is held next year, in late spring or early summer, we may have passed the last turn on the road towards a treaty reducing strategic offensive arms. This is a real prospect. The protocols to the 1974 and 1976 Treaties on nuclear explosions could also be signed at the summit meeting so that they could enter into force very soon thereafter. We are confident that the summit meeting will give a powerful impetus to the talks on major reductions in the armed forces and conventional armaments in Europe.
We welcome the proposal concerning chemical weapons put forward yesterday by President Bush. Generally consistent with the initiatives of the Soviet leadership, it indicates to us that we share the desire to rid mankind of these barbaric weapons. The Soviet Union is ready, together with the United States, to go further and assume mutual obligations prior to the conclusion of a multilateral convention: cease the production of chemical weapons, as we have already done - I am referring here also to binary weapons, on a bilateral basis, radically reduce or completely destroy Soviet and United States chemical weapons, regarding this as a step towards the global destruction of chemical weapons: renounce the use of chemical weapons under any circumstances, institute rigorous verification of the cessation of the production and the elimination of chemical warfare agents. I think there is no need to say how beneficial all this would be for the overall world climate.
In addition to the problems of security, the Soviet-United States agenda encompasses issues of humanitarian cooperation, regional topics and joint efforts in the fields of the environment and economic development, reflecting the process that brings together national and universal concerns. We are more aware today than ever before that Soviet-United States relations cannot be built outside the global context, divorced from the problems concern to all mankind.
Our discussions in Washington and Wyoming have moved us ahead in our efforts to bridge the continuing gap between the attitudes to one's own good and the attitudes to the common good. Much remains to be done, however, to alleviate the disparities of political objectives, for such disparities endanger all of us.
Let us examine the situation, taking nuclear weapons as an example. Why are they dangerous? Not only because of their sheer destructive power. They are unacceptable because they widen the chasm between national and universal interests. The equality of nations and the unity of the world become empty talk when someone's national selfishness is driven by the idea of nuclear supremacy over the world, camouflaged as national security interests.
I would say that the world community has as yet no reason for complacency or euphoria. The nuclear threat has only been reduced by the Soviet-United States Treaty eliminating intermediate and shorter-range missiles.
We believe that reliance on nuclear weapons does not serve anyone's national interests. It is also an obstacle in the way of more democratic international relations. Only the complete elimination of nuclear capabilities would help to attain real security.

The advocates of nuclear deterrence do not believe this will be possible in the foreseeable future. They respond with concepts of so-called minimum nuclear deterrence. In our view, that is a step forward, if only a timid one, a step that can be taken. But first we must define what we mean by minimum nuclear deterrence and what capabilities should be considered sufficient.
The Soviet Union proposes that those questions be discussed at a meeting of representatives of the nuclear Powers and the States on whose territories nuclear weapons are placed. Of course, the persistence of the concepts of nuclear deterrence is due not only to the undue emphasis placed on national rights and interests at the expense of obligations, but also to the lack of trust. The problem should not be easily dismissed. What is the way out of these vicious circles? It lies in affirming glasnost and openness and in building a wide-ranging infrastructure of pervasive verification. If we do need to deter each other, let deterrence be transparent and verifiable.
To that end, the Soviet Union is proposing that all nuclear Powers conclude multilateral agreements on measures to reduce the risk of the outbreak of nuclear war. Detailed discussions to work out such an agreement could be held in consultations among the permanent members of the Security Council.
In the same context, we wish to raise once again the problem of the cessation and prohibition of nuclear tests. This is the question of questions. Why are we still unable to put an end to such tests despite the express will of the overwhelming majority of nations? Because there are those who want to maintain their superiority at any cost.
Guided by its obligations to the world community, the Soviet Union has revised its nuclear-testing programme by reducing the number and yield of explosions.
Let me point out, however, that the efforts of one State are not sufficient for a comprehensive solution to this problem. We see a number of possibilities here. First of all, the USSR is ready to reinstate its moratorium on all nuclear explosions on any day and at any hour if the United States reciprocates. Secondly, it is time finally to end the procedural impasse at the Conference on Disarmament and start concrete discussions there on the problem of a complete test ban. Thirdly, as one possible way of achieving such a ban, we are now considering the possibility of extending the 1963 Treaty to cover underground nuclear explosions. There is an urgent need for a verifiable cessation of the production of fissionable material for weapons purposes. We have declared that this year we are ceasing the production of enriched uranium, that in 1987 we closed down one reactor producing weapons-grade plutonium, and that we plan to close down in 1989 and 1990 a few more such reactors. By the year 2000 all remaining reactors will have been shut down.
In addition, the Soviet Union is proposing that all nuclear Powers should begin preparing to conclude an agreement on the cessation and prohibition of the Production of such material. We believe that in the verification of compliance with the agreement the vast experience of applying International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safeguards could prove useful.
It would seem that even the way the Second World War began ought to have made clear that weapons do not guarantee security - the more weapons there are, the greater the danger of aggression. And yet for the 45 post-war years security has been sought in the arms race. It is only today that we are beginning to understand the need for a fundamentally different concept of security in Europe, a security that relies increasingly on political means and, only as insurance, on the necessary minimum of armaments.
The Vienna accord heralded a new European situation, opening up broad vistas for humanitarian cooperation and exchanges of people, ideas and information. It holds out the prospect that the European idea will rest itself on a foundation of trust and openness. But the groundwork has to be prepared for that by clearing the continent of excessive quantities of arms. That work has begun.
When the negotiators do not consign their responsibilities to the back rooms, when they sincerely want to strike a balance between their interests and those of their partners, progress is always achieved. One example is the Vienna talks between the Warsaw Treaty countries and the countries of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) on reducing armed forces and conventional armaments in Europe.
In response to our alliance's initiative the NATO countries have made some meaningful proposals, which go a long way towards accommodating the positions of the Warsaw Treaty countries. In parallel talks between the countries participating in the European process to develop a qualitatively new generation of confidence- and security-building measures the Warsaw Treaty member countries have proposed a far-reaching approach calling for a comprehensive set of such measures, and extending them to air force and naval activities.
Reverting to the topic of the obligations of individual countries to the community, I feel it my duty to emphasize that reluctance to engage in active talks on reducing naval forces is a sign of neglect of those obligations. Leaving naval forces outside the process of reducing armed forces and armaments would be harmful to universal security. The problem of naval forces could be examined, for example, in special consultations to be attended by all States concerned and, above all, by major naval Powers. They would discuss mutual concerns in this sphere and would exchange views on the mechanism and ultimate objective of future negotiations and on how to move towards them step by step.
The dialectic of developments on the European continent urgently requires the starting of talks on tactical nuclear weapons. The situation does not appear to be deadlocked. Mutually acceptable solutions could be sought in an in-depth discussion of this whole range of issues between the USSR, the United States, the United Kingdom, France and the States where those weapons have been placed. If NATO countries agree to start talks on tactical nuclear weapons the USSR will respond with further unilateral cuts in its tactical nuclear missiles in Europe.
The problem of missile proliferation is also ripe for multilateral discussions. Nearly 20 countries possess such weapons, and the trend towards further geographical spread is still strong.
The approach to this issue could be two-pronged. Barriers could be erected which, first, would preclude the proliferation of combat missiles and associated technology across the globe, and, secondly, would not impinge on the legitimate interest of countries in gaining peaceful access to outer space.
No one in the world can yet bid farewell to arms, but we can abandon, once and for all - and we can do it now - the practice of unconstrained and uncontrolled international weapons transfers, lb that end the principles of glasnost and openness should be asserted here as well. The USSR reaffirms its willingness to participate in the establishment of a United Nations register of weapons sales and transfers, including work on parameters.
The time has come when the idea of preventing war is finding material expression in relations between the armed forces of a number of countries. A new peace-making instrument is being shaped by the Soviet-United States agreement on preventing dangerous military activities and by a series of agreements with the United States, the United Kingdom, West Germany and France on the prevention of incidents on the high seas. Along the same lines. Soviet Union and the People's Republic of China have agreed to start talks short!, on putting an end to their military standoff. The  Soviet union expresses the hope that other states too will engage in this process.
A civilised world is an open world. Breaking the seals on many secrets, the soviet union has revealed to the international community detailed data about all reductions in its armed forces and armaments, their strength, the size of its military budget, and so on.
We reaffirm here the position of the Soviet Union. Our ultimate goal is to have not a single Soviet soldier outside the country. But, speaking of equal responsibilities, let us roundly condemn the continuing encirclement of our country - and not only our country - by military bases of other states.
The soviet union attaches fundamental importance to a transition from individual measures of confidence-building, openness and glasnost in international affairs to a global policy of openness, which would become an integral part of comprehensive security and international peace. The President of the united States, Mr. Bush, has proposed the idea of open skies. We like that idea. In welcoming and supporting the initiative, the Soviet Union calls for the opening up and open space, only then shall  e attain absolute transparency and the necessary level of confidence.
While we duly include in the records of foreign policy such accomplishments as the Geneva Agreements on Afghanistan, the process of granting independence to Namibia, the termination of hostilities on the Iran-Iraq front, and the constructive dynamics in the dialogue on the problem of Cambodia, we cannot yet say that the positive trends are irreversible.
Let us pay a grateful tribute to this Organization for its peace-keeping operations. Let us recognize its unique role, which goes beyond simply localizing conflicts and achieves a qualitatively new level in ensuring stability in the world order. But today's world order is of a far broader category. We have firmly established economic security as one of its pillars.
The Soviet Union shares the entirely justified concern about, and it supports, measures to overcome the crisis in the world economy - measures that were proposed at the Belgrade summit meeting of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. There are a few who continue to dictate to the many the terms of their economic existence. The devotees of diktat should understand that perpetuation of the current situation is fraught with the danger of a catastrophe that would spare no one - and that is no exaggeration.
It would seem that the world of the rich has nothing to worry about since its economy is in good shape. It would seem also that the rich are beyond reproach since, ostensibly, their wealth breeds generosity. In 1988 the aggregate amount of the developed nations' assistance to the developing countries amounted to 3US 90 billion - an impressive sum indeed - but in the same year the developed nations received from the developed world $US 50 billion more in debt servicing and interest payments. That was the largest flow of capital in history from the poor to the rich man's pocket.
Thus the prosperity of the rich is achieved not without help from the poor. There is more to it, however, than this obvious injustice. Such disparities cannot for ever keep testing the strength of the world economy and world politics.
The health of the world economy is also being undermined by the enormous cost of military production, which siphons off vast material and intellectual resources from the civilian sector. Now that there is a prospect of limiting the military-industrial complexes, the problem of conversion has to be addressed. This can be done only by working together and relying on the experience of all States.
Before the very eyes of just one generation the sphere of politics has linked
up with environmental conservation to give mankind the science of political ecology. No one can master it alone, enchained in the fetter of narrow national interests.  
Political ecology requires urgent planetary decisions at the highest political level and the thorough internationalisation of national efforts through the United Nations, through consolidation of its leading environmental branch, the appropriate agency of this Organization. And, since we are speaking of a major component of international security. I would add that political ecology requires the involvement of the Security Council in solving problems and activating such tools as transparency and strict international monitoring.
The United Nations conference on environment and development, to be held in 1992, will undoubtedly be a watershed in establishing universal cooperation and working out a code of civilized ecological behaviour. We call for the holding of this conference at the level of Heads of State or Government.
Defining for itself the main principles of the concept of ecological security, the Soviet Union considers disarmament, the economy and ecology as an integral whole. While participating in implementing conservation strategies, the Soviet Union has programmes for speeding up the integration of its economy, on an equal and mutually beneficial basis, into the world economy, the modern international division of labour and international exchanges in science and technology. that
end we should like to participate actively in the work of international economic organizations and to establish contacts with the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, being convinced that our co-operation with them, as well as with the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations will be useful both for us and for the community as a whole.
In the building of new international relations, our foreign policy looks ahead to a positive evolution of today's world and to its stability. That orientation remains unchanged, even in the face of certain changes which affect our immediate interests and the interests of the community to which we have the honour to belong. But we remain faithful to our avowed principles and continue to affirm that nations' choices cannot and must not be overridden by force and that stability cannot be achieved by threatening the use of force or by intervention, blockade or other sanctions.
It is no secret that we were not enthusiastic about the Polish Communists' election set-back, nor should it be a secret that we hope they can overcome the crisis. Nevertheless, we see nothing threatening in the fact that a coalition Government has been formed, in accordance with the will of the Polish people, We are in no way prejudiced against that Government. We wish it every success and are ready to co-operate with it most actively.
Tolerance is the norm of civilized political behaviour. But if it is mandatory for us in our attitude towards the current Government of Poland, why are others so intolerant as regards, say, Cuba? And if a non-Communist Prime Minister is possible in a Socialist country, why should the appearance of a Communist as head of a Western Government be perceived as heresy? That is something we should not exclude either. The days of traditional demarcation lines are numbered. Only one line remains, to be pursued by all of us together moving to a common goal.
It is not the expression of popular will that threatens countries, but, rather, political and ideological intolerance, chauvinism and extremist excesses of imperial or nationalist mentalities. It is only when they engender violence and destabilize the life of countries and peoples that the machinery of legitimate defence must be activated.
However different may be our ideas of preferable ways of social development, we also have an overriding understanding of our common responsibility for the future of mankind and the survival of civilisation. We know that only together can we step beck from the brink, because an isolated island of development and prosperity would inevitably sink in the ocean of backwardness and poverty peoples and nations cannot be well when mankind is sick. 
There is only one way out of those fateful correlations. As we see it, it is for the world community to move consciously towards harmony between universal and national principles. It is difficult to attain, but it is possible because the collapse of the world is unthinkable. It is possible because we  all share a place where individual national efforts unite in a single "energy field".
The United Nations is that Place, it offers a forum for everybody to talk about his own country and its links with the rest of the world. I should like to take this opportunity to say a few words about my country.
We are building a new model of society, a new model of relations between Peoples and nations, a new model of socialism. As a great concept, socialism is by no means a spent force, indeed, it is revealing its humanistic potential in the bitter and often dramatic confrontation with the forces and flaws that are organically alien to it We in our country are not just repainting the facade, but are rebuilding the entire structure, in which the rules of living together must and will be based on the supremacy of law, people's power, openness to the outside world, inter-ethnic harmony and friendship.
In every sphere of the common life of our State and our people - the national economy, the political system and the people's intellectual endeavour - rejection of the ossified relics of the past goes hand in hand with the enthusiasm of new construction. Even though, in the words of a poet, we may have a gloomy day or two, we are confident that perestroika, which began as a revolution of hopes, will keep those hopes alive. Our people, our nation, will keep perestroika going, for it embodies the aspirations that they cherish.
Today, when some Cassandras hasten to make gloomy predictions, we make our own forecast. We want this historical optimism to be shared by all those who understand that the destiny of the world is inseparable from the future of our Perestroika. So we say to them: our determination to make it irreversible is matched by our belief in victory, a confidence grounded in the democratic institutions, which are ready to assert their genuine and full authority.
We are moving along that path guided by, not least, our awareness of the historic nature and magnitude of our goal, which we must attain ourselves, while not rejecting the support of the world community.
Believe me, we feel that support not only during the tragic days of natural disasters and national misfortunes. I say to representatives: it has been voiced in your statements at this Assembly, it manifests itself every day in your compatriots' generous gestures, their deeds and actions. So I ask you, the envoys of your Governments and nations, to convey to them our warm gratitude.
 
﻿I am honoured to address the General Assembly today at the beginning of its forty-fourth session. I should like to congratulate Joseph Garba of Nigeria, a distinguished diplomat, on his election as President of this session of the General Assembly, and I wish him success in his presidency.
I feel a great personal pleasure on this occasion, for this is a homecoming for both Barbara and me. The memories of my time here in 1971 and 1972 are still with me today - the human moments, the humorous moments that are part of even the highest undertaking.
With the Assembly's permission, I should like to share one story from one of the many meetings of the Security Council. I was the Permanent Representative of the United States, and I was 45 minutes late for the meeting. All 45 minutes were filled by the first speaker to take the floor, and when I walked in and took my seat the speaker paused, with great courtesy, and said: "I welcome the Permanent Representative of the United States. And now, for his benefit, I will start my speech all over again, from the beginning."
That is a true story, at that moment. differences of alliance and ideology didn't matter. The universal groan that went up around that table from every representative present, and the laughter that followed united us all. Today, I would like to begin by recognising - again, a personal privilege - the current Permanent Representatives with whom I served, Ambassador Dugersuren, Ambassador Martinez Ordonez. Ambassador Pabetafika and Permanent Observer Dube. It is wonderful to look around and see so any familiar faces - foreign ministers, members of the Secretariat, and delegates. Of course, the Secretary-General, you were the Permanent representative of your country when we served together. Under-Secretary-General Farah. you were a Permanent Representative back then too. Ambassador Aguilar was here then and is now back. It is an honour to be back with you in this historic Hall, and I apologize if , have forgotten any of you old enough to have served in 1971 and 1972.

The United Nations was established forty-four years ago upon the ashes of war and amidst great hopes. The UN can do great things. No, the United Nations is not perfect, it is not a panacea for the world's problem. But it is a vital forum where the nations of the world seek to replace conflict with consensus, and it must remain a forum for peace. The UN has the support of the United States of America. In recent years, the war of words that is often echoed in this Hall has been giving way to a new mood. 
We have seen a welcome shift from polemics to peace-keeping. United Nations Peace-keepers have given their lives in service to the United Nations. Today, should like to remember one of those soldiers of peace, an American on a mission of peace under the United Nations flag, on a mission for all the world, a man of unquestioned bravery and unswerving, dedication to the United Nations ideal - Lieutenant-Colonel William Richard Higgins. I call on the General Assembly to condemn the murder of this soldier of peace and to call on those responsible to have the decency to return his remains to his family. Let us all - right now, right here - dedicate ourselves and our nations to the cause that Colonel Higgins served so selflessly.
The founders of this historic institution believed that it was here that the nations of the world might come to agree that law, not force, shall govern. And the United Nations can play a fundamental role in the central issue of our time, for today, there is an idea at work around the globe, an idea of undeniable force - and that idea is freedom. Freedom's advance is evident everywhere.- Central Europe and Hungary, where State and society are now in the midst of a movement towards political pluralism and a free-market economy, where the barrier that once enforced an unnatural division between Hungary and its neighbours to the west has been torn down and replaced by a new hope for the future, a new hope in freedom. We see freedom at work in Poland, where, in deference to the will of the people, the Communist Party has relinquished its monopoly on power, and indeed in the Soviet Union, where the world hears the voices of people no longer afraid to speak out or to assert the right to rule themselves.
But freedom's march is not confined to a single continent or to the developed world alone. We see the rise of freedom in Latin America where, one by one, dictatorships are giving way to democracy. We see it on the continent of Africa, where more and more nations see in the system of free enterprise salvation for economies crippled by excessive State control. East and West, North and South, on every continent, we can see the outlines of a new world of freedom.
Of course, freedom's work remains unfinished. The trend we see is not yet universal. Some regimes still stand against the tide. Some rulers still deny the right of the people to govern themselves. But now the power of prejudice and despotism is challenged. Never before have these regimes stood so isolated and alone, so out of step with the steady advance of freedom. Today we are witnessing an ideological collapse, the demise of the totalitarian idea of the omniscient, all-powerful State. There are many reasons for this collapse, but in the end one fact alone explains what we see today: advocates of the totalitarian idea saw its triumph written in the laws of history, they failed to see the love of freedom that was written in the human heart.
Two hundred years ago today, the United States - our Congress - proposed the Bill of Rights: fundamental freedoms belonging to every individual. Rights no Government can deny. Those same rights have been recognized in this congress of nations in the words of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights - a common standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations. From where we stand, on the threshold of this new world of freedom, the trend is clear enough. If, for those who write the history of our times, the twentieth century is remembered as the century of the state, the twenty-first century must be an era of emancipation, the age of the individual. Make no mistake, nothing can stand in the way of freedom's march. There will come a day when freedom is seen the world over to be the universal birthright of every man and woman, of every race and walk of life. Even under the worst circumstances, at the darkest of times, freedom has always remained alive - a distant dream, perhaps, but always alive.
Today, that dream is no longer distant. For the first time, for millions around the world, a new world of freedom is within reach. Today is freedom's moment. You see, the possibility now exists for the creation of a true community of nations, built on shared interests and ideals. A true community, a world where free Governments and free markets meet the rising desire of the people to control their own destiny, to live in dignity, and to exercise freely their fundamental human rights. It is time that worked together to deliver that destiny into the hands of men and women everywhere. Our challenge is to strengthen the foundations of freedom, encourage its advance and face our most urgent challenges, the global challenges of the twenty-first century: economic, health, environmental well-being, the great questions of war and peace.
First, global economic growth. During this decade, a number of developing nations have moved into the ranks of the world's most advanced economies, all of them - each and every one - powered by the engine of free enterprise. In the decade ahead, others can join their ranks, but for many nations, barriers stand in the way. In the case of some countries, these are obstacles of their own making: un-needed restrictions, regulations that act as dead weights on their own economies and obstacles to foreign trade. But other barriers to growth exist, and those, too, require effective action.
Too many developing countries struggle today under a burden of debt that makes growth all but impossible. The nations of the world deserve better opportunity to achieve a measure of control over their own economic fate and build better lives for their own people. The approach the United States has put forward - the Brady plan - will help these nations reduce that debt and, at the same time, encourage the free market reforms that will fuel economic growth.
In just two days, I will be speaking to the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, and I will discuss there, in more detail, the steps that our nations can take in dealing with the debt problem. But I can say now the new world of freedom is not a world where a few nations live in comfort while others live in want. The power of commerce is a force for progress. Open markets are the key to continued growth in the developing world. Today, the United States buys over one-half of the global manufactured exports that all developing nations combined sell to the industrialized world. It is time for the other advanced economies to follow suit, to create expanded opportunities for trade. I believe we will learn, in the century ahead, that many nations of the world have barely begun to tap their true potential for development. The free market and its fruits are not the special preserve of a few, they are a harvest that everyone can share.
Beyond the challenge of global growth lies another issue of global magnitude: the environment. No line drawn on a map can stop the advance of pollution. Threats to our environment have become international problems. We must develop an international approach to urgent environmental issues, one that seeks common solutions to common problems. The United Nations is already at work on the question of global warming and the effort to prevent oil spills and other disasters from fouling our seas and the air we breathe. And I will tell you now the United States will do its part. We have committed ourselves to the world-wide phase-out of chlorofluorocarbons by the year 2000. We have proposed amending our own Clean Air Act to ensure clean air for our citizens within a single generation. We have banned the import of ivory to protect the elephant and rhinoceros from the human predators who exterminate them for profit. And we have begun to explore ways to work with other nations, with the major industrialized democracies, and in Poland and in Hungary, to make common cause for the sake of our environment.
The environment belongs to all of us. In this new world of freedom, the world's citizens must enjoy this common trust for generations to come. Global economic growth and the stewardship of our planet - both are critical issues.
But as always, questions of war and peace must be paramount to the United Nations. We must move forward to limit and eliminate weapons of mass destruction. Five years ago, at the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva, I presented a United States draft treaty outlawing chemical weapons. Since then, progress has been made, but time is running out. The threat is growing. More than 20 nations now possess chemical weapons or the capability to produce them. And these horrible weapons are now finding their way into regional conflicts. That is simply unacceptable. For the sake of mankind, we must halt and reverse this threat.
Today I want to announce steps that the United States is ready to take, steps to rid the world of these truly terrible weapons, steps towards a treaty that will ban - eliminate - all chemical weapons from the Earth 10 years from the day it is signed. This initiative contains three major elements. First, in the first eight years of a chemical weapons treaty the United States is ready to destroy nearly all - 98 per cent - of our chemical weapons stockpile, provided the Soviet Union joins the ban, and I think it will. Secondly, we are ready to destroy all of our chemical weapons - 100 per cent, every one - within 10 years, once all nations capable of building chemical weapons sign that total-ban treaty. And thirdly, the United States is ready to begin now. We will eliminate more than 80 per cent of our stockpile even as we work to complete a treaty, if the Soviet Union joins us in cutting chemical weapons to an equal level and if we agree on the conditions, including inspections, under which stockpiles are destroyed.
We know that monitoring a total ban on chemical weapons will be a challenge. But the knowledge we have gained from our recent arms control experience and our accelerating research in this area makes me believe that we can achieve the level of verification that gives us confidence to go forward with the ban. The world has lived too long in the shadow of chemical warfare? so let us act together, beginning today, to rid the Earth of this scourge.
We are serious about achieving conventional arms reductions as well. And that is why we put forward new proposals just last Thursday at the negotiations in Vienna on conventional forces in Europe, proposals that demonstrate our commitment to act rapidly to ease military tensions in Europe and move the nations of that continent one step closer to their common destiny: a Europe whole and free.
The United States is convinced that open and innovative measures can move disarmament forward and also ease international tensions. That is the idea behind the "open skies" proposal, about which the Soviets have now expressed a positive attitude. It is the idea behind the "open lands" proposal, permitting for the first time ever free travel for all Soviet and United States diplomats throughout each other's countries. Openness is the enemy of mistrust, and every step towards a more open world is a step towards the new world we seek.
Let me make this comment on our meetings with the Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union, Mr. Shevardnadze, over the past few days: I am very pleased by the progress made. The Soviet Union removed a number of obstacles to progress on conventional and strategic arms reductions. We reached agreements in principle on issues from verification to nuclear testing. And, of course, we agreed to a summit in the spring or early summer of 1990. I look forward to meeting Mr. Gorbachev there.
Each of those achievements is important in its own right, but they are more important still as signs of a new attitude that prevails between the United States and the USSR. Serious differences remain; we know that. But the willingness to deal constructively and candidly with those differences is news that we and indeed the world must welcome. We have not entered into an era of perpetual peace. The threats to peace that nations face may today be changing, but they have not vanished. In fact, in a number of regions around the world, a dangerous combination is now emerging: regimes armed with old and unappeasable animosities and modern weapons of mass destruction. That development will raise the stakes whenever war breaks out. Regional conflict may well threaten world peace as never before.
The challenge of preserving peace is a personal one for all individuals right here in this Hall. Mr. Secretary-General, I say with great respect that you have made it your own. The United Nations can be a mediator, a forum where parties in conflict come in search of peaceful solutions. For the sake of peace, the United Nations must redouble its support for the peace efforts now under way in regions of conflict all over the world. I assure the Assembly that the United States is determined to take an active role in settling regional conflicts. Sometimes our role in regional disputes is and will be highly public, and sometimes, like many others do, we work quietly behind the scenes. But always, we are working for positive change and lasting peace.
Our world faces other, less conventional threats no less dangerous to international peace and stability. Illegal drugs are a menace to social order and a source of human misery wherever they gain a foothold. The nations which suffer this scourge must join forces in the fight, and we are. Let me salute the commitment and extraordinary courage of one country in particular: Colombia, where
we are working with the people and their President, Virgil lo Barco, to put the drug cartels cut of business and bring the drug lords to justice.
Finally, we must join forces to combat the threat of terrorism. Every nation and the United Nations must send the outlaws of the world a clear message hostage-taking and the terror of random violence are methods that cannot win the world's approval. Terrorism of any kind is repugnant to all values that a civilized world holds in common. And make no mistake.- Terrorism is a means that no end, no matter how just, can sanctify.
Whatever the challenge, freedom greatly raises the chances of our success. Freedom's moment is a time for hope for all of the world, because freedom, once set in motion, takes on a momentum of its own. As I said the day I assumed the presidency of our country, we do not have to talk late into the night about which form of government is better. We know that free government, democracy, is best. And I believe that is the hard-won truth of our time, the unassailable fact that still stands at the end of a century of great struggle and human suffering. And this is true not because all our differences must give way to democracy , but because democracy makes room for all our differences. In democracy, diversity finds its common home.
At the very heart of the democratic ideal is respect for freedom of belief, freedom of thought and action, in all its diversity, for human rights. The world has experienced enough of the ideologies that have promised to remake man in some new and better image. We have seen the colossal tragedies and dashed hopes. We know now that freedom and democracy hold the answers: what men and nations want is the freedom to live by their own lights and a chance to prosper, in peace.
When I began today I spoke to you about peace-keeping. I want to speak to you now about peace-making. We must bring peace to the people who have never known its blessings. There is a painting that hangs on the wall of my office in the White House which pictures President Abraham Lincoln and his generals meeting near the end of a war that remains the bloodiest in the history of my country. Outside at that moment a battle rages, in this picture, and yet what we see in the distance is a rainbow, a symbol of hope, of the passing of the storm. That painting is called "The Peace-makers". For me, it is a constant reminder that our struggle, the struggle for peace, is a struggle blessed by hope.
I do remember sitting in this Hall, I remember the mutual respect among all of us proudly serving as representatives, yes, I remember the almost endless speeches - and I do not want this to be one of them - the Security Council sessions, the receptions, those long receiving lines, the formal meetings of the General Assembly, and the informal discussions in the delegates' lounge. And I remember something more, something beyond the frantic pace and sometimes frustrating experiences of daily life here: The heartbeat of the United Nations, the quiet conviction that we could make the world more peaceful, more free. What we sought then, all of us, now lies within our reach. I ask each of you here in this Hall:
Can we not bring a unity of purpose to the United Nations? Can we not make this new world of freedom the common destiny we seek? I believe we can. I know we must. My solemn wish today is that here, among the United Nations, that spirit will take hold, and that all men and all nations will make freedom's moment their own.
Thank you, God bless you, and may God bless the work of the United Nations.  
﻿
Permit me to begin by warmly congratulating you. Sir on your election to the presidency of the current session of the General Assembly: I am sure that this session will be a success. I also wish to take this opportunity to express my sincere thanks to the President of the last session, Mr. Dante Caputo. For his outstanding contribution in fulfilling his high mission.
The past year has been marked by fresh achievements in the efforts of various countries to seek solutions to regional conflicts, reduce the threat of war and improve the international situation, and by new prospects for world peace. However, ours is not a trouble-free world. regional conflicts have not yet come to a halt. The arms race is still going on. Certain international contradictions have sharpened, owing to violation of the established norms of international law. The economic situation in the developing countries is further deteriorating. All this demonstrates that the source of world turbulence and tension still exists. The Chinese delegation would like to expound its position on the major questions confronting the world today. 
The first question is regional conflicts. regional conflicts affect peace and tranquillity in the world and have caused direct, tremendous losses, particularly to many third-world countries. As a third-world country and a permanent member of the Security Council, China is naturally very much concerned about the issue of regional conflicts. The Chinese Government has all along stood for a fair and reasonable political settlement of those conflicts, and has played a constructive role in this regard.
In accordance with the Geneva Agreements on the settlement of the Afghan question, the Soviet Union has withdrawn its troops from Afghanistan. That is a positive development. Genuine peace, however, has yet to come to the land of Afghanistan. We hope that the various political forces there will set up a broadly based coalition Government through consultation and achieve peace in that land so that the Afghan people may rebuild its country.
Iran and Iraq reached a cease-fire a year ago on the basis of mutual acceptance of Security Council resolution 598 (1987), and each is now busy rebuilding its war-ravaged economy. We hope that these two developing countries, with which China enjoys friendly relations, will soon resume contacts and negotiations so as to turn their cease-fire into a lasting peace.
The recent summit conference of the five Central American States has been well received by the international community, as it produced important new agreements on promoting the peace process in Central America. It is our hope that the United States also will respect the peace efforts of these countries. The smooth implementation of the agreements will benefit the stability and development of the region.
Over the past year positive changes have occurred on the scene of southern Africa. With the start of the process of Namibian independence, the ultimate accomplishment of the historic mission of decolonisation on the African continent is now in sight. Angola has made headway in trying to bring peace to the country. The Government of Mozambique is working hard to end the unrest in its country. The Chinese Government has always sympathized with and supported the Namibian people in their struggle for independence. We hope that Security Council resolution 435 (1978) and other relevant agreements will be seriously implemented and that the South African authorities will honour their commitment, so as to ensure the holding of a free and fair general election under effective United Nations supervision and to bring about Namibian independence as scheduled. We call on the international community to be watchful, to work to eliminate obstacles to the Namibian independence process and guard against any incident that may arise to the detriment of a free and fair general election.
The Chinese Government has always supported the African countries in their just struggle against racism, and the efforts made by the front-line States and people in southern Africa to achieve peace and stability in the region and develop the national economy. We hope that their efforts will enjoy broad sympathy and vigorous support from the international community. The black people in South Africa are entitled to racial equality and democratic rights. We strongly demand that the South African authorities abrogate the universally condemned apartheid system, which is contrary to the spirit of our times.
Since the last session of the General Assembly there has been an ever-stronger call for a political settlement of the Middle East question. The just struggle of the Palestinians living in the West Rank and the Gaza Strip has clearly demonstrated that the question of ending the Israeli occupation and solving the Palestinian issue with no further delay. The Palestine Liberation organization has adopted a series of flexible and practical policies, winning wide appreciation and support from the international community. It is high time the Israeli Government went along with the trend of history by replacing its rigid position by a flexible approach.
The Chinese Government stands for a settlement of the Middle East question through political means without resorting to force. We support the convocation of the International Conference on the Middle East under United Nations auspices with the participation of the parties concerned, including the five permanent members of the Security Council. We appreciate the efforts of the parties concerned in the Middle East question to conduct dialogues of such diverse forms as they deem appropriate. We demand that Israel stop forthwith its suppression of Palestinian residents in occupation zones and that it withdraw from the occupied Arab territories. We hope to see mutual recognition between the State of Palestine and Israel, guaranteed security both for Arab States and for Israel, and the peaceful coexistence of the Arab nation and the Jewish nation. That, in our opinion, is the correct way to lead a Middle East long plagued by turmoil to peace and tranquillity.
Together with the other justice-upholding countries concerned, the Chinese Government has over the past 11 years consistently worked for a fair and reasonable settlement of the Cambodian question. To that end the United Nations has adopted 10 successive resolutions. The Cambodian question arose as a result of the Vietnamese invasion. Therefore, a comprehensive settlement of the question calls for an end to the Vietnamese invasion and the removal of its consequences. That is the very essence of the successive resolutions adopted by the United Nations on the Cambodian situation, and it is also the consistent position of the Chinese Government. during the transitional period from the withdrawal of Vietnamese forces to the holding of a general election in Cambodia, the only way to ensure peace and forestall a dangerous situation in the country is to set up a provisional coalition Government headed by Prince Sihanouk and composed of the four parties in Cambodia. Cambodia should be restored to its independent, neutral and non-aligned status, while the countries concerned should provide an international guarantee for that status. Recently, the International Conference on Cambodia was held in Paris; it was attended by foreign ministers of many countries and leaders of the four parties in Cambodia. This in itself is of major significance, but regrettably, the Conference did not produce the anticipated results, owing to the rigid position taken by Viet Nam and Phnom Penh on the proposal put forward by the majority of the States participating in the Conference for an international control mechanism under United Nations auspices, the establishment of a provisional quadripartite coalition Government headed by Prince Sihanouk, and a comprehensive settlement of the Cambodian question. As for the withdrawal of forces from Cambodia promised by Viet Nam, without the necessary international supervision people have reason to doubt whether Viet Nam has genuinely pulled out all its forces and military personnel of other categories. We hope that the international community will continue to follow the situation in Cambodia closely, render sympathy and support to the Cambodian people in their just cause, and keep working for a fair and reasonable ultimate settlement of the Cambodian question so as to remove completely this regional hot spot.
The second question is disarmament.
The past year has witnessed new progress in the field of international disarmament. The Treaty between the United States and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the Elimination of Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles - the INF Treaty - is being implemented. Positive results emerged from the International Conference on the prohibition of chemical weapons held in Paris last January. With the start last March in Vienna of. the negotiation on conventional armed forces in Europe and the subsequent specific proposals put forward by each side, long-deadlocked European conventional disarmament has taken a turn for the better. Moreover, the Soviet Union and some East European countries have decided to carry out a unilateral reduction in their forces and armament or withdraw some of them from abroad.
Nevertheless, it is noted that the arms race between the United States and the Soviet Union has not come to a stop. They continue to vie with each other in developing high-technology weapons systems and in going all out to upgrade their nuclear weapons and have even extended their arms race into outer space. So the halting of the arms race and the achievement of effective disarmament remains an arduous task.
The international community expects the United States and the Soviet Union to shoulder their special responsibility for disarmament by taking the lead in drastically reducing their nuclear arsenals and conventional armaments and by stopping their arms race in all forms, including that in outer space. It is our consistent view that chemical weapons should be completely banned and thoroughly destroyed. At the present session of the General Assembly, the United States and the Soviet Union have made proposals on the question of chemical weapons. We hope that they will take practical steps to stop production and development of those weapons and destroy their existing stockpiles, so as to facilitate the conclusion of an international convention on a comprehensive ban on chemical weapons.
Disarmament is a question bearing on world peace and the security of all countries. Therefore, all countries, big or small, strong or weak, nuclear or non-nuclear, should have an equal say in the question, and each can play an active role. The reasonable demands and propositions of the many small and medium-sized countries ought to be respected, and full play should be given to the role of the United Nations and the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva on disarmament issues. All this is highly necessary for the healthy development of the international disarmament process.
The third question is the proper handling of State-to-State relations.
Over the past year a number of countries have improved their relations with each other to varying degrees, which is a valuable contribution to world peace. What is particularly encouraging is that the Arab States have closed their ranks, in a spirit of conciliation. Countries in Africa are working for increased peaceful co-operation on that continent, while Latin American countries have made further headway in their regional co-operation.
China has all along devoted its efforts to the establishment and development of friendly relations and co-operation with other countries on the basis of the five principles of mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence. The past year saw even better and stronger relations between China and many other countries, especially its neighbours.
China maintains a traditional friendship with the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. We are interested in peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula. We support the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's reasonable proposition on the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea, and wish to see positive results flow from the dialogue and contacts between the North and South of Korea. We have always enjoyed good relations with Pakistan, Bangladesh, Nepal, Sri Lanka, Thailand and many other neighbours in South and South-East Asia. We have normalized our relations with the People's Republic of Mongolia and Laos. Our relations with India are improving in many fields. The consultations on normalization of Sino-Indonesian relations are proceeding smoothly. The solidarity and co-operation between China and Arab States, African States and Latin American States have also made new progress.
In May this year, China and the Soviet Union held a top-level meeting, thereby normalizing their bilateral relations. In a spirit of bidding farewell to the past and opening up the future, leaders of the two countries reviewed and summed up the history of Sino-Soviet relations and agreed to develop the bilateral relations on the basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. good-neighbourliness between the two big countries, China and the Soviet Union, is in the interests of not only their two peoples but also peace and stability in Asia and the world at large. This has been well received by the international community as it benefits the whole of mankind.
China's relations with Western countries were on a course of steady development. However, difficulties of varying degrees have emerged over the past few months in our relations with certain Western countries. What has exactly happened? Has China acted contrary to the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence in its relations with these Western countries? No. Has China encroached upon their interests in any way? No. It is known to all that in late spring and early summer this year turmoil occurred in China's capital Beijing, which was aimed at subverting the Government of the People's Republic of China and overthrowing the socialist system stipulated in the Constitution of the People's Republic. It goes without saying that how to deal with this problem is China's internal affair. The whole world witnessed the fact that for almost two months the Chinese Government had exercised the utmost restraint and tried to solve the problem by persuasion and education rather than compulsory measures. It was not until the critical moment when the events had turned into an anti-government rebellion that the Chinese Government was compelled to take decisive measures to quell the rebellion. The overwhelming majority of countries in the world have expressed their understanding of this action by our Government. Only certain Western Governments, ignoring the facts and basing themselves on nothing but distorted news reports and misinformation, levelled unwarranted charges against the Chinese Government and applied pressure on it. It should also be noted that there is much evidence pointing to involvement in the above-mentioned events by some hostile foreign forces, which added fuel to the flames. They know full well what role they have played. In order to maintain State sovereignty and national dignity, it is only natural that the Chinese Government should have firmly rejected their meddling in the events in China and interference in its internal affairs, which contravene the norms governing international relations and the fundamental principles of the United Nations Charter. In their statements at the General Assembly in the past few days, the delegates of some countries continued to attack the Chinese Government groundlessly. To harp on "democracy" and "freedom" while indulging in the habit of making arbitrary criticisms and imposing one's own will on others in State-to-State relations represents precisely the kind of behaviour that goes against the historical tide. This is indeed regrettable.
The day after tomorrow, the People's Republic of China will celebrate its fortieth anniversary. For China, 1 October 1949 is a day of great historic significance, marking the end of an era in which the Chinese people were subjected to every kind of national humiliation. Over the past four decades, foreign pressure on New China has never ceased, but what has come of it? New China is ever forging ahead. It has never feared, and will in no way bend to any foreign pressure. China's affairs can only be decided by the Chinese people, and China's policy can only be determined by the Chinese Government. Through long years of practice, we have found a development path suited to China's conditions, and we will continue along that path. We have formulated an independent foreign policy of peace attuned to the fundamental interests of the people of China and the world, and we will keep pursuing that policy. China will adhere to its policy of reform and opening to the outside world and continue to work for development of relations with other countries throughout the world.
A normal relationship between China and a foreign country serves mutual interests, whereas in case of a disruption of such a relationship, China will by no means be the only one to suffer. Past experience has repeatedly proved that normal State-to-State relations can only be based on the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. China abides by these principles, and if other countries also do so, normal relations can certainly be established and developed between them. Herein lies the way out of the current difficulties in the relations of some Western countries with China.
The fourth question is the establishment of a new international political order.
Now that the world has advanced to a stage where most former colonies and dependencies have won independence, all States should treat one another as equals and an end should be put to hegemonic practice. Yet, facts show that hegemonic practice and power politics still exist. From time to time, there are cases in international relations, such as the big bullying the small, the strong domineering over the weak, the imposition of one's own will on others, or even armed encroachment upon the sovereignty of another State and damage to its territorial integrity by force. Should these acts which contravene the norms governing international relations remain unchecked, there can be no tranquillity in the world or guarantee of peace.
With the concerted efforts of the international community, the world now witnesses a trend towards relaxation of tension and increased contacts among nations. This is a good thing. But meanwhile, in international contacts, there are still obvious attempts to interfere in the internal affairs of other countries by various means in violation of the basic norms governing international relations. It is dangerous for State policies to be formulated and pursued with such attempts in mind, as it will detract from relaxation of international tension and lead to the continuation of the cold war. This is a question which merits the attention of the international community.
On the one hand, there are vast numbers of countries in the world with quite different social systems, ideologies, values, historical backgrounds, cultural traditions and religious beliefs, and on the other hand, their interests predetermine the need for contacts with one another. Consequently, all countries are required to adopt a realistic attitude by recognising the diversity of the world, refraining from interfering in each other's internal affairs, and observing in their contacts the mutually accepted norms governing international relations. We firmly believe that such a world will be in line with the interests and aspirations of the people of all countries. I wish to use the forum of the United Nations to present this idea of the Chinese Government, hoping that statesmen of various countries will give it serious consideration when exploring the future of the world.
The fifth question is the establishment of a new international economic order.
For a long time developing countries have suffered greatly from inequitable exchanges, owing to irrationality in existing international economic relations. For them the recent years have seen worsening terms of trade, plummeting export earnings, dwindling production investment and heavy debt burdens. There has been even the phenomenon of reverse capital flow from poor to rich countries for many years running. So the tendency of poor countries to become poorer and rich countries richer is more pronounced than it was a decade ago. If allowed to continue, this situation will bring in its wake even more serious consequences for the whole world, including both the developing and the developed countries. The economic development of the third world has become a pressing issue affecting the global scene. Current international economic relations should not and cannot remain completely unchanged in the time to coma. The establishment of a new international economic order is the need of the times.
In our view, the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence should also be abided by in the conduct of economic relations between countries. A country's economic problems can be solved only by the government and people of that country with policies appropriate to their national conditions. Economic contacts between countries should serve friendly co-operation between them and not be turned into means of exerting pressure on other countries or interfering in their internal affairs. Any attempt to impose a certain economic system or developmental model on other countries and to interfere in the economic policies or development efforts of developing countries means power politics in the economic sphere, it runs counter to norms of international relations and the current historical trend and will not work in practice.
To promote the establishment of the new international economic order in the interest of common development of all countries, what is urgently needed at present is a new round of truly substantive North-South dialogue with emphasis on solving the pressing problems facing the developing countries, such as debt, trade, capital and finance. We call on the developed countries to respond constructively to the proposals for reviving the North-South dialogue made by the Conference of Heads of State and Government of the Non-Aligned Countries held in Belgrade in Sept either this year and the Special Ministerial Meeting of the Group of 77 held last June in Caracas. We hope that the special session of the General Assembly devoted to growth and development, scheduled for April next year, will arrive at a fresh common understanding on future international economic co-operation and will provide a sound guideline for it. We also hope that the new international development strategy being worked out will offer effective measures in this regard.
Protecting the environment has become a pressing issue of universal concern? it must be given full attention while efforts are made to solve the question of development. China has made the protection of the environment its State policy, we attach importance to and will participate in the United Nations conference on environment and development scheduled for 1992, and are ready to make necessary preparations for its convocation with other countries and relevant international organizations. We note with pleasure that, as the most influential international organization, the United Nations has in recent years had some outstanding achievements in facilitating the political settlement of regional conflicts, maintaining world peace, and promoting international co-operation and economic and social development. As a result, there is universal recognition of the importance of the United Nations. The positive efforts made by the Secretary-General have also won extensive acclaim from the international community.
The final decade of the twentieth century is approaching. A new century is setting in, the times are progressing and the face of the world is changing. Like the entire international community, the United Nations is faced with unprecedented opportunities and extraordinary challenges. In order to adapt better to an ever-changing world, the United Nations needs to continue its own reform and further improve its efficiency. World peace and development need the United Nations, while the success of the United Nations depends on the support and co-operation of all its Member States. Together with the many other United Nations Member States, China is ready to fulfil the duties prescribed in the United Nations Charter and to contribute its share to a strengthened role of the organization in world affairs.
﻿
I congratulate you, Sir, on your election as President of the General Assembly. Your experience and the esteem in which you are held as the former Foreign Minister of Nigeria, as its Permanent Representative to the United Nations and as Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid guarantee that you will excellently perform the duties of your office. At the same time I wish to pay deepest respect to your predecessor, Mr. Dante Caputo of Argentina, and thank him for the exemplary and successful conduct of his functions.
Foreign Minister Dumas of France presented the views of the members of the European Community yesterday. I thank him for his clear statement. Now, at the closing of this millennium we are moving towards a new phase in world politics. The old structures still largely determine the political scene. but new structures are already becoming visible everywhere. We are confronted with global challenges. The natural sources of life are increasingly being jeopardized. In the last two years, world food production dropped for the first time. Plants and animals are becoming extinct. New epidemics are spreading. A large part of mankind lives in dire poverty. Terrorism and illicit drug trafficking call for joint action by the international community. Underdevelopment and the debt burden deprive a large section of mankind of any hope. Excessive armaments and regional conflicts, as well as violations of human rights and of the right of nations to self-determination, require fundamental new thinking and actions, m Europe there is fresh hope for a better future. This will have positive effects on the entire world.
In the year 2030 there will be 10 billion people on earth. For their sake -and it is not for distant descendants whose faces are hidden from us by the mist of distant centuries; it is for our children, our grandchildren - we must today lay the groundwork so that the glebe will remain habitable. No single country on Earth, however rich and powerful, is able to handle this task by itself and through its own ability. Joint efforts by all mankind are needed. First and foremost this means that we must move away from confrontation towards co-operation, we require co-operative structures.
Precisely because we Germans are aware of our responsibility for the Second World war we perceive our duty to work for a better world, for a world of peace, democracy and solidarity between nations, for a world of freedom and human rights, for a world at peace with nature. The Polish nation was the first victim of the war deliberately unleashed by Hitlerian Germany 50 years ago. And I am turning to You Mr. Skubiszewski, Foreign Minister of the new Poland, to say that the Polish people are assured that their right to live in secure borders will not be called into question, not now nor in the future, through territorial claims by us Germans. The wheel of history will not be turned back. Together with Poland we want to work for a better future for Europe. The inviolability of borders is the basis of peaceful relations in Europe.
Ever since its inception the Federal Republic of Germany has framed a European peace policy. As a member of the European Community and of the Atlantic Alliance, we belong to the family of Western democracies. To the United States we are linked through deep friendship, through the Alliance and through a commitment to common values. President Bush impressively reaffirmed this in his speech at Mainz, with France we have established a unique partnership and co-operation, as reflected in the Franco-German Treaty and in our day-today politics. This points to the future. The groundwork for the developments we are today witnessing in Europe, for the prospects that are now discernible, was laid by the founding of the European Community, by the treaties of Moscow and Warsaw, by the treaty with the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, by the Basic Treaty with the German Democratic Republic and by the Helsinki Final Act. These are European paths that come towards each other; they must therefore be strengthened and extended. Nobody will be allowed to stray from them. We shall remain committed to the letter and spirit of those treaties.
Major elements of that peaceful order are the European Community and the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe process. The European Community, which is heading for a European Union, sees itself as a factor for economic and political stability in the world, it maintains closer relations, including those based on agreements with its neighbours in Europe and with States and groupings of States in all other continents. It strongly promotes voluntary regional associations in other parts of the world. It has to be open to multifaceted and broad-based co-operation with those countries of Central and Eastern Europe that desire it. New forms of co-operation and exchange are required. EUREKA is an offer open to all those who are interested. The new environment agency set up by the European Community can become the starting-point of new pan-European co-operation in the area of the protection of the environment.
Transport structures covering the whole of Europe are needed. We are receptive to ideas and suggestions from others. The trade limitations introduced for strategic reasons must be adapted to the changed quality of political, security-policy, economic and technological co-operation between West and East. They must not become an obstacle to a far-sighted policy.
East and West have opted for the path of co-operation. That is a source of hope for the nations of the world - not only the nations of Europe, The vision of a peaceful order in Europe, from the Atlantic to the Urals - as the West proposed in the Harmel report as early as 1967, and as recurs in General Secretary Gorbachev's concept of the common European house - is opening up. The bold reforms in the Soviet Union, in Hungary and in Poland point in that direction.
We agree with our Western friends that the reform processes in Central and Eastern Europe are in the interests of all Europe and of the world. They deserve our support, not least through common, co-ordinated action, through a plan of solidarity for Europe. This process of reform in Central and Eastern Europe is not a case of one side's opinion being adopted by the other; it is a process of self-reflection on the common foundations of European culture and European history, to which all European nations have made great contributions. The reforms have become irreversible because man's yearning for more freedom is irreversible, but the developments are not immune to standstills, or even setbacks. In the long run, however, no country can evade this development. Anyone who hopes that the reforms will fail will be overtaken by the development.
In the West, too, nobody should underestimate the new possibilities; instead, people should make resolute use of them for the benefit of all Europe. History tends not to repeat the opportunities it offers. I appeal to the countries of 
Europe not to let this historic juncture slip by. We Western democracies offer stable-framework conditions for this reform process. Statesmanly foresight and statesmanly responsibility are required now on all sides. Nobody can want others to be destabilized. The Federal Republic of Germany regards a peaceful order in Europe as the framework also for the goal defined in the Letter on German Unity: "to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will recover its unity in free self-determination". We want to attain this goal while fully observing the treaties that we have signed. That can be achieved only together with all other States in Europe - not against them. Nobody in Europe has cause to fear our policy. Our policy is linked to the destiny of the entire continent. It is a European peace policy. This precludes any national solo efforts. We consider it our task to work for a pan-European peaceful order from which no country may be excluded or nay exclude itself, our foreign policy, in accordance with the dictates of our Constitution, rejects any kind of power politics. It is a policy of responsibility, it is determined by the fundamental values of our Constitution, it is based on unconditional fidelity to treaties.
The Federal Republic of Germany, as a country situated in the heart of Europe, brings all its weight to bear for the purpose of co-operation, understanding and disarmament conducive to a better Europe. This includes cooperation with the German Democratic Republic. The two German States are aware of their responsibility for peace in Europe. This responsibility weighs more heavily than do those things that divide us. On the basis of this common responsibility,  the two German States have already made substantial contributions towards detente and disarmament in Europe. In particular, the people in our States have benefited from this. In these endeavours we act on the foundation of the basic Treaty with the German Democratic Republic and are guided by the Joint declarations issued by Chancellor Kohl and General Secretary Honecker on 12 March 1965 and 8 September 1,87. New and closer forms of co-operation are needed in many fields - economic and technological, scientific and cultural, transport and protection of the environment.
The two German states - each in its own fashion - must contribute towards overcoming the things that separate Europeans from each other. They must face the new developments occurring in the whole of Europe and work for their success. The Federal Republic of Germany wholeheartedly supports the process of European unification within the European Community, as well as the efforts of European
countries aimed at reform. The German Democratic Republic, under its own conditions, can contribute, through reforms, towards greater openness in Europe. just as the Soviet Union, Poland and Hungary are doing already. We have been deeply moved as we have witnessed, in recent weeks, the fate of young people who are sorrowfully leaving their home and familiar borrowings. Nobody can want such a development. A policy of reform would open up new prospects for the people of the German Democratic Republic, as in other Central and Eastern European countries. These would encourage the people to stay where they grew up and where they are at home. Today, East and West no longer discuss only the problems that have accused between them since the War. They Jointly focus their attention also on those tasks of the future which, as is stated in the Joint German-Soviet Declaration of June 1989, can be mastered only through concerted action by all states and  peoples. The Moscow Treaty continues to form the foundation of the relationship between our two countries. The German-Soviet Declaration underscores the importance of German-Soviet relations for the whole of Europe. This calls for new thinking by everyone and for everyone.
That declaration defined goals to which we have long been committed along with our Western partners-, the preservation and shaping of peace, the settlement of existing conflicts, the right of nations to self-determination, the precedence of international law in politics, international co-operation in the economic, scientific and technological fields, the results of which should benefit all mankind, the preservation of the natural environment and the overcoming of hunger and poverty in the world, and the combating of new threats such as epidemics and international terrorism. 
A peaceful world of free people subject only to the rule of law and whose dignity is no longer impaired by hunger and poverty: that is seen as the true goal of politics. In that way, the design of a peaceful order for all Europe, the architecture of a pan-European house, is becoming clearly visible. Through arms control and disarmament we want to reduce the military elements of the East-West relationship. We want to demilitarise East-West relations, just as international relations must be demilitarized. We want to create an increasing number of co-operative security structures. We welcome and support the efforts of the United states and the Soviet Union to achieve co-operation marked by increasing mutual trust.
An entire continent is seriously committed to agreed and controlled disarmament. The Treaty on intermediate-range nuclear forces - the INF Treaty - was an important step towards that end. The two sides accept the principle that whoever has more weapons must disarm more. The aim is to ensure that the armed forces of the two sides have the capability of defence only and not of attack, especially surprise attack and large-scale offensive action. Ever more co-operative security structures will emerge, thus providing additional guarantees of security. The negotiations in Vienna on conventional stability and confidence-building measures, as well as the global prohibition of chemical weapons, will lend a new quality to those security structures. The meetings between Secretary of State Baker and Foreign Minister Shevardnadze have provided further signs of hope. In Vienna, Western proposals have created the conditions for far-reaching conventional disarmament. Given good will on the part of all concerned, an initial agreement could be achieved as early as 1990.
We strongly support the United States-Soviet negotiations in Geneva on nuclear and space weapons. By reducing their nuclear weapons, the nuclear Powers are living up to their responsibility towards the international community. The need for all countries to accede to the non-proliferation Treaty is becoming all the more urgent.
The negotiations on a comprehensive, global and verifiable ban on chemical weapons must finally be completed. Only in that way can the spread of those barbaric weapons be prevented. President Bush's declaration here at the United Nations that his country is ready to destroy over 80 per cent of its existing chemical weapons stocks even before the conclusion of a chemical weapons convention, provided that the Soviet Union reduces its chemical weapons to the same level, is unprecedented in the history of disarmament negotiations. The Federal Republic of Germany has constantly striven for the successful completion of the Geneva negotiations. President Bush's remarks concerning verification of compliance with a future chemical weapons convention have a significance that goes far beyond the scope of disarmament negotiations. Openness is becoming a guiding principle in dealings between countries. In fact, every step towards a more open world is a step towards the new world we seek.
The recent Canberra Conference made an important contribution in support of the Geneva negotiations. All producers are called upon to control trade in chemical substances and facilities that are suitable also for the manufacture of chemical weapons. The Federal Republic of Germany has considerably tightened its own control laws; as acknowledged in the final declaration of the Canberra Conference, it has thus made an advance contribution to the implementation of a future chemical weapons convention.
Disarmament is a task not for the industrial nations alone. The developing countries spend $200 billion a year for military purposes. That is four times the official development assistance they receive. Moreover, those resources are unavailable for their development. Regional theatres of conflict are exacerbated by the unbridled trade in arms. The arms trade must become more transparent to the international public. Such transparency forces both the importers and the exporters to account for and justify their actions, which itself has a moderating effect. The wholly disproportionate level of arms in all parts of the world makes disarmament a global task which must be dealt with by the United Nations.
A country's attitude towards disarmament is the most reliable measure of how far it is prepared to abandon old thinking. A State's attitude towards human rights is the most reliable measure of its stance on the inalienable dignity of each individual. A peaceful order in Europe - a peaceful order in the world - can rest only on the universal application of human rights and on the right of nations to self-determination. The future Europe is thus to be a large heterogeneous area based throughout on the rule of law.
To us, respect for human rights is the indispensable basis for any policy. In our view, there is still an urgent need to appoint a United Nations high commissioner for human rights and set up an international court of human rights. We ask that our initiative on abolishing capital punishment be supported also by those countries which, frequently for religious reasons, want to retain such punishment. The form of optional protocol we have chosen leaves the door open to those States that are not yet able to decide in favour of signing it. International terrorism world wide and international drug crimes constitute aggression against human dignity and against mankind. They threaten every political and social order. In future, countries will have to be measured by their efforts in this fight. Anyone who provides refuge for terrorists or spares those who commit drug crimes is placing himself outside the community of nations. The drug problem, that scourge of mankind, has become a global challenge.
This demands resolute co-operation by all countries. The common fight against illicit drug trafficking must be stepped up. Co-operation among all countries in combating cross-border illicit drug trafficking must be intensified. The social causes of drug production must be eliminated in the relevant countries through common efforts, and the social causes of drug dependence in the consumer countries must be eliminated as well.
We shall survive the third millennium only if all countries - large and small, weak and strong alike - unconditionally make international law the yardstick of their political actions. We must overcome force, both within and between States. The decade ahead of us must be a decade of pacifying regional theatres of conflict. A historic opportunity is emerging for the Central American peace process. All Governments interested in the fate of Central America have in the meantime fully endorsed the Esquipulas peace agreement. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany supports the United Nations contribution to that process.
Namibia, the last colony in Africa, will gain independence in a few months' time. The Western Contact Group, to which we belonged, initiated this process and participated substantially in shaping it. We are convinced that the Secretary-General of the United Nations and his special representative will bring the peace process in Namibia to a good conclusion. In so doing, they have the full confidence and support of the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany. Our participation in the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) reflects this, we all hope that an independent Namibia that espouses democracy, pluralism and human rights will send signals to the Republic of South Africa that cannot be ignored. Apartheid is inimical to human rights. It cannot be reformed. It must be eliminated. We call upon the South African Government to terminate the state of emergency, to release all political detainees, Nelson Mandela in the first place, and to admit the opposition. That must pave the way for negotiations involving all the country's political forces for the purpose of developing a just constitutional order. we shall do "whatever is possible to help bring about round-table negotiations.
In the Middle East the objective continues to be a peaceful settlement that guarantees the right of all States in the region, including Israel, to live within secure and recognized boundaries and that enables the Palestinian people finally to exercise its right to self-determination. During the past few months there has been some movement in the Middle East conflict: the Israeli plan for elections in the occupied territories and President Mubarak's proposal to open up prospects for talks between Israel and the Palestinians.
The suffering of the Lebanese nation must be ended through a political solution. The cease-fire brought about by the Arab League's Committee of Three is an encouraging signal. We support all suitable efforts aimed at national reconciliation in Lebanon and the restoration of the country's full sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence.
In view of the dangers constantly generated by regional conflicts, a far-reaching improvement of the United Nations instruments for coping with those conflicts is needed. The Declaration on the prevention of conflicts, which we helped to draft in the Special Committee on the United Nations Charter and which was unanimously adopted at the forty-third session of the General Assembly, is a step towards that end. We have launched a new initiative designed to facilitate early and comprehensive fact-finding by the United Nations, particularly by the Secretary-General. The efforts of the United Nations and the Secretary-General to resolve conflicts must not fail for want of money.
Underdevelopment in large parts of the world is one of the global challenges of our time. People in all countries are entitled to a life that is worth living. Industrial and developing countries must collaborate to achieve economic development and social justice. The debt crisis can only be resolved through joint action by everyone concerned: the debtor and creditor countries, the Governments and the international financial institutions, as well as the private banks. All creditor countries are now, as before, called upon to frame their national regulations in such a way as to encourage participation by banks in debt relief. That is already the case in our country, without considerable funds from private banks the developing countries will not return to the path of growth.
The initiative of United States Secretary of the Treasury Brady is an important step in solving the debt crisis. At the forefront of the intensified debt strategy is the reduction of debts and interest. Fresh money must be made available. The rescheduling agreements with Mexico and the Philippines are major landmarks in the efforts to solve the debt crisis. The debts of the least-developed countries must be cancelled-, the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany has already done so. For years now it has been providing development aid to those countries exclusively in the form of grants.
Many developing countries are carrying out radical and painful reforms in order to reshape their economic structures. They are thereby making a substantial contribution towards the stability of the world economy. These reforms should restore the confidence of domestic and foreign investors.
The prosperity of all countries can be increased most effectively through the free exchange of goods and services. That is why it is so important to make the Uruguay Round a full success. That still calls for considerable exertions and concessions, not least in areas that are sensitive for the industrial nations. All countries must resist the temptations of protectionism. The weakest are always hardest hit by the consequences of protectionism. The basic principles of the new thinking - openness instead of isolation, co-operation instead of confrontation - must also apply to international trade. The Belgrade conference of the Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms this new thinking and reflects the growing awareness of global interdependence.
Today it is a question of reconciling economic and ecological factors. People are increasingly resisting the destruction of the natural sources of life. There is no nation that is not affected, no nation that does not bear responsibility. Global warming, destruction of the ozone layer, desertification, contamination of soil, air and water through pollutants and waste and forest depletion all threaten life on our earth. We have but this one Earth, and it has been entrusted to us. It must remain habitable for all future generations as well. 
Mankind's duty to preserve peace includes making peace with nature. The first steps have been taken with the Vienna Convention and the Montreal Protocol, the Convention on hazardous waste and the Convention to combat marine pollution. Those Conventions must now be applied worldwide. They must constantly be supplemented and improved until all known pollutants are covered. The World Climate Convention and measures to save the forests must be vigorously promoted. Protection of tropical rain forests is also a matter for the United Nations. The Organization must pool and co-ordinate the efforts of the international community in the field of environmental protection. Binding limits and levels must be fixed, and agreed deadlines must be met. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany will do its utmost to support all environmental activities of the United Nations, especially the United Nations conference on the environment which this General Assembly is to decide on at this session. This applies also to the international decade for the prevention of natural disasters. The Federal Government has made substantial efforts to protect natural resources. It will contribute to the work of the United Nations the experience of a country that has a strong environmental awareness, high environmental protection standards and advanced scientific and technological know-how.
The industrial nations must make a special contribution through the transfer of ecologically sound technology and through financial support for environmental projects in the developing countries. We must increase the responsibility of the United Nations for environmental matters and develop further its relevant organs, especially the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), widen their powers and, in particular, provide them with more funds.
The nations will achieve a new spirit of coexistence only if they acknowledge and respect each other's cultural achievements and characteristics. The awareness of mutual dependence in questions concerning our survival must be accompanied by unconditional respect for the dignity and achievements of every nation. The worldwide cultural dialogue should preserve the cultural identity of all nations. This calls for exchange on equal terms through mutual give-and-take.
The prestige of the United Nations increases with the new spirit of coexistence and the awareness of the need for a global domestic policy. This is not least a consequence of the growing understanding between West and East. The turn of the tide in international relations will also enable the United Nations to play the role its founders intended it to have, after the terrible experiences of the Second World War.
We can no longer afford confrontation and national egoism, as our extinction would be the penalty. The United Nations must evolve into a universal community of States and peoples in which everyone can express his views freely and openly, in which the rights of the stronger do not prevail. To all individuals and nations, the United Nations is already a symbol of a new international order founded on human rights and self-determination, on dialogue and co-operation. We are called upon to create peace between individuals, between nations. We are called upon to create peace between man and nature. Inalienable human rights and the right of nations to self-determination must form the bedrock of our actions.
﻿I am speaking on behalf of the European Economic Community. Mr. President, allow me in my turn to extend to you on behalf of the European Community and its member States warmest congratulations on your unanimous election to the office of President of the General Assembly. Your experience in international affairs, your perfect familiarity with the United Nations system and your personal qualities particularly qualify you to occupy that important office. We have no doubt that those attributes will enable you to work wonders.
Let me also include in this tribute your predecessor at the head of the Assembly, Mr. Dante Caputo. The energy and efficiency with which he discharged that office merit the gratitude of the entire Organization.
I should like also, on behalf of the Twelve, to assure the Secretary-General of our unswerving and unqualified support in his weighty task, and to express our admiration for his untiring activity throughout the world in favour of peace.
The European Community and its member States have always considered that they have a special contribution to make to the efforts being made to build a more just and peaceful world bound by ever-closer ties of solidarity.
I should now like to put forward a few thoughts about the main thrust of our external action, by pointing to our common struggle for peace, the outlook for economic development and the fight against the scourges inflicted on our societies by human rights violations, terrorism and drug abuse.
I should like first to say a few words about the hopes that have been kindled by developments in the year gone by. while the progress made is still too fragile for the international community to be certain that it will soon see the dawn of peace break upon the world, and while tensions still exist or are worsening here and there and indeed new conflicts are emerging, the fact is that, all in all, the cause of peace has advanced more than it probably ever has done in recent times.
In relations between the eastern and western parts of Europe, recent developments suggest that the deep wounds of history, once considered as incurable, are now beginning to heal. On both sides, a common language is enabling us to talk to one another, negotiate and reach agreements that only a short time ago seemed beyond our grasp.
The European Council has sought to give fresh impetus to East-West relations, as this is warranted by the changes towards greater political and economic freedom that have taken place in the Soviet Union and several Central and Eastern European countries, notably Poland and Hungary. While we must regret that there remain serious violations of human rights in some of those countries, how could we fail to welcome the reforms on which they have embarked and support and encourage them when they are quite plainly contributing to overcoming the divisions of the last War at a pace and on a scale hitherto unprecedented in Europe.
The proceedings of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe are closely bound up with that prospect. Since the adoption of a closing document last January in Vienna, two key meetings - the Information Forum in London and the first session of the Conference on the Human Dimension in Paris - have made it possible to take greater advantage of the scope of the Helsinki process to advance the cause of fundamental freedoms, the rule of law and the values of democracy.
As for the negotiations on measures aimed at building confidence and security and on conventional forces in Europe, whose purpose is to remove the imbalances liable to undermine the stability and security of the continent, they have taken a decisive turn, and there are hopes that in the coming months significant progress can be made which would have major importance for the future of East-West relations.
In the broader setting of the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva, there have been encouraging results following the impetus created by the Conference on chemical disarmament held in Paris in January 1989. The Twelve would like to see the conclusion at the earliest possible opportunity of a comprehensive, verifiable treaty banning chemical weapons. The results achieved in that field at the recent United States-Soviet meetings are a most encouraging sign in this respect.
By the same token, I welcome the progress announced yesterday by the President of the United states and moments ago by the Soviet Foreign Minister with regard to their bilateral negotiations on reducing by half their stockpiles of strategic weapons. We hope there will be an early outcome to these negotiations and that the significant gains of the past, such as the anti-ballistic missile Treaty, will be preserved.
But Europe is not the only theatre in the struggle for peace, to which our Organization attaches universal significance. Encouraging signs have emerged in many parts of the world, holding out promise of the settlement of some conflicts. The utmost must be done to give added impetus to those favourable develops, and the Twelve are setting about that task.
In Namibia, the process towards independence and peace is under way. The twelve unreservedly support the action of the Secretary-General and earnestly call on all the parties not to impede the movement towards peace. The European community stands ready to welcome an independent Namibia among its partners under the Lome Convention.
The rewarding dialogue started with the front-line States, notably in Luxembourg last June, shows that everyone aspires to an early settlement of these long-standing conflicts which have delayed or thwarted the region's development plans. Here again, the Community is more than ready to foster reconstruction and, whether it be in Angola, Mozambique or elsewhere, to help the population build a new era of peace. 
In that connection, the Community and its member States have always insisted on the need to put an end to the apartheid system and bring about the establishment of a just, democratic society in South Africa. I shall come back to that basic demand.
The Twelve are particularly attentive to the implementation of the Secretary-General's peace plan for Western Sahara, which is expected to lead to a referendum on self-determination and holds out hopes for a settlement of this issue. They are convinced that the creation of the Arab Maghreb Union will contribute to that end.
Through the recent Tela agreements, the countries of Central America have demonstrated their determination to take their destiny in their own hands. This is a source of satisfaction to us. The success of the exercise will depend on the different parties abiding by the undertakings they have given. It is also envisaged that the United Nations and the Organization of American States (OAS) will lend their support to the implementation of the peace agreements.
The Community and its member States wish to pay a tribute to the sense of moderation and dialogue displayed by the Central American Heads of State, moved as they have been by the spirit of democracy. The San Pedro Sula Conference, held in February 1989, showed the determination of the European Community and the Contadora group of countries to give their support to the process of negotiation and economic integration which the Central American Governments have set as their goals.
The Twelve also note with satisfaction the progress made by democracy in South
America, and especially the prospect of positive developments in Chile, heralded by free elections.
Since the announcement of the cease-fire between Iran and Iraq, which was welcomed by the entire international community, the Secretary-General has, with the Twelve's support, pursued his endeavours to ensure that the negotiations move progressively towards a final settlement. But we should not be content with the current "no war - no peace" situation. The Twelve accordingly wish to launch an appeal to the Governments of the two countries to contribute to the efforts of the
Secretary-General and his colleagues to transform the present armistice into a lasting peace and to lose no more time in fully implementing Security Council resolution 598 (1987).
The Twelve express the hope that the Iranian leaders will demonstrate their readiness to contribute to international life in a constructive and peaceful manner consonant with the norms governing relations among States, so that that country can again take its rightful place in its region and in the international community at large.
The withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan was a necessary, but not sufficient, condition for a political solution. As long as the conflict continues, there will still be a need for all the Afghan parties to seek ways and means of bringing about a genuine process of self-determination, leading to the formation of a fully representative government and the existence of a truly independent and non-aligned Afghanistan. The Twelve confirm their support for the United Nations Secretary-General in the efforts he is making to facilitate a settlement, in the hope that the refugees will be able to return to their homes in freedom and dignity, the Community and its member States stand ready, once a settlement has been reached, to contribute to the reconstruction of Afghanistan, in the same way as they are already contributing to the humanitarian assistance being provided for the long-suffering people of that country.
In Cambodia, signs have emerged in recent months, albeit tentatively, of a possible return to peace. The Twelve have welcomed the decision of Viet Nam to withdraw its troops and consider that their withdrawal has made it possible to seek an overall political solution to the Cambodian conflict. The Twelve's support could not but encourage France to take the initiative of convening an international conference in Paris, with the co-presidency of Indonesia, bringing together all the 
Khmer parties and the countries most directly involved, in the presence of the UN Secretary General. Although the meeting did not make it possible to reach an agreement, it can be said to have marked a very important turning point in the search for a peaceful solution. The process which has now started should be pursued, with the requisite determination, with the aim of arriving at least at an overall settlement guaranteeing the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and neutrality of Cambodia and enabling the Cambodian people to control its own destiny through free end internationally supervised elections. The temptation of the different parties involved to seek a solution in the field still by force of arms could lead only to a stalemate.
The Twelve are convinced that the only way out of this long-drawn-out conflict lies in dialogue and national reconciliation. The continuing instability in that region is also adding to the tragedy of the Vietnamese boat people. The Twelve share the determination of the Secretary-General and the international community to find a solution to this problem. In the case of the Korean peninsula. we should like again to voice the hope that, in accordance with the principle of universality enshrined in our Organization, the Korean people may enjoy full representation in the United Nations at an early date.
The progress that has been accomplished and the stronger conviction we now have that peace is possible everywhere can only strengthen our resolve to work the Middle East. In the Middle East at a time when, on the Palestinian  side, a number of important decisions have opened up fresh prospects for a realistic search for a settlement of the Israeli conflict and the Palestinian question, no real progress has yet been made in responding to those moves. Yet the passage of time is not working to anybody's advantage. Let us beware of the disappointment that is bound to be aroused by such missed opportunities.
The Community is making the same message plain to one and all: if a peace settlement is to be reached, then it is necessary to recognize, both in the Middle East and elsewhere in the world, the right of all States, and of Israel in particular, to security and the right of all peoples to justice - in other words, the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination, with everything which that implies. In the Community's view, the appropriate way to attain those goals remains the organization of an international peace conference under the auspices of the United Nations.
The situation in the occupied territories provides a dramatic illustration of the effects of the lack of progress in seeking a settlement. The measures taken against the population in those territories - the continued closure of the universities, the expulsions, the extension and increase in the number of detentions on administrative grounds - have prompted the Twelve to appeal yet again to the Israeli authorities to abide by their obligations as the occupying Power, in accordance with the Security Council resolutions.
The Twelve, in the Madrid Declaration, have made their position known on the Israeli plan for organizing elections and granting provisional self-governing status to the territories. For the impact of such elections to be really meaningful, they should form part of a comprehensive settlement process based on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the application of the principle of land for peace, and they should be held with adequate guarantees of freedom throughout the occupied territories, including East Jerusalem. In the same spirit and on the basis of the same principles, the Twelve welcome Egypt's contribution to the peace process, as set out in the 10 Points  which President Mubarak has Put forward. The Twelve hope that this will
make it possible, in particular, to set in motion the necessary dialogue between Israelis and Palestinians.
Without waiting for the settlement which, they so earnestly desire, the Community and its member states plan to step up their cooperation with the occupied territories and to develop their program of assistance to the population, which has suffered so severely from the continuing occupation and its attendant restrictions. 
I now  wish to refer to Lebanon. In Lebanon, the tragedy of a nation that has been torn apart has lasted for 14 years now. Never has the suffering been so great as over the past few months, nor the battles so bloody, nor the ordeals borne by everybody so horrendous.
It is this that has prompted the Community and its Member States to call for an effective cease-fire and the lifting of the blockades and for a start to be made towards a process of national reconciliation ensuring the full restoration of Lebanese sovereignty on the basis of fresh institutions. They have constantly given their support to the moves made by the Arab League, which were initially led by the Committee of Six and subsequently by that of the three Heads of State. They welcome that top-level Committee's resumption of its mission, which they fully support, and hope that once the parties have all agreed to its proposals, dialogue and the quest for peace will prevail.
It is now essential that, at a moment when dialogue is being renewed, all Lebanese parties be freed from external pressures so that they may be able to agree on a new system for living side by side, one that takes into account the existing demographic and social situation. Through the introduction of such a system and the withdrawal of all foreign forces - with the exception of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) - Lebanon must regain its full sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity. 
This is what France has been endeavouring to do, and will continue to do with the support of its partners in the Community, while making it its constant concern to support the Arab moves led by the Tripartite Committee until hope is rekindled in Lebanon.
At the same time the Community and its member States have signified their solidarity with the entire Lebanese people by undertaking an assistance programme aimed at alleviating their suffering and at contributing to the restoration of normal living conditions and the resumption of economic and social activities.
We cannot speak of Lebanon without referring to the fate of the hostages, several of whom are nationals of the Community's member States. How can we forget Colonel Higgins, who was serving the United Nations? The Twelve condemn the taking of hostages, which must be fought with all the means at our disposal in the spirit of the relevant resolutions adopted by the Security Council. The Twelve wish to appeal to those countries which might be able to exert some influence in secure the liberation of the hostages.
I should like to state the Community's unchanging position with regard to Cyprus, a member of the European family. The Twelve call on all the parties to co-operate with the Secretary-General and his Representative on the spot with a view to overcoming the existing obstacles and finding the paths to dialogue. The Twelve ask them not to let slip the opportunity now available for a just and lasting settlement that will safeguard the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of Cyprus in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations.
We all know that world peace is a sacred cause. It warrants all the energy and resolve we can devote to it. It calls for determination and obstinacy. We may. no doubt, feel rather discouraged when no sooner has one hotbed of tension died down than others flare up, for we are then dogged by feelings of hopelessness, like those which Sisyphus may be felt at the top of his mountain before the stone started to roll down again.
And yet, hope remains alive when the chain of men and women epitomized by our Assembly are still linked together in the service of peace. We know that that unremitting task is a collective one and that progress cannot be made unless we are all mobilized.
Hence it is with the same determination, the same degree of hope and the same trust in good fortune that we have to tackle other conflicts and other areas of tension, evidence of further rifts here and there.
I should here like to turn to the case of those two countries, Senegal and Mauritania, which were living in harmony and united by a common design, but which have suddenly been rocked by violence to the point where they have now become brother enemies. Can Senegal and Mauritania soon return to the path of understanding and dialogue? The Twelve earnestly hope so. This is why they are supporting the mediation efforts of President Mubarak and hope that conciliation and reason will prevail.
Other tragedies are being played out. In Ethiopia, where the civil war continues to rage bringing in its wake a host of displaced populations, suffering and poverty, prospects for dialogue seem nevertheless to be emerging. The Twelve hope to do all they can to pave the way for negotiation and reconciliation. The same holds true for the Sudan and Somalia.
In this connexion I should like to pay a tribute to the action of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), whose work everyone considers irreplaceable.
Lastly, I should like to mention the hopes aroused by the discussions between the Governments at Colombo and New Delhi in a bid to restore peace and national unity in Sri Lanka. 
In the case of East Timor, the Twelve reaffirm their support for the contacts between Portugal and Indonesia under the auspices of the Secretary-General. They hope that early progress will lead to a just and comprehensive settlement, accepted internationally.
The cause of peace is making progress in spite of everything, as we can see, and our Assembly bears special witness to the fact. It is making progress through multilateral and bilateral dialogue, through the readiness of States to renounce war in settling their differences, and through the action of the United Nations in every instance where its mediation is imperative. The Twelve intend to associate themselves fully with this ever renewed task and they will play a major role in quelling conflicts, by reasons, I would say, of their very nature and calling, and through the example they are setting through the agreement among them and their prospective union.
Yet peace-making, the reduction of tensions and the banishment of violence cannot be dissociated from the struggle against the inequalities marking international economic development. We must take care - I say again - not to provoke new trouble spots that might be stirred up by the revolt of the poor. We must make sure that growth world-wide is shared more fairly and is more balanced and more geared to coping with the abject poverty of those countries which have few natural endowments or which have been ill-treated by history or crushed by the burden of debt. Action in favour of growth and development is, more than ever, an integral part of the struggle for peace. The Community has made that fact a key feature of its relations with the rest of the world.
Since the beginning of the 1980s, economic growth has recovered and has brought about a sharp increase in trade. Our aim is to consolidate that trend while at the same time continuing the struggle against inflation and unemployment. We have to ensure that everybody benefits from the movement. The fact that whole regions, in particular in Africa and Latin America, are continuing to lag behind
would reduce all efforts to naught if priority were not given to North-South solidarity.
As the world's foremost trading power and its leading provider of aid, the European Community considers that tangible steps have to be taken in the three key areas of international economic co-operation, development and the environment, about which I shall now say a few words.
In recent years Europe, together with Japan and a number of other Asian partners, has progressively taken over the momentum formerly generated by growth in the United States. Such growth is healthy and is the outcome of efforts of investment and modernization and the determined and convergent action of member States to hold down inflation and, above all, to finalize the establishment of the internal market by 1993.
This internal market will not be self-contained. The Europe of 1993 will be a "Europe of partners". The programme for finalizing the creation of the internal market will not entail any weakening of the Community's international obligations. All its multilateral or bilateral commitments are and will be respected. It is in our very interest to preserve and encourage a free and open trading system.
All Europe's partners will benefit from the single market of 1993 as a result of the dismantling of frontiers, the improvement of access procedures and the greater degree of transparency. The economic growth generated by the merger of 12 markets into a single market of 320 million consumers will work to the advantage of everybody when it is borne in mind that imports, which already account for one quarter of its gross domestic product, are expected to progress even further.
In more specific areas, the efforts deployed by the Community at the internal level will also have positive effects for third countries. For instance, the progressive accomplishment of economic and monetary union - which will be one of our major priorities in the coming months - will be instrumental in contributing to the stability of the international monetary system.
The reform of the Common Agricultural Policy, on which work started five years ago, is continuing, it is contributing to the improvement of the world market situation. The Co-unity reaffirms the undertakings it gave at the mid-term meeting of the Uruguay Round negotiations in April 1989. The efforts it is making
are considerable, and I would recall that it remains the world's largest importer of agricultural products.
In 1989 the Community has continued to strengthen its relations with all the regions of the world. First, it is making preparations with the European Free Trade Association for a renewed framework for dialogue and co-operation. Then, a series of agreements have been concluded with the countries of Eastern Europe: with Hungary, Czechoslovakia and, even more recently, with Poland, to which Commissioner Adriessen and myself paid a visit. Developments in this last-named country make it increasingly urgent to dispatch the aid that was decided on at the Summit of the Arch and accepted by 24 countries. We must force the pace to respond to the extent of the need.
Negotiations are being conducted with the Soviet Union and Bulgaria, and are being envisaged with the German Democratic Republic. This is the basis on which the Community plans to engage in a variety of forms of co-operation to supplement that in which its member States are already engaging.
The creation of the Arab Maghreb Union will enable the European Economic to step up and diversify the already very rewarding relations it maintains with those Mediterranean countries. Discussions are proceeding with the countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council for the purpose of supplementing the Cooperation Agreed signed in 1988 by means Of a fresh trade agreement.
In Asia, 1989 has been a year marked by new joint steps taken by the EEC and the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN, in their bid to further industrial cooperation by stepping up investments. With its Latin American partners, the Community is pursuing its efforts to diversify cooperation and trade. in Central America, it is developing it cooperation under the San Jose Agreements, thereby enhancing the efforts being made by the countries of the isthmus.
Lastly, I should like to express my deep satisfaction at the improvement in the Community's trade relations with its main partners in the developed world, where willingness to negotiate is now the overriding consideration.
This improvement in the climate is fragile, and our best chance of consolidating it is to complete the Uruguay Round negotiations by the date scheduled and to secure substantive results in all areas.
In the coming months, North-South solidarity will be in the international headlines: the renewal of the lome Convention, the special session of the United Nations General Assembly on economic cooperation and development, the second international conference on the least developed countries in Paris, and the launching of the fourth development decade.
Let us grasp the opportunity offered by these various occasions, for they will make it possible to take stock of what has been achieved and also to realize that we need to go further. Development depends to a large degree on the domestic strategies adopted by the countries concerned themselves. A large number of developing countries have embarked on a courageous adjustment process that is an essential requirement, even though it may sometimes give rise to problems from the social and political standpoints. I wish to pay tribute to their efforts which often demand heavy sacrifices.
However, these efforts will be useful only if they are made in a favourable international environment. In the first place, it is absolutely essential to lighten the burden of excessive indebtedness which has now become intolerable. In this crucial area, the concerted and constructive approach that has prevailed has already made it possible to overcome the inhibiting factors and to record some measure of progress.
Several of the Community's  member States have taken additional steps in favour of the poorest countries by cancelling official development assistance loans. France, for its part, has announced through the President of the Republic an across-the-board cancellation of the debts accruing from development assistance in the case of 35 of the poorest African entries. This measure will come into force on 1 January 1990 and is - I must say here - free of any conditions.
At the same time, other countries which are certainly not as poor but which are grappling with a heavy burden of indebtedness to the banks are having to face difficult political and economic choices. This is particularly the case in Latin America where solving the debt problem should make it possible to consolidate and strengthen democracy in the region. 
Two countries, Mexico and the Philippines, have already successfully embarked on that path. But progress in coping with indebtedness cannot be sufficient in itself to ensure development, and fresh resources are necessary. Such resources must, in the first instance, be generated by trade. The Community has already, to a large extent, opened up its market to products from the developing countries, without awaiting the conclusion of the Uruguay Round, it has recently made significant improvements in the access of tropical products to its market.
In the ongoing renegotiation of the Lome Convention, it will endeavour to improve further an arrangement that is already proving advantageous. Even so, for the vast majority of the developing countries, dependent as they are on a handful of export comities, access to the markets of the industrialized countries is not enough. The Common Fund for commodities, should now come into force. For its part, the Community plans to strengthen the STABEX and SYSMIN mechanisms for the stabilization of export earnings under the Lome Convention.
Alongside these measures, official development assistance still represents a lifeline, and the Community is already making a considerable effort in that regard. The assistance proved by its member States taken together has been quite clearly moving in the direction of the 0.7 per cent target since the early 1980s.
In the final analysis, however, economic development hinges on an unfailing international mobilization of forces to protect our environment. The heating up of the atmosphere, the deterioration of the ozone layer, the pollution of the oceans and freshwater resources and desertification - all pose a threat to our entire planet.
Contending with this threat at an early date is a responsibility that is incumbent upon all of us.
Many developing countries do not always have sufficient funds for that purpose. An effort by the industrialized countries to introduce new forms of co-operation and financing will make it easier for the individual countries in the world to take care of the environment and to manage their natural resources in a common endeavour. This must surely be one of the most necessary forms that international solidarity can take.
Such solidarity is exemplary when it takes the form of protecting the tropical forests, helping Bangladesh to combat the incalculable consequences of flooding, or setting up an observatory in the Sahara.
The planetary scale of the threat is such that international negotiations are needed to spell out the objectives of common interest.
With that prospect in mind, the conference on the environment and development, which the United Nations Secretary-General is convening in 1992, will represent a major turning-point. Before then, the world climate conference which will take place in 1990 should afford an opportunity for making significant progress on the question of the greenhouse effect. The Community earnestly calls for the conclusion of an international agreement on climatic changes, and it would also like a dialogue to be started on ocean-bed mining. The Community has already taken, or is about to take, a number of decisions having immediate effects the early implementation, and at a faster pace, of the Helsinki decisions on the eradication of chlorofluorocarbons; the launching of a programme of action on the greenhouse effect; accession to the Basle Convention on movements of dangerous waste; the creation of a European environmental agency and the drawing-up of a tropical forest assistance programme.
These actions, coupled with support for the current international negotiations and with the integration of environmental issues into co-operation with the developing countries, are indicative of the Community's growing commitment to the preservation of our planetary environment.
There are other threats that also call for our vigilance and decisive action. We likewise cannot keep silent at the violations of mankind's most fundamental freedoms and rights. There are many such violations and they unfortunately continue to exist in too many countries on all the continents.
The Twelve are constantly waging war on behalf of human rights, which are the foundation of the United Nations, for they cannot remain indifferent to the intolerable violations to which those rights are being subjected. It is not that they are trying to behave as a censor, rather their fight is inspired by the values which underpin the Community and have brought its member States together.
The events of Tiananmen Square are still present in our memories, we may ask whether the European Community's relations with Beijing have been compromised for a long time to case. We sincerely hope that this will not be the case. We shall show vigilance, however, in the hope that the leaders of the People's Republic of China will eventually heed the appeals addressed to them by the entire international community. 
We also attach considerable importance to ensuring that China fully abides by the undertakings it has given in respect of the constitutional instruments for Hong Kong.
The Twelve wish to launch a further appeal for the Burmese people to be allied freely to exercise its right of expression.
Free elections have been held in Panama also. The Twelve are giving their support to the efforts of the Organization of American States to put forward a solution to the crisis, they reaffirm their reservations about the new regime currently in power, which does not enjoy any form of institutional legitimacy.
I turn now to South Africa - yet again. It has to be asked whether the winds of change bluing over southern Africa as a whole will also have a positive impact in South Africa. The Twelve, which have constantly denounced the particularly odious apartheid regime, have taken note of the statements made by the South African leaders asserting their determination to embark on reforms. However, the
twelve likewise note - and deplore - the extension of the state of emergency, the continuing ban on anti-apartheid organizations, the pursuit of repression and the continued detention of a large number of political prisoners, starting with Nelson Mandela. They will not let up the pressure until the aims being sought have been attained.
Violations of human rights are the blight of international relations, the leprosy of modern times. The Assembly has been witness to the emergence of the most admirable legal instruments and high-minded resolutions, which every State has accepted. How can one not speak here of the emotion of people who are suffering and whose hopes have been suddenly dashed in the face of brute force and the abuse of authority or merely a lack of understanding at man's relentless and courageous march towards freedom? I should like to pay tribute to the Commission on Human Rights, which is striving with all its might to win respect for the values enshrined in the United Nations. This year the Commission has submitted two particularly important drafts to the Assembly, after some years spent on the
difficult task of putting them together. These are the draft of the second optional protocol covering the abolition of the death penalty and the draft of a convention on the rights of the child. I hope that final consultations will permit the General Assembly to adopt these two drafts by consensus at this session.
Respect for freedom cannot be dissociated from the rejection of terrorism. Resorting to the barbaric practices of terrorism is unwarranted, whatever the circumstances. All terrorists have to be brought to justice. That means that every country must adopt a very firm attitude and that there has to be a concerted response.
With the early prospect of the creation of a Community area without internal borders, there is increased collaboration between the agencies responsible for public order in the Twelve, which consider that, as the threat stands at present, there are no grounds for relaxing their vigilance.
But there is another challenge to democratic values which cannot go un-mentioned: the scourge of drug abuse. The tragic events in Colombia last month, when the drug traffickers demonstrated their deadly power, have once again underscored the need to strengthen international cooperation in the fight against drugs. I wish to pay tribute to the authorities of Colombia for their coverage. The Community gives its full backing to them and to the measures taken by the President of the United States. Over and above the action being taken at the regional level, the Twelve consider that an effective solution to drug problems has to be sought in an international context involving producer countries, consumer countries and the countries of transit. It is with that in mind that the Twelve consider that the right forum for this purpose is the United Nations, with its Commission on Narcotic Drugs and the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control, and that they have contributed to the adoption of the new United Nations Convention against illicit drug trafficking, opened for signature on 20 December 1988.
The Community attaches the utmost importance to the work of the United Nations, as demonstrated by its very active participation in peace-keeping operations. That is why our first concern is to see the efficiency of the United  Nations enhanced and to learn about the initial results of the reforms undertaken for that purpose.
This is the first time that it has fallen to France, which is the current President of the Council of the European Communities, to speak in this capacity before the Assembly on behalf of the Europe of the Twelve. I am conscious of the honour that has been done to me. In France's eyes, the European Community is a very great undertaking whose scope it readily adopts as its own. I hope that the Community's identity will grow stronger as it increasingly opens to the world. Through its voice in international organizations and the presence and action of the "troika" when urgent issues arise, the Community sends out a message of peace from its own people to the other peoples of the world. I am happy to have been able to speak on behalf of Europe.
Allow me, in conclusion, to say a few words on behalf of my own country. The ardent desire for peace, the aspiration for progress and the sacred defence of the law all represent, for every man and woman on our planet, the sum total of hope that no force on earth can ever stifle. That is the significance of the steps which France has taken in 1989, with the Conference on the prohibition of chemical weapons, action on human rights, action on behalf of Lebanon, and the Paris Conference on Cambodia. That is also why France has resolutely chosen, in the family of nations, to support the most impoverished and least favoured peoples. 
On the threshold of the year 2000, we are faced with and involved in fresh struggles. Let us wage them without beating around the bush and without asking futile questions. Future generations will judge us by the manner in which we have responded to the major challenges of the present, such as the threat to the environment, the crushing poverty of millions of human beings, and the violation of rights and freedoms. 
  The key word in response to all these problems is .is solidarity. It is France's fervent hope that voices will speak out in unison from this prestigious forum to enjoin the international community to give fresh impetus everywhere to dialogue, development and peace.
﻿
Let me first, if I my, sir, add my congratulations to those you have already received on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly. The first country .that I ever lived and worked in outside my own was Nigeria - in Jos, your home town - and I have a very great affection for the country and for its citizens. I wish you the greatest possible success in your presidency. I wish also to thank the outgoing President, Mr. Dante Caputo, and to pay a tribute to the tireless work of the Secretary-General throughout the past year.
Fifty years ago this month, war began in Europe and spread throughout the world. Fifty-five million people died. The landscape of international relations was profoundly changed. That war inspired the creation of this Organization. The United Nations, conceived out of war, was the best framework our predecessors could devise for law, for order, and for peace. Hopes for it then were high, but they did not last. Even as the General Assembly was meeting for the first time, in London, divisions were opening between the two halves of Europe. The peoples of the East, for whom my country went to war, found that victory had been secured at an appalling price. They had won the peace, but they had lost their freedom. That division of Europe and that loss of freedom imposed a polarity on world affairs which has bedevilled international politics for over 40 years. Today, I am struck by the enormous and cheering contrast with those times. I believe that the feeling of hope and opportunity in world affairs is greater today than at any time since the Assembly first met, in London, my home town. 
The hopes of the early days have been revived. Ideologies have become less Potent: it is less and less relevant to talk of Easiest, or North-South, or the first, second, third or even fourth worlds. Instead, we should talk of a world whose nation States have reciprocal rights, responsibilities and obligations. There is only one world. We all share in it and must make of it what we can. Today, the opportunities for the United Nations to make good use of that fine framework for law, order and peace I spoke of have suddenly become real. There are new problems that we must face together. We have moved from cold war to global warming. Fresh ideas and attitudes are changing the face of the Soviet Union and
Eastern Europe. I agree with Mr. Shevardnadze that it is in the interests of all of us for perestroika to succeed.
Liberty is reasserting itself in Poland and in Hungary and is drawing thousands of Germans from East to West. The cold war is ending where it started. Even the Berlin Wall cannot stem the exodus of people seeking a new life in freedom. No one doubts, I think, that we are only at the beginning of a long and difficult process. Patience and goodwill are necessary on a11 sides. Yesterday, Mr. Shevardnadze offered an authoritative Soviet view of recent events in Poland. I warmly welcome his remarks. I hope and believe that in making them he was burying, once and for all, the so-called Brezhnev doctrine, which was used to justify the invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968. with freedom no longer seen as a threat, there is a real opportunity to build a new Europe.
The first priority for East-West relations must be to support and encourage the process of reform which is now under way. That will reinforce trust and confidence. A co-ordinated approach, including very substantial economic support, is essential. The European Community has made clear its readiness to play its full part, with both short- and long-term measures. Both will be needed. The challenge is to work in partnership with others to bring about a Community of Europe, to stand alongside the Community in Europe. The goal is a Europe of peace, prosperity and freedom, where the terms East and west have more to do with geography than with politics - a Europe without enforced divisions, whose people are at liberty to determine their own future.
Increasing trust will assist the process of arms control. Success in this field is a priority. For the past 40 years the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) has resolutely maintained the peace in Europe. Now it is taking new opportunities to consolidate that peace. NATO countries have tabled far-reaching conventional arms proposals. Their aim is clears it is enhanced security at equal and lower levels of forces in Europe. More peace at less cost is an attractive bargain for everyone.
We are encouraged by the steps agreed upon between the United States and the Soviet Union to achieve faster progress towards an early START agreement. The proposed 50 per cent cuts in their nuclear arsenals will make a major contribution to international security and stability.
We are working also for the achievement of a global chemical weapons ban. I warmly welcome the proposals made by President Bush on Monday and the positive Soviet response to them. The reduction of United States and Soviet stockpiles ahead of a convention will do much to reassure countries that do not possess chemical weapons and will also remove the rationale for other countries to cling to their stocks. It is through practical steps like these that Governments can best show their determination to get rid of these gruesome weapons. My country gave up its chemical weapons 30 years ago. We look forward to other countries destroying theirs.
We should look also for a way to give more impetus and focus to the Geneva negotiations on chemical weapons. Today I propose one way to do this: let us move from the present intermittent pattern of negotiations to round-the-year meetings, as already happens in other areas of arms control. We can also be encouraged by the progress that has been made towards the resolution of regional conflicts in different parts of the world. In Namibia the international community, and the united Nations in particular, has shown what co-operation can achieve. Security Council resolution 435 (1978) is more than a decade old, but its principles have remained valid. That in turn has opened the way to Namibian independence.
The Namibian independence process is the direct responsibility of the United Nations and the Secretary-General personally, since we met last year, there has been major progress towards implementation of the United Nations plan. Now, as Namibia's elections draw near, it is vital for all of us to give our full support to the Secretary-General and the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG). All the parties involved must show restraint, particularly in the face of provocation, such as the recent murder of Anton Lubowski. Violence and intimidation will serve only those who wish to deny Namibia its freedom.
But Namibia will need help after independence as well. Britain will Play a full part in that effort. At the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting next month we shall also be considering what help the Commonwealth can provide. Next year, I hope, a free, independent Namibia will have taken its place in the Assembly and also, I trust, as a welcome new member of the Commonwealth. 
Fighting still continues in Angola and in Mozambique, but there is now some movement towards peace in both of those countries. I urge both sides in Angola to restore the cease-fire and to resume negotiations on the basis of the common ground identified in June. For our part, we shall continue to give full support to President Chissano's efforts to achieve a peaceful settlement with Renamo. We call upon the new South African Government to support those efforts in the letter and spirit of the Nkomati accord. That means making sure that no support - no support - goes from South Africa to Renamo.
South Africa remains the key to lasting stability in that region. In the recent elections, 70 per cent of the white-minority electorate voted for change. One hundred per cent of the black population, denied a vote, are calling urgently for change. Mr. de Klerk campaigned from a platform of reform. He committed himself to work for a new South Africa, in which all the people would be fully represented. He made a clear declaration of intent. There is now a clear mandate. Now the declaration and the mandate must be turned into action.
Of one thing I am sure. Apartheid cannot survive and it does not deserve to survive. It is not something to be tolerated or to be patient with, it is something to oppose constantly and comprehensively. 
Violence is not the answer. Nor are economic sanctions. They weigh the possibility of change against the certainty of immediate, lasting hardship to the black community whose growing economic muscle is already contributing to the erosion of apartheid.
No. The answer to apartheid is unremitting political pressure on South Africa to reform itself, wise policy lies in assistance and support for the innocent victims of apartheid within South Africa - political prisoners and township dwellers alike. It lies also in support for the economies of South Africa's neighbours and help for them to defend themselves against attempts at destabilization. Positive action, constructive action - action in which Britain's record is second to none and will remain so.
 Many brave men and women in South Africa have struggled peacefully and Persistently against apartheid. If I single out Helen Suzman, it is because, for 40 years, often alone in the South African Parliament, often in the face of threats and intimidation, she fought for freedom. She is in London today. I am pleased to tell the Assembly that she will be honoured by Her Majesty the Queen with one of our highest awards for all she has done in the campaign for justice. In her name, Britain will be funding a new scholarship scheme, soon bringing to 1,000 the number of our annual scholarships for black South Africans.  The new Government in South Africa must now move quickly and unambiguously to meet its commitment to fundamental reform. A new and just society cannot be constructed overnight. But we are clear what should happen. We want to see the release of detainees, the lifting of the state of emergency, the suspension of violence and a dialogue with black leaders to consider and to implement the changes that must be made.  I hope that the United Nations will be ready to respond appropriately to clear and practical signs of change. But signs there must be. That should be our common message to South Africa's leaders.
Since we last met, my country and Argentina have taken significant steps towards achieving a more normal relationship, in doing so, the two countries have agreed to set the question of sovereignty over the Falkland Islands on one side. Following preliminary talks here in August, both sides will be meeting again in Madrid this month. For our part, we shall work hard to ensure the success of the process which has now begun. It will not be easy. And our ambitions should not be set too high too soon. But we enter these negotiations hoping for agreement. In the Middle East, the resolutions which are the core of the search for peace are now nearly a generation bid. Another generation of refugees and dispossessed people has new been added to what is first and foremost a human tragedy.
Last year's renunciation of terrorism by the PLO and its willingness to recognize Israel were a major breakthrough. I hope that Israel will come to recognize that. The Israeli Government's proposal for elections in the occupied territories is a positive step too. I hope the PLO will come to recognize that. I pay tribute to the efforts of President Mubarak in taking these ideas forward. Elections must be part of a process leading to final status negotiations on the basis of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). We believe that the best framework for these negotiations is an international conference under United Nations auspices.
In Lebanon, we have witnessed for years a process of national self-destruction. Now it seems there is a glimmer of hope. We have welcomed and supported the efforts of the Arab League Committee of Three. They offer a bridge to peace. We hope all concerned in Lebanon's conflict will cross it. A particular threat hangs over the hostages in Lebanon. They are the victims of a detestable form of blackmail which threatens the entire international community.
It is hard to appreciate the anguish of those held hostage, although I have seen the suffering of some of their families, and seen, too, their courage and determination, which is remarkable. John McCarthy, Terry Waite, and now Jackie Mann, three British hostages, have been held for a total of more than 2,000 days. We must keep them and the other hostages constantly in the public eye. They most not be forgotten or overlooked. We must make every effort to press for their unconditional release. There are countries with influence on the hostage-takers. They should use that influence without delay to secure the hostages, safe release, state terrorism is no more acceptable through agents than carried out directly.  It is time to return the hostages to their families, and that should be the message from this Assembly.  
Upon one further Point we must all be clear. We must and we dare not give in to the blackmail of terrorists. The Security Councils resolution on terrorism last July added the authority of this Organisation to that message. We need to work for the wide adoption of specific counter-measures. After horrific bombing of Pan Am night 103, the United Kingdom, with Czechoslovakia. is seeking an international agreement on the marking of explosives. All of us are naturally concerned at inflict or tension between countries, or within countries. A number of instates were raised on behalf of European Community countries by my colleague, Roland Dumas. yesterday. I would single out only one, Burma, where  here is an urgent need for the restoration of human rights and democracy through free elections. Earlier this year millions of us around the world were shocked to see Chinese troops kill and wound their fellow citizens on the orders of their own Government. 
The measures that we have taken in response to those events are not. however, intended to isolate China. We hope to see China return to genuine reform and to repair the damage done to its international relations. No Government can survive indefinitely by the suppression of peaceful dissent. By treaty. Hong Kong will revert to China in 1997. By treaty, Hong Kong will also preserve its traditional freedoms and way of life. That treaty, the Sino-British Joint Declaration of 1984, is binding. It has been registered as such at the United Nations by both Britain and China.
I welcome unreservedly China's reaffirmation of its commitment to the Joint Declaration. Britain is likewise committed, bindingly and whole-heartedly. But our common commitment must now be reflected in action. And practical reassurances are required from China to the people of Hong Kong, so that they may feel secure in their future, both up to 1997 and beyond. Hong Kong is resilient. Its economy continues to thrive. But it will take time, steady nerves and, above all, an explicitly supportive attitude on the part of China to restore Hong Kong's confidence in its future.
For our part, Britain will continue vigorously to represent the interests of Hong Kong's people in our discussions with China, we intend also to introduce concrete measures to reassure people in the territory about their future. They include-, the early introduction of a Bill of Rights; the development of more representative government; and a package to encourage people essential to Hong Kong's future stability and prosperity to stay there, by giving them guarantees of resettlement in Britain if they wish. That package will be designed not to strip Hong Kong of its people, but to give them hope and confidence to remain in Hong Kong. 
	Hong Kong's continued confidence and success is in the interest of the entire international community. In return, Hong Kong needs international understanding and support. That was recognized by the Paris economic summit, and I hope it will also be recognized by this Assembly. International understanding and support is also required in response to the intractable problem of the Vietnamese boat people.
The continuing human exodus from Viet Nam has imposed an insuperable burden on Places of first asylum in the region. Hong Kong alone has more than 56,000 boat people in its camps-, over 32,000 of them have arrived this year.
Yet the bleak reality is that for most of these people there are no homes to go to outside their own country. They are not political refugees. Under the criteria laid down by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, they have left Viet Nam for economic reasons, and not under political pressure.  In June, at Geneva, the International Conference on Indo-Chinese Refugees agreed that: "Persons determined not to be refugees should return to their country of origin in accordance with international practices reflecting the responsibility of States towards their own citizens." That is surely the only answer. Alas, there is no room for them in Hong Kong. There is no hope of a home in any new country. The existing situation is, therefore, unsustainable.
The international community knows that it cannot simply leave this problem with Hong Kong in the hope that somehow they will cope. They cannot cope. The Government and the people of Hong Kong have done all they can. They have put up 15 camps. They have provided food, clothing, schooling. But the limit of their capacity to help has been reached.
For those boat people who are genuine refugees, homes are being found in countries around the world. That is as it should be. But for those boat people who are not refugees, there can ultimately be only one home: the one they came from, so far, only a few of them have recognized this and volunteered to return. We look to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to step up counselling of the non-refugees to ensure that more of them know that there is no future for them outside their own country.
In mid-October, the international community will review developments since the Geneva Conference. The main purpose must be to agree a programme of repatriation under the good offices of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. That must involve the phased, orderly and monitored return and re-integration in safety and dignity of all those who are not genuine refugees. To achieve that, Viet Nam must assume full responsibility for its own people and co-operate in the programme. We shall work in good faith with the Vietnamese authorities to that end.
The world that many of us grew up in was haunted by memories of war and overshadowed by the threat of nuclear destruction. Yet, for many of us, it was a much more innocent world than today. Our parents did not live in fear that their children could be exposed to the lethal menace of drugs. We as parents today can have no such peace of mind.
That is why the town of Medellin is now a household name throughout the world. That is why Colombia's battle against drugs is a battle on behalf of us all. The power of the traffickers transcends national boundaries. It demands an international response. I can announce today that, following discussions with the Colombian authorities, my Government has approved a substantial package of assistance for Colombia. It draws on our experience in fighting terrorism. It will comprise communications and towards equipment, technical assistance, and training for those in Colombia involved in the anti-drugs campaign. However, it is vital to make intensified efforts to reduce demand in consumer countries - to put the traders in human misery out of business. Britain will be hosting, in close co-operation with the United Nations, a major international conference in London next April to tackle the problems of demand reduction and cocaine.
The United Nations already makes a significant contribution to international efforts to combat the drugs menace. But we must all do more. All states should ratify the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances. Britain will do so and has also signed nine agreements so far with other countries permitting the tracing and confiscation of the assets of drug traffickers. The world in which many of us grew up was also a more ignorant world. Pew then appreciated the fragility of the environment which sustains life. But today, if ever there was an issue that should unite the nations, it is this one. To meet this global challenge we need stronger international institutions and clearer priorities. 
That is why Britain has more than doubled its voluntary financial contribution to the United Nations Environment Programme. That is why Britain called in May for the early negotiation of an international convention on climate change. And that is why Britain is active in helping to protect tropical forests, whose importance in terms of both climate and resources is now far better understood. The priorities of preservation must live alongside the priorities of development and economic growth. A balance has to be struck. Our philosophy has to be sustainable development, development that benefits mankind and protects his environment. Partnership is a new watchword for the relationship between developed and developing countries. The priorities for that partnership are clear. In the first instance it must be for developing countries themselves to pursue sound economic policies. But development aid has an important part to play. So does action by creditor countries to relieve the debt burden on countries pursuing reform, and most especially on the poorest. International trade must be kept open and inflation contained to assist growth. Britain will continue to work for progress in all those areas.
Experience has shown us that focusing tightly and in turn on the key issues is a better approach than looking for generalized global solutions. The international community, with the United Nations as its chosen instrument, faces a formidable range of challenges. But they are matched by opportunities. The demands on the United Nations are growing. But so is its prestige. So is its authority. So too is the extent of its engagement in new areas.
As we recall the conflict which created the United Nations, it is reassuring to find the Organization developing its role so successfully today. With the membership's continued support the process can be taken further still. All of us will gain from that. For, as the then British Prime Minister told the very first session of the General Assembly:  "The United Nations is really a coming together of all peoples in all countries and continents. It is not 'them' - it is; every one of us seeking, as citizens of the world, peace and security for humanity." Now, at last, we cure doing just that.
﻿
My delegation warmly welcomes the assumption by Ambassador Garba of- the stewardship of the forty-fourth session of the General Assembly. He is an eminent personality and distinguished representative of a country with which we have the friendliest of relations. We are confident that, with his well-known diplomatic skill and experience, the deliberations of this session of the Assembly will be both fruitful and purposive.
I should like to pay tribute to my friend Mr. Dante Caputo for the outstanding leadership he provided for the forty-third session of the Assembly. 1989 has been a year of consolidation of the much-enhanced role of the United Nations in international affairs. The Organization has had its peace-keeping or observation teams in almost all the troubled regions of the world, and everywhere they have been creditably discharging their functions. The critical contribution of the United Nations peace-keeping in the world was recognized by the well-merited award last year of the Nobel Peace Prize to the United Nations peace-keeping forces.
We admire the sure touch, assurance and promptness with which the Secretary-General, Mr. Perez de Cuellar, has been discharging the onerous aid growing responsibilities now being entrusted to the United Nations. In this he has displayed quiet competence aid a remarkable insight into the Organization's great potentialities as well as its limitations.
The Secretary-General referred in his report to "the renewal of confidence in multilateralism" (A/44/1, p. 3). Today multilateralism is no longer an ideal; it has become a necessity. Its ultimate validity has been driven home by the threat posed to human survival by the nuclear-arms race, the degradation of the environment and other non-military threats to security, such as poverty, underdevelopment, over-population and inequality, both within and among nations.
Multilateralism today has to deal with a new generation of problems. We have to cope with the rapid changes in the pattern of production, consumption and trade brought about by the technological revolution. We have to give direction to the new integrationist trends in the world economy, with a view to optimising their benefits. We have to evolve new rules, regulations and regimes to cope with new problems and opportunities in the fields of trade, manufactures, services, environment and science and technology.
The United Nations, as a linchpin of this multilateralism, must be strengthened. This is the only organization which is global in scope, universal in membership aid mandated by a treaty in the form of the Chatter. India welcomes the renewed confidence in the United Nations on the part of the major Powers.
Renewal of confidence in multilateralism cannot be partial or selective; it has to be total and all-embracing. It is unfortunate that, whereas the United Nations is now able to assert its rightful role in the political field, it is still not regarded by the major economic Powers as an appropriate forum for serious negotiations on economic issues. My delegation sincerely hopes that this imbalance will soon be redressed. The ongoing process of the formulation of an international development strategy for the 1990s and the forthcoming special session of the General Assembly devoted to international economic co-operation provide an excellent opportunity for it.
On the United Nations lies the onerous responsibility of bringing to the Namibian people their long-awaited independence, for which they have undergone so much suffering and made such heroic sacrifices. The process is well under way. The United Nations Transition Assistance Group, under the guidance of the Secretary-General, has so far done a creditable job under trying conditions. However, the path to Namibian independence is still strewn with many obstacles. To ensure the conduct of free and fair elections, great vigilance and caution need to be exercised, particularly by the Security Council. The lacunae and distortions in the election process should be identified and speedily removed. After the elections the Constituent Assembly should have the sovereign and unfettered right to frame the country's Constitution. The United Nations must ensure that there is no set-back to the process now under way and that the outcome of the elections truly reflects the wishes, hopes and aspirations of the Namibian people.
While Namibia's independence will signify the end of the South African regime's illegal occupation of that country, the citadel of apartheid in South Africa itself will still remain intact. Claims are being matte that the racial atmosphere in South Africa is undergoing change. The world is, however, watching carefully to see the quality, extent and pace of the change that the South African regime is willing to bring about. Apartheid cannot be reformed; it has to be totally dismantled. There is no half-way house to restoring human dignity and protecting human rights. The South African regime must demonstrate its willingness to negotiate unconditionally with the genuine representatives of the people of South Africa. In order to create a suitable climate for negotiation, it should release Nelson Mandela and other political prisoners, lift restrictions on political organizations and end the state of emergency. It must also show a desire to deal with the front-line States without intimidation and on the basis of equality and the principles enshrined in the United Nations Charter.
The forty-third session of the General Assembly closed on a note of optimism on the Palestinian question. The bold and courageous initiative of President Arafat and the initiation of the United States-Palestine Liberation Organization dialogue had created a positive climate. However, the situation still remains deadlocked. The intifadah, the unarmed Palestinian struggle, continues amidst increasing repression.
There can be no durable peace in West Asia without a just and comprehensive settlement, based on the realization by the Palestinian people of their inalienable right to self-determination and the recognition of the rights of all States in the region, including Palestine and Israel, to live in peace and security within internationally recognized borders. We are convinced that for this purpose the United Nations-sponsored International Peace Conference needs to be convened urgently.
The long civil strife in Lebanon has fractured the country's constitutional, political and economic framework. The success of the latest effort of the high-level Committee of the Arab League in bringing about a cease-fire is a glimmer of hope on the horizon. We hope that the current political dialogue will lead to national reconciliation and that peace and stability will soon return to Lebanon.
Two months ago the Conference convened in Paris raised hopes for the future of Cambodia. Significant progress was made at the Conference on many elements of the overall package. However, differences persisted among the Cambodian factions and some of the basic issues, resulting in the Conference's aiding without making any breakthrough. The completion of the withdrawal of the Vietnamese troops from Cambodia is a major, positive development. For further progress now it is necessary to adapt a balanced approach that takes into account the reality prevailing in Cambodia and the security and other interests of the countries of the region, and that provides for the cessation of all foreign interference and intervention in the internal affairs of Cambodia, so that the people of Cambodia can exercise their right to determine their own destiny. It is equally important to ensure at all costs that Cambodia is prevented from becoming once again the victim of the universally condemned genocidal policies and practices of the Pol Pot regime. The danger of the recurrence of fighting in Cambodia, of which the first signs are already visible, must be arrested. For this purpose, there is an imperative need for the cessation of arms supplies to all Cambodian factions.
India is concerned at the blood-bath in Afghanistan, Which has continued even after the Soviet Union completed the withdrawal of its troops on schedule. We call once again upon all parties to observe strictly and implement the Geneva accords in letter and spirit, to give up the futile search for a military solution and to come to the negotiating table for a political solution. Those who are trying to resolve the question by military means ate only prolonging the agony of the people of Afghanistan. President Najibullah recently made a series of far-reaching proposals for national reconciliation which in our opinion deserve serious consideration.
India has maintained traditionally close relations with both Iran and Iraq. We are therefore dismayed at the lack of progress in translating the cease-fire agreed upon last year between the two countries into a durable peace. My delegation supports the Secretary-General in his efforts to secure the implementation of Security Council resolution 598 (1987) and help resolve the vexatious issues between the two countries.
We are encouraged by the optimistic note struck by the Secretary-General regarding the prospects for resolving the long-standing problem in Cyprus on the basis of the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of that country. We urge him to redouble his efforts so as to take full advantage of the present propitious climate.
We are happy at the prospect of peace in Central America and the role the United Nations has been called upon to play in that process. The leaders of five Central American countries and the parties directly involved in the problems besetting Central America deserve our compliments for their statesmanship and foresight. We wish them success in implementing the Esquipulas process and the Tela agreement in their collective bid to restore peace.
In the Korean peninsula, which unhappily remains divided, there is an overwhelming sentiment in favour of peace, reconciliation and dialogue. India supports all efforts aimed at the peaceful reunification of Korea. In conformity with the principle of universality, India supports the aspirations of the Korean people to contribute actively towards the realization of the purposes aid principles of the United Nations through representation in this world body.
The international community should oppose racial discrimination wherever it is practiced. In Fiji efforts to institutionalise racial discrimination are continuing with hardly any resistance from the international community. The report of the Constitution Inquiry Advisory Committee does very little to eliminate the racially discriminatory character of the draft constitution. As the Foreign Minister of New Zealand has pointed out, "the Committee has failed to question the serious departure from fundamental democratic principles". We hope better sense will prevail before it is too late.
In Myanmar, the situation remains unstable as a result of the continuing repression of the democratic aspirations of the people. We sincerely hope the Burmese authorities will respond to the urging of their people for freedom and democracy and work with them to bring the present tensions to an end.
The recent breakthrough on some crucial aspects of the negotiations in the framework of the Strategic Arms Reduction Talks (START) has come as a welcome relief and has brightened hopes of an early conclusion of the negotiations. It is essential that the agreement be clinched without further loss of momentum.
In the meantime, the arms race moves apace without any sign of a let-up. Nuclear-weapons testing goes on unchecked, and so does the search for new systems and technologies and the modernization of existing weapon systems. The continued testing of nuclear particle beams, stealth bombers, smart weapons and new missiles is hardly going to inspire confidence in the world at large, much less among the interlocutors themselves. Those developments tend to confirm our basic apprehensions regarding the qualitative arms race, as clearly referred to by the Secretary-General in his report. Hence India's proposal for monitoring scientific and technological developments which have a bearing on international security.
There can be no meaningful progress either in nuclear disarmament or in achieving nuclear non-proliferation in the true sense of the term unless the doctrines of nuclear deterrence which underpin the present nuclear-arms race are discarded. In our view, that is at the root of the present dithering.
It was in view of those considerations that at the third special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi presented India's action plan for the total elimination of nuclear weapons by the year 2010. I call once again upon all countries, particularly the nuclear-weapon States, to initiate the necessary multilateral negotiations with the overall aim of moving towards a nuclear-weapon-free and non-violent world.
For the past several years, the international community has been pressing for a comprehensive chemical-weapons convention. The agreement recently reached between the United States and the Soviet Union, and the statements made last week in this Assembly by President Bush and Foreign Minister Shevardnadze, will no doubt facilitate an early conclusion of such a convention. We hope that all outstanding issues will be resolved and a chemical-weapons convention signed during 1990.
With the positive prospect of disarmament there is now a real opportunity to release resources from the military sector for development purposes. Even if such resources are utilized for development in the countries involved in the process of disarmament, it will bring some benefit to the world economy. However, a conscious effort must be made to ensure that pert of those resources go where they are most needed: to the developing countries. Appropriate institutional arrangements should be made within the United Nations for giving concrete shape to the link between disarmament and development so that the present opportunities are harnessed in the direction of global peace and security.
In recent years the world has witnessed a cancerous growth of terrorism at all levels. India supports all measures that would discourage terrorist acts, particularly the taking of innocent men and women as hostages. The recent international awareness against this menace must be translated into concrete actions to curb terrorism.
Since the General Assembly last met there has been an encouraging expansion in world trade aid output. However, the external environment for the development of developing countries continues to remain unfavourable. Official development assistance has been stagnating in real terms well below the internationally-agreed target of 0.7 per cent of gross national product. Other financial flows, particularly commercial flows, virtually dried up in the latter half of the 1980s. Commodity prices, in real terms, remained at the lowest levels reached in the past 50 years. Protectionism continues to constrain developing countries in their efforts to increase their exports. Decisions can global economic issues that affect developing countries continue to be taken in forums which exclude them.
Many developing countries are carrying out structural adjustments in their economies, as part of their effort to interact more closely with the mainstream of the world economy. This task can be performed in the context of a much more open, co-operative and growing world economy. The major challenge is to work out a package of policies which should ensure the return of the world economy to higher growth conditions shared by all groups of countries.
It is essential for this purpose to revitalize the north-south dialogue on the basis of mutuality of interest. Hence the Presidents of Egypt, Venezuela and Senegal and the Prime Minister of India took the initiative, in Paris in July this year, to call for the commencement of a process of summit-level consultations among developed and developing countries on global economic and environmental issues. Some major industrialized countries, such as France and Canada, have already responded positively to this initiative. We hope for a positive response from others.
The debt problem is shackling the growth of the heavily indebted countries. A welcome development in this regard is that various plans have been mooted and in a few cases, notably Mexico, elaborate packages involving cancellation or reduction of debts, have been negotiated. However, the level of resources required for these plans to make a real dent on the problems of indebtedness, while putting their economies back on the path of growth, are not forthcoming. And the conditionalities attached are far too onerous.
The debt problem threatens to engulf even those developing countries which despite severe difficulties, have so far managed their debts and balance-of- payments accounts well. In most of these countries, the debt-gross national product ratio has increased rapidly. This has coincided with a decline in real terms in concessional flows of resources which has pushed these countries towards higher commercial borrowings. This, in turn, has aggravated their already serious debt-servicing burden. Any comprehensive solution to the debt problem should include a set of anticipatory measures to prevent this category of developing countries from falling into the debt trap, by increasing the flow of development finance, particularly concessional resources, to them.
The Uruguay Round of trade negotiations provides an excellent opportunity to the international community to address itself to the asymmetries and distortions in the international trading system and to take measures for preserving and strengthening it. We are, however, concerned over the emerging imbalances in the negotiations because of the inadequate priority being given to the areas of special interest to developing countries and the growing pressures on these countries to undertake new obligations. In the new areas, the developmental, technological and public-interest needs of the developing countries should be taken fully into consideration. High priority should be given to the removal of barriers to the transfer of technology to these countries, and to the elimination of restrictive business practices followed by transnational corporations. Specific measures should be provided for the promotion of service industries of importance to developing countries.
There is, unfortunately, a tendency in some major industrialized countries to force their will on trading partners and to adopt unilateral coercive means to penetrate their markets in the name of liberalization. Such measures are unjust and irrational. They are hardly conducive to the success of a ma jot multilateral undertaking like the Uruguay Round.
The new centres of economic power are becoming the focal points for regional integration efforts. But we are concerned that this new economic regionalism may lead to the vivisection of the world economic system. Answers to our present-day complex economic problems do not lie in the narrow havens of regionally integrated markets but in a larger harbour of truly multilateral exchanges aid interactions.
Collective self-reliance through south-south co-operation constitutes a principal plank of the platform of the non-aligned arid other developing countries. Unfortunately, progress in this field has so far lagged behind expectations. A more determined effort backed by political will at the highest level is required. We look forward to the recommendations of the South Commission on this important subject.
Drug abuse and illicit trafficking in drugs have become the scourge of the present-day world. Hardly any corn try is immune from it. It is imperative, consequently, that the entire international community co-operate in the urgent task of combating this menace. In this connection, I welcome the proposal made by the distinguished President of Colombia calling for a special session of the General Assembly to deal with the drug problem.
Environmental issues have recently surged to the forefront of international concern. This is one of the major items on the General Assembly's agenda end, as we prepare for the world conference on environment and development proposed to be held in 1992, India strongly supports a comprehensive multilateral approach to solving the environmental problems.
Environmental issues are closely related to development and they cannot be viewed in isolation. In the first World Conference on Environment and Development held in Stockholm in 1972, the then Prime Minister of India, Shrineti Indira Gandhi, had driven home the crucial link between economic development and the protection of the environment by characterizing poverty as the greatest pollutant.
Here in the General Assembly, environment has been an area of consensus, a unifying concern. We hope it will remain so. This can happen only if the legitimate concerns of the developing countries are addressed adequately in any global endeavour to tackle environmental problems. International measures to deal with these problems should not attempt to freeze development and progress at the present unequal level.
Since the process of development in developed countries has led to the present environmental predicament, these countries have the major responsibility for taking corrective action, apart from the fact that they have also the wherewithal, both financial and technological, for this, unfortunately, the tendency recently has been to rely on regulatory measures which do not fully take into account the existing asymmetries in the level of industrialization and modernization of the developed and developing countries. From the point of view of the developing countries, supportive measures that enable them to protect the environment without compromising their development needs and priorities are of greater importance.
Turning to the practical aspect of the question, the proposal of the Prime Minister of India, Shri Rajiv Gandhi, made at the Ninth Summit Conference of the Non-Aligned Countries held in Belgrade in September, for the creation of a Planet Protection Fund (PPF), has received wide attention and support. 
We are particularly encouraged by the support extended by the PPF by President Vassiliou of Cyprus and the Prime Minister Brundtland of Norway. The proposal envisages a fund to which all countries, developing and developed, will contribute, except the least developed countries. The fund will be used to protect the environment by developing and purchasing conservation-compatible technologies in critical areas that can then be brought into, the public domain for the benefit of both developed and developing countries. In our view, the creation of such a Fund is sine qua non for arriving at a global compact for combating environmental degradation. I hope the General assembly will be able to lend its support to that proposal. 
As I speak here in my capacity as representative of India, my mind inevitably goes to a date next month, 14 November. It was on that day, 100 years ago, in 1889, that a great Indian was born. His name was Jawaharlal Nehru. He was born in riches, but sacrificed his all to join the struggle for India's freedom. In 1947, when India became free, the mantle of leading independent India fell upon him.  
Having see, the atrocities and indignities heaped upon man by man, having imbibed the lesson of truth and non-violence from his mentor Mahatma Gandhi, he emerged with a vision for India and for the world that was different from conventional wisdom. He spoke of the opportunity of moral force over military force. He spoke of non-alignment against bloc politics. He spoke of one world even as the world itself was being pulled asunder.  
In the beginning, his was a lone voice. But soon his association with Tito, Nasser and many other leaders led to the birth of the Non-Aligned Movement. Today, a vast majority of the nations of the world are members of the Movement; and those who are outside it recognize it as a major force in world politics and seek to associate themselves with it. Jawaharlal Nehru brought to the Non-Aligned movement the age-old message of peace - a precious heritage of all the great civilizations of the world. It was that message of peace that rescinded at the ninth Summit of the Nan-Aligned Movement, which happened to coincide with the centenary of Nehru's birth. Let me conclude with the message of peace that Nehru gave to the Assembly 33 years ago. He said-.
-I have no doubt that all the peoples of the world are passionately desirous of peace. I doubt if there are any people anywhere who desire war. Certainly the common man all over the world desires peace passionately, if that is so, why should we not follow the path of peace? Why should we be led away by fears, apprehensions, hatred and violence?"
﻿The United Nations was founded by the nations that had fought and won the most terrible war mankind has known - a war against racism, fascism, and man's inhumanity to man. This war began with Hitler's onslaught on Poland.
Fifty years ago this week, after intense fighting, the German army entered Warsaw, it was the inevitable outcome of the agreement reached at Munich a year earlier, in which Britain and France surrendered to Hitler's demands and sacrificed democratic Czechoslovakia in the name of self-determination and for the sake of what they thought was "peace in our time".
The month of September 1939 marked the beginning of the greatest and most terrible war known to mankind. That war will for ever be associated with the Holocaust - the systematic attempt by Nazi Germany to annihilate the Jewish people. Six million Jews - almost all of Europe's Jews - were murdered, first by being starved, beaten and shot to death, and later by being gassed in industrialized murder factories designed and installed for the express purpose of mass murder of Jews at Auschwitz, Majdanek, Treblinka, Sobibor, Dachau, Bergen-Belsen and other now infamous sites. Wherever the German army reached, no Jewish community escaped. In every town and village occupied by the Wehrmacht scarcely any Jews survived.
At first, no one knew; and then no one believed. And then when it was already known in the capitals of the Allied Powers that day by day thousands of Jews - men, women and children - were being put to death, nothing was done to help. Many still prefer to believe that nothing could have been done - that the German army was too powerful, the Allies too weak, the distances too great. But now we know. Much could have been done; many could have been saved. In April of 1943, the Jews of the Warsaw Ghetto revolted. A handful of men and women, almost unarmed, facing impossible odds, they held out against the German army for one whole month. At that time, von Paulus' army had already been crushed at Stalingrad, Rommel had been defeated in the Western Desert and Allied armies had landed in North Africa. Allied forces were bombing the cities of Germany by day and night. The Allies were winning the war on land, at sea, and in the air.
But no help, not even a sign of encouragement, was extended to the Jewish fighters of the Warsaw Ghetto.
It was in the two following years, leading up to the Nazi surrender, that the Nazi murder machine moved into high gear and millions of Jews were murdered. In the closing months of the war in Europe, while the German army was reeling in defeat on all fronts, the crematoria continued to devour their victims. It was during the very last months of the war that Hungarian Jewry perished.
Many of those Jews who succeeded to escape Hitler's Europe and tried to reach the shores of Palestine were turned back to certain death.
The Holocaust, the murder of six million by Nazi Germany and its henchmen, the abandonment of the Jews by the rest of the world, remains engraved forever in the heart and soul of mankind.
In November 1947, the Holocaust still a vivid memory, the United Nations General Assembly reaffirmed a decision taken by the League of Nations 26 years earlier. Then the League had given international recognition to the Zionist movement and its goal - the establishment of a Jewish State in Palestine. In 1947, the United Nations called for the establishment of the Jewish State in a fraction of the territory originally designated for this purpose by the League of Nations.
That decision was rejected by the Arab world, just as the Arab world had over the years consistently denied the rights of the Jewish people in their ancient
homeland. As the British Mandate expired on 15 May 1948 and Israel's independence was declared, Israel was invaded by the armies of the surrounding Arab States. In those days, Israel stood alone, 650,000 Jews fighting for their lives only a few years after Europe had been turned into a Jewish graveyard. Israel had no choice but to win that war, just as it had to win four succeeding wars launched against it by the surrounding Arab countries.
The United Nations resolution of 1947 is today part of Israel's history, an expression of support for Zionism - the right of the Jewish people to their own State in their ancient homeland. But in 1975, the United Nations General Assembly, greatly enlarged, but unfortunately not grown in moral stature, adopted the infamous "Zionism is racism" resolution that makes a sham of the United Nations resolution adopted 2 8 years earlier, and that continues to this day to be a stain on the record of the Organization. As long as this resolution is not revoked, no moral authority can accompany United Nations decisions, and an air of hypocrisy continues to envelop its debates.
Israel has learned to be in the minority at the United Nations, just as we have learned to exist in the dangerous environment of the Middle East. We live in a constant state of alert, allocating a great part of our resources to defence, determined to fight terrorism and ward off aggression.
Some say that this is paranoia - a paranoia engendered by the Holocaust, the Jews still living in fear of their very existence, preparing to defend themselves against imaginary enemies. But is this really a figment of Israel's imagination? The Arab armies surrounding Israel maintain an inventory of modern weaponry - tanks, aircraft, missiles, artillery - larger than all the weaponry of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. During the past decade, military equipment valued at about 100 billion dollars was purchased by the countries of that area. We
ask ourselves, why is this weaponry there, most of it directed against Israel? Is it possible that these weapons might be used against Israel, and against Israel's civilian population?
We have already experienced five wars? we have lost thousands of our sons in Israel's defence. We see around us a Middle East that is brutal and fanatic, where no mercy is shown even to civilians. A million soldiers were killed in the Iraqi-Iranian war, where the most modern weapons of mass destruction were applied, including chemical warfare used on a massive scale by the Iraqi army. The universal agreement against the use of chemical warfare was broken not only in attacks against combatants, but also against Kurdish civilian villages. These outrages went almost unnoticed by the world, but not by us in Israel, remembering our own experience and knowing that Iraq is closer to Israel than New York is to Washington.
In recent months, the civilian population of Beirut and the Christian enclave north of Beirut were under fire from Syrian army artillery. The killing of innocent civilians went on day by day, the attackers gaining confidence that they can continue the killings with impunity. Is it then paranoia when Israel, in this environment and under these circumstances, feels itself threatened?
Are we aspiring to a needless luxury when we put forth the claim to secure and recognized boundaries? Are we wasting our resources when we maintain an army capable of defending ourselves? Are we imposing on the great nations of the world when we plead with them not to arm those of our neighbours that daily announce their hostility to Israel? Are we wrong when we ask that no encouragement be given to terrorists who in their war on Israel have committed some of the worst atrocities the world has seen since the Second World War? And yet Israel, embattled and beleaguered, continues in the quest for peace. Many of the Arab rulers seem to have no desire for peace with Israel, no matter what the conditions. Worse yet, it is the aim of these rulers to prevent others from making peace with us.
As a result, the peace process in the Middle East moves at a glacial pace. It took 30 years before Egypt reached out to meet Israel's outstretched hand - 30 years and five wars. Israel paid a tremendous price for the Israeli-Egyptian peace Treaty, a price unprecedented in the annals of conflict resolution between nations, with the signing of that Treaty 10 years ago, we had hoped that the other Arab States would quickly enter into negotiations with us, but this has not happened - at least not yet.
In May of 1983 we signed an agreement with Lebanon that would have normalized relations between our two countries and that entailed the withdrawal of the Israel Defence Forces from Southern Lebanon. But that agreement was scuttled by Syrian interference. They had other plans for Lebanon. Six years have passed and the Lebanese tragedy continues. Southern Lebanon is still a staging-ground for terrorist attacks by the PLO and the Hezbollah against the towns and villages on Israel's northern border.
This is the threatening nature of our environment, and we ignore it only at our peril. However, we will not resign ourselves to this cruel reality. We will leave no stone unturned in our quest for peace.
That is why, in April of this year, Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir unveiled Israel's four-point peace initiative. We call for a common Israeli-Egyptian effort to build, on the foundations of the Camp David accords that brought about the Israeli-Egyptian peace treaty, a comprehensive peace for the Middle East. We call on the 20 Arab countries, at present in a state of war with Israel, to cease hostile propaganda and economic boycott and begin a process of normalizing their relations with Israel. We call on the international community of nations to participate in an effort to rehabilitate the Palestinian refugee camps in Judea, Samaria and Gaza.
We call on the Palestinian Arab population in Judea, Samaria and Gaza to cease acts of terrorism and violence, and we announce our readiness to hold free democratic elections so that they can choose their representatives for negotiations with Israel on an interim agreement and eventually on the terms of a permanent settlement. There is no alternative way to move the Middle Eastern peace process forward. Rejection of this initiative is synonymous with rejecting progress towards peace. We call on all nations to support Israel's peace initiative, and we call on the Arab world to respond favourably to it. This is not the time to attempt to
wring concessions from Israel that relate to the permanent settlement. Our immediate objective must be to put an end to violence and to get negotiations going. Putting the cart before the horse can only stall the process itself.
If the representatives of the Palestinian Arab population in Judea, Samaria and Gaza will come to the negotiating table cognizant not only of the rights and aspirations of the population that will have freely chosen them, but also aware of Israel's rights and legitimate concerns, there is an excellent chance that negotiations will lead to agreement. Moreover, the democratic experience not as yet prevalent in the Middle East will no doubt serve as an example to all nations of the region. That in itself will be an important contribution to peace in the area, because war and terrorism do not flourish in democratic societies. I urge all member nations of this Organization to lend their support to Israel's continuing efforts to end warfare and bloodshed in the Middle East.
I call on the representatives of Algeria, Bahrain, Djibouti, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, Mauritania, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, the United Arab Emirates, the Yemen Arab Republic and the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen to utilize the opportunity of our presence at the United Nations General Assembly and to meet with me to discuss how we can move from belligerency to peace, and from hostility to friendship.
I call on the Palestinian Arab population in Judea, Samaria and Gaza to desist from violent acts and to make every effort to help establish the conditions that will permit the holding of free, democratic elections.
The peace process in the Middle East requires courage, patience and perseverance. We in Israel are dedicated to the peace process. We shall continue to pursue it despite all obstacles. We expect your support.
﻿
It is a great pleasure to see a distinguished leader such as Ambassador Garba presiding over this Assembly. We have come to know him well from contacts between New Zealand and Nigeria, and we are confident that the Assembly is in very good hands.
I last attended the General Assembly in 1985. I was then the Deputy Prime Minister of a recently elected Labour Government. I spoke on behalf of New Zealand in the general debate during the fortieth session. That year, of course, we celebrated the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations.
We all spoke with pride and enthusiasm about the Charter. We analysed its potential and looked at what had been achieved in the United Nations system over 40 years. And it was true much had been accomplished. But we all knew in our heart of hearts that despite the praise, the plaudits and the peace, it threatened to be a hollow anniversary.
The failure to make progress on nuclear disarmament had distorted the fabric of international life. Seemingly intractable conflicts proliferated in many parts of the world. The peace-keeping machinery of the United Nations lay almost dormant and apparently dismissed. In our own region, the South Pacific, we watched anxiously the process of decolonisation and self-determination in New Caledonia, where violence seemed imminent. Sadly, these fears proved well founded. In South Africa, the regime in Pretoria continued year by year its unremitting and abhorrent practice of apartheid and its illegal occupation of Namibia. In 1985 there was all too much evidence that respect for international law and the basic norms of the United Nations Charter were being ignored. We saw the International Court being treated with cynical disdain. There was a steady erosion of State willingness to accept the rule of law and compulsory jurisdiction. New Zealand itself, in 1985, had been the victim of an unlawful act of force during the Rainbow Warrior incident. I was obliged to draw that incident to the Assembly's attention in some detail.
But times have changed. Four years later I am back in New York and I find a new picture. We have turned a corner. There have been encouraging signs concerning many of the intractable problems that we faced in 1985. It is a matter of enormous satisfaction to New Zealand that the United Nations, has been a key component in these developments. Even in the darkest days of cynicism about the United Nations, New Zealand stood up and spoke out in support of the United Nations, the Charter principles and the rule of law. We applaud what has happened and what is continuing to happen. Let me cite some examples.
In the area of peace-keeping, we see the United Nations proving what can be done, with hard-won progress in the conflict between Iran and Iraq. In southern Africa, a very important step has been taken in Namibia. New Zealand is pleased to have been able to contribute personnel to United Nations forces in both those situations, and also in Afghanistan. In the Pacific, we see grounds for hope in New Caledonia. We look forward to a genuine act of self-determination in accordance with United Nations principles.
On disarmament, we have also seen a marked change in the atmosphere, in the attitudes of the two super-Powers. One major agreement has been achieved: the intermediate-nuclear-forces Treaty. Other agreements, on strategic nuclear forces and conventional forces, are being negotiated. We in New Zealand appreciate the complexities of these negotiations. We applaud what has been achieved and what is being done. But our message must continue to be put bluntly: Do not return to the snail's pace of the 1970s and early 1980s. Deep cuts in strategic weapons and conventional forces are urgent. We have a historical opportunity that may not come again for a very long time. If the momentum slows and the moment is lost, history and all humanity will judge those responsible very harshly indeed.
I also have to say quite plainly that we remain disappointed that the United Nations plays a less than central role in key disarmament negotiations. The United Nations must be a primary forum for the discussion of disarmament issues and the eventual negotiation of disarmament treaties. New Zealand, together with Australia, has a special interest in promoting, through the United Nations system, progress towards a comprehensive test ban. We again urge in the strongest terms that the powerful few reconsider our resolution with an open mind.
New Zealand has a particularly well known position on the question of nuclear weapons. I want to reiterate what I said to the Assembly in 1985:
"We have ... declared unambiguously that we do not want any country to defend New Zealand with nuclear weapons ..„ We will not have any nuclear weapons on our territory." (A/40/PV.7, p. 66) Since 1985 this policy has attracted widespread public support in New Zealand. This support continues to grow. It is clearly reflected in public opinion polls. New Zealand is, and will remain, a nuclear-weapon-free State. Consistent with that position we urge, in the strongest terms, that nuclear testing and nuclear weapons themselves be eliminated at the earliest possible date.
Another field in which we have observed significant developments in recent years is the rule of international law. It was a matter of great encouragement to many small countries when last year, in the Assembly, President Gorbachev announced that the Soviet Union was adopting a new policy towards the International Court of Justice. We also warmly welcome the fact that the Foreign Ministers of the Non-Aligned Movement, at their meeting at The Hague in July, began a constructive analysis of the Court and the role of international law. These developments went further and were reinforced by the welcome news of the recent agreement between the United States and the Soviet Union on the compulsory settlement of disputes in the fields of drug trafficking and terrorism. New Zealand urges all countries to review their positions on compulsory jurisdiction and the settlement of disputes by third-party mechanisms. In this context I would also refer to the variety of roles that the Secretary-General can play to resolve disputes.
I should also like to acknowledge in this Hall the people in the United Nations system who have done so much to ensure the progress made over the past few years. I do not mean only the staff that supports meetings here and in Geneva. I remember also the unseen United Nations employees and volunteers who work in the field, often in very dangerous environments and suffering considerable hardship, negotiating cease-fires, organizing peace-keeping forces, serving in peace-keeping operations and running emergency relief and development assistance programmes. I want them to know that the people of New Zealand welcome and appreciate their very real contributions.
It would be tempting at this point to conclude that the United Nations is in good shape, that things are all headed in the right direction and that we can all go home feeling good about what we have achieved. But that is not the case. The United Nations system is still struggling with major problems. The evil of apartheid is still with us. We have not done enough to reduce poverty and indebtedness. Political solutions still elude us in the Middle East and Cambodia. But I have to tell the Assembly that, in New Zealand's assessment, a much larger
problem has crept up on the world's leaders. It has caught us unawares. The problem I refer to is the health of the planet Earth itself.
I know that the United Nations has not ignored the environment. Mr. Tolba and his staff in the United Nations Environment Programme have laboured valiantly. They have had real success on ozone depletion with the Montreal Protocol and, more recently, with the Helsinki Declaration. We in New Zealand have worked very hard indeed to support their efforts, end we shall continue to do so.
The general debate is itself demonstrating the growing international concern about the global environment. Action is under way in other parts of the United Nations system as well. A major United Nations conference on environment and development is scheduled for 1992, and it will offer a timely opportunity to take stock of the measures necessary to protect planet Earth.
New Zealand strongly endorsed the decision of the UNEP Governing Council in May this year to identify, in preparation for the 1992 conference, the eight critical global environmental problems: atmospheric degradation, fresh-water limitations, pollution of the oceans, deforestation and the others. 1 also want to acknowledge the work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. It is proving to be a very useful and effective mechanism, and New Zealand is playing an active role in its work.
All these measures are consuming a great deal of time and energy. Environmental statements, seminars and conferences have become the political flavour of the month. But it sometimes seems that a lot of talk takes the place of action.
The 1992 conference will give us an ideal chance to prove to all the doubters and denigrators of the United Nations the real worth of the Organization. Our efforts in the coming weeks must be focused and they must be effective. We need vision, courage and action on the environment, not just talk. I want to ask some hard questions.
Politicians are sometimes accused of getting on the green bandwagon because it is politically safe, simplistic and relatively cost-free. But I want to put it to the Assembly that anyone here who believes that environment issues are a soft option is sadly misguided. The global environmental crisis is real. Human development has altered the global ecosystem in which we live. We have been taking the good out of the air, the sea and the land and putting back poison. For most of human history the impact was so slight as to barely affect the balance. But in the last 50 years humanity has wrought havoc on this Earth. We have suddenly come to the knowledge that we can affect the ecological balance very seriously. More frighteningly, we have discovered that the balance has already been changed. The question now is, have we damaged our planet beyond repair? Can we get back to equilibrium? Can we arrest the process of change? The jury, of course, is still out on these questions. If the answer is that the change is irreversible, the ultimate effects could be just as catastrophic for humanity as global nuclear war.
I saw a cartoon recently. It pictured some aliens from outer space landing on a ravaged Earth where human life had ceased. One alien says to the other, "It's too bad. They just achieved general and complete disarmament and some hole in the ozone layer got them".
The message I have for the United Nations system is that we must look urgently at our priorities and our institutions. We must give real priority to the problems of the environment. We must give them attention at least equal to that which we devote to the political and security issues which have mesmerized the United Nations system and Governments for so long.
Degradation of the environment is a problem that threatens out security every bit as gravely as the arms race. It affects everyone. But we must recognize that, unlike the issue of nuclear disarmament, where a few very powerful countries have control of the means of destruction, every country in the United Nations, no matter how small, contributes in some way to the threat of environmental destruction. All contribute? all suffer. Pollution recognizes no political boundaries. It is therefore beyond any doubt a problem for the United Nations.
	
Of course, not every country is equally responsible, and not every country stands to be equally or as rapidly affected. Sometimes the innocent will suffer more than the guilty. It is a fact that more than 80 per cent of the greenhouse gases are produced by a small group of economically privileged countries. It is also a fact that the contribution of the developed world to the depletion of the ozone layer is overwhelming. New Zealand understands the anxiety these facts cause to the peoples of the developing world.
We are especially conscious of the plight of the countries of the South Pacific. Last year I represented New Zealand at the South Pacific Forum meeting. We discussed climate change and the disastrous impact of possible sea-level rises. Imagine being the President or leader of an atoll country in the Pacific, such as Tuvalu or Kiribati or Tokelau, and learning that the effluent and by-products of other people's development not only threaten sustainable development in your small island country but indeed threaten to submerge every bit of land on which your people live. Small island communities in the Caribbean and Indian Ocean face similar problems. Pollution could literally wipe them off the face of the Earth.
Or imagine representing one of the countries in the South Pacific with few or no natural resources other than the fish in the ocean. You discover that foreign fishermen from outside the region have begun to use in your region a fishing technology not used there before, a technology which threatens to collapse the albacore tuna fishery which is of vital economic importance to the coastal States of the region.
I am speaking of the "wall of death": the enormous drift-nets which in the last few years have been employed in the South Pacific by distant water fishermen. The technology is not new in itself. What is new, and what, makes it quite unacceptable, is a new technique for the use of drift-nets. This involves several vessels working in co-operation, each deploying a series of very long nets. Each net can be up to 50 kilometres in length. Each vessel sets a number of these nets in a very long line across the ocean. They sometimes cover thousands of kilometres of ocean. In the North Pacific, at the height of the season, an estimated 50,000 kilometres of drift-nets are set nightly. They then drift, literally like a wall of death. They catch and kill, like a vacuum cleaner, virtually every living creature, including some endangered species, that comes in contact with them.
The indiscriminate nature of the catch makes this an unacceptable fishing technology. Turtles, whales, dolphins, birds: all are trapped and killed. Large percentages of the catch are lost or wasted when the nets are recovered. In the North Pacific, drift-net fishing has seriously damaged valuable salmon stocks.
I have to say that this technology was rejected unanimously by the countries of the South Pacific. In July of this year at the South Pacific Forum meeting at Tarawa, South Pacific Heads of Government adopted a Declaration condemning the practice of large-scale drift-net fishing. But "wall-of-death" fishing is not just a moral problem. It is a legal, political and economic problem, and has global implications. Freedom of the high seas cannot be invoked to protect what is in effect a systematic assault on the regional marine ecosystem. There was a time when some argued that freedom of the high seas legitimised unacceptable and illegal practices. But customary international law has responded over the years to outlaw unreasonable and repugnant practices. At the present time, international law is again responding to the unacceptable and unreasonable use of the high seas for drift-net fishing.
There is already some evidence of the international community's response to this unreasonable use of the high seas. Many Pacific island States, including New Zealand, have already taken action to outlaw the practice in their domestic regulations and in their 200-mile acres. The Declaration was vigorously supported only four weeks ago at the South Pacific Conference on Nature and Conservation of Protected Areas. It will be reinforced and codified later this year when the South Pacific countries adopt a regional convention to prevent "wall-of-death" fishing in our region.
I want to make it clear that what is troubling the South Pacific nations is not the practice of small-scale in-shore use of drift-nets of limited size, which are used by various developing countries. Our concern is with the new and highly destructive phenomenon of very long pelagic drift-nets. The Tarawa Declaration called on the international community to support the position of the South Pacific countries on drift-netting. We have asked the Secretary-General to circulate the Tarawa Declaration as a United Nations document for the information of all delegations.
The South Pacific will be vigorously pursuing this issue bilaterally, regionally and globally. We will be proceeding in a dispassionate, rational and reasonable way. But those who engage in this ecologically irresponsible activity should be in no doubt that the techniques they use are unacceptable wherever they are used. New Zealand looks to the United Nations to support the Tarawa Declaration. Resolutions in the United Nations system to combat drift-netting are inevitable if these practices are not phased out quickly. New Zealand, in close co-operation with the South Pacific countries and other Members of the United Nations who have declared their abhorrence of the new drift-net technology, will be pursuing this issue within the United Nations system. At the present session opportunities exist under agenda items before several Committees of this Assembly.
We note that the Government of the Republic of Korea has temporarily halted drift-net fishing in the South Pacific. That is welcome. We also welcome the decision by Japan in the past few weeks to reduce its drift-net fishing fleet. This is a step in the right direction. But a cessation of this fishing technique is the only ecologically acceptable solution. Only Taiwan has yet to respond to the concerns of the Pacific countries on this matter. We urge all concerned to act quickly. Indeed, the state of our global fisheries is a good example of the broader' environmental problems that our planet is facing.
There is really only one international measure regulating fisheries that proceeds on acceptably sound ecosystem principles. That is the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine and Living Resources. In this connection, I would remind the Assembly of the important and valuable environmental protection measures that have been achieved under the Antarctic Treaty, and note that further significant steps will be sponsored by New Zealand at the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in Paris next week. The Antarctic Treaty is an effective institution. We are making it even more effective in the environmental field. It is an institution that should be supported by the United Nations General Assembly.
Even 20 years ago it was generally assumed that the fish in the open sea were inexhaustible. In general, anyone could go fishing without limitation. Yet we all now know that the biomass of any fishery can easily be over fished. We face a situation where the world's fishing capacity may already be close to, or in excess of, sustainable yield from the commercial fisheries in the world's oceans. We are technically capable of catching fish faster than they can breed. Fishing rights are therefore tightly regulated and licensed. Will we soon have to apply to our atmosphere regulatory principles similar to those we are now applying to out fisheries.
I have to say that, if this is the case, then the example we have set with our fisheries is a frightening one. Drift-netting is simply the latest in a long history of irresponsible fishing practices. It is just as well that humanity has not depended on fisheries alone for its survival. The record of international fisheries management is such a sorry one that, if that had been the case, whole populations would have long since perished in the wake of collapsed fisheries.
But the reality is that there is no alternative atmosphere to breathe. There is only one global climate. We must do better than the halting attempts at fisheries conservation in that respect. I have some very specific and challenging thoughts about where we go from here to deal with the problems of the global environment generally.
The intimate connection between the global environment and the global economy is beyond dispute. It does not need to be argued here. The conclusion of the Brundtland report that development only makes sense if it is sustainable has been widely recognized.

The concept of sustainable development is, in its own right, an enormous challenge for the international community. But we must add to that challenge the need to address the disturbances that have been caused to the natural ecosystems. The ozone layer is already seriously depleted. Disposal of hazardous and toxic wastes has become a global threat through dumping in the oceans. We have already witnessed unacceptable attempts to pay developing countries to accept a role as waste receivers. Acid rain and desertification threaten economic progress on several continents, reforestation is limiting the environment's capacity to heal itself and, more importantly, our atmosphere and our climate itself are threatened. Restoring the equilibrium, in all of these areas is going to involve quite significant impacts on the global economy.
I do not believe that the full extent of those impacts is yet appreciated by the general public in any of our countries. It is time that ordinary people everywhere stopped and thought for a moment. It is time to acknowledge that we are all adding to the environmental problems every day and that there are no free rides. In the end, we are all going to have to contribute to the solutions, and this will require a major change of attitude all over the world.
In this connection I want to pay tribute to the foresight shown by the Prime Ministers of the Netherlands, France and Norway, who in March this year brought together 24 Heads of government to consider the solutions. I was privileged to represent New Zealand at that meeting. We adopted the Hague Declaration. That document called for the development of some very new and important principles to protect the global environment.
What then does all this mean in practice? The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and its Working Groups are focusing on that issue in a great deal of detail. But it seems to me that there are two very clear messages for the future: first, if effective measures are to be taken to reduce greenhouse emissions some quite radical economic measures will be required. Secondly, as is clearly spelt out in the Hague Declaration, some major institutional changes are going; to be required. As to economic measures, these will prove particularly radical for some economic theorists in many countries, including New Zealand. As many of you will know, my Government has drastically reformed the New Zealand economy. We have eliminated subsidies, deregulated commercial activity and reversed the stultifying effects of unnecessary governmental intervention in the economy. And it has proved to be good economic medicine.
But it is abundantly clear from the evidence of environmental impacts that the definition of "necessary governmental intervention" is going to have to change. Indeed, in New Zealand we have already begun to implement interventions co protect the global environment. The first step was the implementation of the Montreal Protocol in 1988. As a second step, I will shortly be putting before our Parliament legislation going beyond the Montreal Protocol. By 1994 we shall reduce consumption of chlorofluorocarbons to only 5 per cent of 1986 levels, and we shall phase them out altogether by the year 2000. Thirdly, to address our national policies for resource management, I have commissioned the complete overhaul of our law relating to land use, water use, minerals, pollution and hazardous substances, legislation radically reforming all these areas will be submitted to our Parliament before the end of the year. The New Zealand Government will make sustainable development the guiding principle behind decision-making in each of these areas.
But it is clear that these interventions will be insignificant by comparison with what will be required to combat the greenhouse effect. I am aware that there are still many unknowns relating to the greenhouse effect, but the evidence overwhelmingly points to the need to act.
Effective action will require measures to reduce carbon dioxide and other industrial emissions. We shall have to look at ways to encourage measures of reforestation that absorb carbon dioxide. We shall have to look at energy use, and that will have spin-off implications for economic activity and development throughout all our economies.
But there are solutions as well as problems. Radical improvements in energy efficiency and energy conservation make sense economically as well as environmentally. But these alone will not be enough. The United Nations may even need to consider the possibility that, within the limitations of present technology, if development is to be sustainable, it must be rationed - in other words, that humanity has reached the point in history where sustainable development is only possible if "rights to pollute" are allocated according to agreed criteria. New Zealand would be the first to acknowledge that this proposition is a frightening one, and it is all the more frightening because of its potential impacts on the aspirations of the developing world for economic and social development.
New Zealand understands that we cannot solve global environmental problems unless we can work simultaneously and in a co-ordinated fashion to eradicate poverty. Sustainable development, in its true sense, will require action: to relieve debt burdens; to liberalize multilateral trade; and to promote flows of development assistance without extra conditions. The burdens of improving the global environment must be shared by us all, and they must be shared fairly. That means that some who are already at higher stages of development will have to carry the greatest part of the burden.
So clearly we are facing an immensely complex negotiating task. It involves balancing a wide range of technical, scientific and political judgements and meshing them with international economic, trade and aid policies. This is a task which requires the most delicate and co-ordinated oversight. Almost by definition it is beyond the mandate of any existing institution.
That brings me to my second major point - institutional reform. We are conscious that a number of proposals have been canvassed in recent times for institutional reform. They range from a new form of Security Council to an ad hoc institution with limited scope and a limited mandate. We are also conscious that existing machinery, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN), and others, must be given the room and support necessary to achieve their functions while we are discussing the institutional reforms of the future.
We accept that reform will have to be evolutionary. But a United Nations declaration on the environment may be needed, and in our view we need a vision that is clear and cogent, because if by 1992 existing institutions are not coping adequately, the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development will need to address squarely the key issue of institutional reform. I have no doubt the issue will not go away. It will have to be faced. In New Zealand's judgement, the traditional response of international law, developing international legal standards in small incremental steps, each of which must subsequently be ratified by all countries, is no longer appropriate to deal with the highly complex environmental problems of the future.
The time has come for something more innovative, for a conceptual leap forward in institutional terms. And we see the need for the establishment of a new organ in the United Nations system - perhaps it could be called the "Environmental Protection Council". The United Nations already has a Security Council. We also have an Economic and Social Council and a Trusteeship Council. We have two chapters of the United Nations Charter on the settlement of disputes and the maintenance of peace. We have a chapter laying down the rules and principles with respect to Non-Self-Governing Territories. I have no doubt that if the Charter were being drawn up today, there would be widespread support for including among the organs of the United Nations a body empowered to take binding decisions on global environmental issues. In our view, nothing less than an institution with this status will command the necessary respect and authority to achieve what is required.
Perhaps the most effective way to achieve this would be through the inclusion in the United Nations Charter of a new chapter dealing with the environment. Another option would be a major declaration of principle adopted by the United Nations. But we do not envisage any new body replacing UNEP. Far from it. UNEP brings together vital scientific and technical expertise. It has demonstrated both skill and ability in constructing and implementing programmes to analyse global issues and to support operational activities at the regional level. This is a vital function. Not only must it continue, but UNEP's role of developing scientific, technical and policy advice must be enhanced. UNEP may need to be built in as an integral part of the new structure. The missing institutional link, however, is the equivalent of a legislature. We would envisage the new environmental protection council becoming the point in the United Nations system which links the streams of economic and environmental advice. It would perform the function that currently falls between the cracks in the mandates of all the existing organizations. It would have responsibility for taking co-ordinated decisions on sustainable policies for global environmental protection. It would be empowered to take binding decisions. And if decisions are to be binding, the membership of the Council may need to be very wide - perhaps including all Members of the United Nations. But the key thing is that it should have power to act - not just to talk. The time is coming for a bold new step in developing the structures of the United Nations. We must show that the United Nations is ready to meet new challenges and meet them by changing itself to cope with the needs of humanity in the course of the next century.
In 1945, the present Charter was born out of the conviction that the horrors of the Second World War must never be repeated. The environmental challenge which we now face may be every bit as devastating for humanity. Let us hope that we have learned from the past and that it will prove possible to put in place effective institutions now, rather than repeat the sad experience of the League of Nations, a well-meaning but inadequate institution. If we wait for the aftermath of an ecological disaster, it may be too late.
May I conclude with a quotation from one of my predecessors, Prime Minister Peter Fraser, who in his statement at San Francisco, on 1 May 1945, at the adoption of the present Charter, had this to say:
"The failure of the League of Nations, one of the noblest conceptions in the history of mankind, was a moral failure on the part of the individual members, and was not due to any fundamental defect of the machinery of the League. [It] failed because its members would not perform what they undertook to perform. It failed because of the recession that took place in public morality ... It failed because the rule of expediency replaced that of moral principles.
"I would therefore stress that unless in the future we have the moral rectitude end determination to stand by our engagements and our principles, then ... this new organization will avail us nothing, the sufferings and the sacrifices our people have endured will avail us nothing, and the countless lives of those who have died in this struggle for security and freedom will have been sacrificed in vain."
These words are a solemn reminder to us all that in the end it is not only a question of institutions, of conventions and protocols. It is, in the final analysis, the scourge of pollution, like the scourge of war, that can arid will destroy us unless we are willing to put principle above expediency. Strong medicine is called for a sick planet. We have no choice. And if we take no action, we will have no future.
﻿My task as head of the delegation of the Soviet Union to the General Assembly has been greatly facilitated by two fundamental statements made by Mikhail S. Gorbachev concerning the place and role of the United Nations in building new international relations at this crucial stage of world development for mankind, at time when it is moving out of the cold war into a period of peace in its development and affirming a new political order resting on a comprehensive approach to security.
The profound analytical report of Mr. Perez de Cuellar on the work of our Organization over the past year has impressed us with its convincing evidence of the expansion of the role of the United Nations as a global peace-maker. Addressing the Assembly, its new President, the representative of Nigeria, Mr. Garba, also referred to that.
The heads of many delegations have put forward some far-reaching and original ideas at this session. Yesterday we listened with close attention to the statement of President George Bush of the United States, which, in our view, contained a number of very important and interesting ideas.
As always, during these days of the General Assembly's regular session representatives of the world community have together been recreating a panorama of the past year in the life of mankind. Its overriding idea is that of peace and security, its ideal composition is harmony of universal human values and national interests.
In making our own national contribution to this grand agreement each of us, I am
sure, wants it to become a part of an organic and unitary whole. Unfortunately, in some places the overall composition is still marred by cracks that impair its integrity. Over the past 12 months we have seen a rather contradictory picture of the state of the world.
Of course, the central concept remains the same and the theme, a product of mankind's thought and suffering, as we were appropriately reminded by the fiftieth anniversary of the outbreak of the Second World War, has not changed: it is the piloting of our common ark towards a new shore and our common desire to chart its course so as to avoid a storm that might destroy it. Nevertheless, there have been some new developments which have aroused concern. It is not just that the ship of the world has not yet negotiated the dangerous straits; it is encountering new threats that could give it a critical lurch.
The twentieth century has released the tremendous energy of nations and peoples, and this has become a major factor in the development of universal civilization. It is capable of and has been working miracles by extricating entire national communities from backwardness and poverty in what is historically an amazingly brief span of time. It is adding to the mosaic of the world more and
more bright and clear-cut elements of progress and prosperity. However, the same national energy, when it takes the form of inflated egotism and self-interest, often makes for aggression and expansion, a grasping for one's own good at the expense of others.
Here the problem of the self-defence of nations arises, the problem of their Physical survival, preserving their unique historical and cultural identities. Action provokes counteraction, which assumes some highly ambivalent forms. Centrifugal tendencies are prevailing over centripetal ones, thus upsetting the balance of world relationships, which is so hard to build.
This diverts the focus of our attention from traditional international issues to domestic and inter-ethnic conflicts. It has now become quite clear that internal strife in some countries extends the process of their destabilization to vast areas and that regional upheavals convulse the whole world. Lebanon is a case in point. It is often much easier to resolve the external issues in a settlement than to deal with its internal conditions, and this is clearly evident in Afghanistan and Cambodia.
Today the notion of "inside the country" often has a bearing on that of "outside". The trouble, however, is that the isolated fragments of the world which yearn for a better life fail to see beyond the mountain ridges, jungles, dunes and other features of their own national landscapes, the threat to their own existence, that might objectively result from such a fragmented view. Equally, those who want to prosper at the expense of others do not see that their own existence is also threatened.
This leads us to the question of the responsibility of the part vis-à-vis the whole and of nations vis-à-vis mankind. This places on our agenda the problem of harmonizing universal and national interests.
Some clarifications and explanations are in order here.
The supremacy of universal human values and observance of universal rules of the world community are the imperatives of our time. The objective requirements of the age we live in, its trends, character and circumstances leave mankind no other choice but to reject the traditional polarization. This is the axiom which underlies both the concept and the practical policies of the new thinking. Of course, it cannot resolve the existing contradictions overnight, but as a start it can alleviate them.
On the question of the primacy of universal human values, we are also implying the mature readiness of nations to accept this. Where that maturity has not yet been attained, and where the national idea is being juxtaposed with the common interest, domestic conflicts directly complement and impel global destructive processes.
Now I should like to stress this: freedom of choice continues to crown the hierarchy of a nation's supreme values. Every nation is free to choose the ways and means of its own development, but to do so in a responsible manner. It must not lock itself in the dark rooms of national selfishness or ignore the interests of other peoples and of the entire community of nations. Freedom does not mean irresponsibility towards others, for in the final analysis that would mean irresponsibility towards oneself.
The time has finally come to realize that not all means are good for attaining even the most noble ends.
The international community has become aware of the danger of narcotics traffic, of terrorism, it condemns and outlaws both phenomena. We need equally determined action against any kind of violence, whatever the motives or excuses for it. Violence by the State against its own people must be totally excluded. Violence on national, ethnic or religious grounds can no longer be tolerated.
To repeat, we advocate freedom of choice. However, we reject its interpretation as the licence to use any means, to commit any violence or to shed blood. Freedom must not be sought at the expense of others. No support or sympathy should be extended to so-called movements that countenance actions"
humiliating to other nations or use terrorist, barbaric and inhuman methods in waging their struggle. It is to be deplored that. 50 years after the Second World War. some politicians have begun to forget its lessons. Let us remember that political and ideological differences did not prevent Comments and nations from joining forces to defend universal human values from nazism and fascism. The dividing line in that battle was drawn not by ideology but by the rules of and attitudes towards morality. The Soviet Union, the United States. Great Britain and other countries and peoples found themselves in the same camp and. fighting side by side, saved civilization.
Fascism, which started the war is the extreme and ugliest form of nationalism and chauvinism. German nazism marched under the banner of revanchism. Now that the forces of revanchism are again becoming active and are seeking to revise and destroy the post-war realities in Europe, it is our duty to warn those who, wittingly or unwittingly, are encouraging those forces. The revanchist movement is dangerous and inimical to the march of peace, to which President Bush referred here yesterday.
While expressing respect for healthy national movements, let me refer to one modern concept of nationhood. it defines a nation as a collective personality, endowed with certain rights, in many respects similar to and even sometimes identical with individual human rights. But there are no rights without responsibilities, either for the individual or for the State.
It is the mission of the United Nations to promote among the world's peoples the idea of the interdependence of national aspirations and the common good of mankind, and to encourage nations to behave responsibly. This fundamental position of the Soviet Union is clearly reflected in our bilateral contacts. Relations between the Soviet Union and the United states Provide the best illustration of this. I will permit myself to touch upon the  United States-Soviet dialogue only because I am convinced that its importance far transcends the frontiers of the two States.  In the view of the Soviet leadership, this is not a kind of privilege but a clearly understood responsibility towards the world community. Therefore my account of the results of our talks with President Bush and Secretary of State Baker is my report to you.
These talks demonstrated increasing awareness by both sides of the need to co-operate for the benefit of mankind and growing confidence that such co-operation, such interaction, is possible.
Agreement to hold a meeting of the top leaders of the Soviet Union and the United States shows that we have moved far ahead in solving a number of major bilateral and international problems. Extraordinary efforts at the highest level will be needed to attain the goal of concluding treaties.
I am referring in particular to the preparation of the agreement on 50 per cent reductions in strategic offensive arms. We have proposed to the United States side options for resolving the key issues in that agreed: the Treaty on the Limitation of Anti-ballistic Missile Systems, space, and long-range sea-launched cruise missiles. Our partners have accommodated us on mobile intercontinental ballistic missiles. Positions on other outstanding problems have come closer to each other. In our view, by the time the summit meeting is held next year, in late spring or early summer, we may have passed the last turn on the road towards a treaty reducing strategic offensive arms. This is a real prospect. The protocols to the 1974 and 1976 Treaties on nuclear explosions could also be signed at the summit meeting so that they could enter into force very soon thereafter. We are confident that the summit meeting will give a powerful impetus to the talks on major reductions in the armed forces and conventional armaments in Europe.
We welcome the proposal concerning chemical weapons put forward yesterday by President Bush. Generally consistent with the initiatives of the Soviet leadership, it indicates to us that we share the desire to rid mankind of these barbaric weapons. The Soviet Union is ready, together with the United States, to go further and assume mutual obligations prior to the conclusion of a multilateral convention: cease the production of chemical weapons, as we have already done - I am referring here also to binary weapons, on a bilateral basis, radically reduce or completely destroy Soviet and United States chemical weapons, regarding this as a step towards the global destruction of chemical weapons: renounce the use of chemical weapons under any circumstances, institute rigorous verification of the cessation of the production and the elimination of chemical warfare agents. I think there is no need to say how beneficial all this would be for the overall world climate.
In addition to the problems of security, the Soviet-United States agenda encompasses issues of humanitarian cooperation, regional topics and joint efforts in the fields of the environment and economic development, reflecting the process that brings together national and universal concerns. We are more aware today than ever before that Soviet-United States relations cannot be built outside the global context, divorced from the problems concern to all mankind.
Our discussions in Washington and Wyoming have moved us ahead in our efforts to bridge the continuing gap between the attitudes to one's own good and the attitudes to the common good. Much remains to be done, however, to alleviate the disparities of political objectives, for such disparities endanger all of us.
Let us examine the situation, taking nuclear weapons as an example. Why are they dangerous? Not only because of their sheer destructive power. They are unacceptable because they widen the chasm between national and universal interests. The equality of nations and the unity of the world become empty talk when someone's national selfishness is driven by the idea of nuclear supremacy over the world, camouflaged as national security interests.
I would say that the world community has as yet no reason for complacency or euphoria. The nuclear threat has only been reduced by the Soviet-United States Treaty eliminating intermediate and shorter-range missiles.
We believe that reliance on nuclear weapons does not serve anyone's national interests. It is also an obstacle in the way of more democratic international relations. Only the complete elimination of nuclear capabilities would help to attain real security.

The advocates of nuclear deterrence do not believe this will be possible in the foreseeable future. They respond with concepts of so-called minimum nuclear deterrence. In our view, that is a step forward, if only a timid one, a step that can be taken. But first we must define what we mean by minimum nuclear deterrence and what capabilities should be considered sufficient.
The Soviet Union proposes that those questions be discussed at a meeting of representatives of the nuclear Powers and the States on whose territories nuclear weapons are placed. Of course, the persistence of the concepts of nuclear deterrence is due not only to the undue emphasis placed on national rights and interests at the expense of obligations, but also to the lack of trust. The problem should not be easily dismissed. What is the way out of these vicious circles? It lies in affirming glasnost and openness and in building a wide-ranging infrastructure of pervasive verification. If we do need to deter each other, let deterrence be transparent and verifiable.
To that end, the Soviet Union is proposing that all nuclear Powers conclude multilateral agreements on measures to reduce the risk of the outbreak of nuclear war. Detailed discussions to work out such an agreement could be held in consultations among the permanent members of the Security Council.
In the same context, we wish to raise once again the problem of the cessation and prohibition of nuclear tests. This is the question of questions. Why are we still unable to put an end to such tests despite the express will of the overwhelming majority of nations? Because there are those who want to maintain their superiority at any cost.
Guided by its obligations to the world community, the Soviet Union has revised its nuclear-testing programme by reducing the number and yield of explosions.
Let me point out, however, that the efforts of one State are not sufficient for a comprehensive solution to this problem. We see a number of possibilities here. First of all, the USSR is ready to reinstate its moratorium on all nuclear explosions on any day and at any hour if the United States reciprocates. Secondly, it is time finally to end the procedural impasse at the Conference on Disarmament and start concrete discussions there on the problem of a complete test ban. Thirdly, as one possible way of achieving such a ban, we are now considering the possibility of extending the 1963 Treaty to cover underground nuclear explosions. There is an urgent need for a verifiable cessation of the production of fissionable material for weapons purposes. We have declared that this year we are ceasing the production of enriched uranium, that in 1987 we closed down one reactor producing weapons-grade plutonium, and that we plan to close down in 1989 and 1990 a few more such reactors. By the year 2000 all remaining reactors will have been shut down.
In addition, the Soviet Union is proposing that all nuclear Powers should begin preparing to conclude an agreement on the cessation and prohibition of the Production of such material. We believe that in the verification of compliance with the agreement the vast experience of applying International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safeguards could prove useful.
It would seem that even the way the Second World War began ought to have made clear that weapons do not guarantee security - the more weapons there are, the greater the danger of aggression. And yet for the 45 post-war years security has been sought in the arms race. It is only today that we are beginning to understand the need for a fundamentally different concept of security in Europe, a security that relies increasingly on political means and, only as insurance, on the necessary minimum of armaments.
The Vienna accord heralded a new European situation, opening up broad vistas for humanitarian cooperation and exchanges of people, ideas and information. It holds out the prospect that the European idea will rest itself on a foundation of trust and openness. But the groundwork has to be prepared for that by clearing the continent of excessive quantities of arms. That work has begun.
When the negotiators do not consign their responsibilities to the back rooms, when they sincerely want to strike a balance between their interests and those of their partners, progress is always achieved. One example is the Vienna talks between the Warsaw Treaty countries and the countries of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) on reducing armed forces and conventional armaments in Europe.
In response to our alliance's initiative the NATO countries have made some meaningful proposals, which go a long way towards accommodating the positions of the Warsaw Treaty countries. In parallel talks between the countries participating in the European process to develop a qualitatively new generation of confidence- and security-building measures the Warsaw Treaty member countries have proposed a far-reaching approach calling for a comprehensive set of such measures, and extending them to air force and naval activities.
Reverting to the topic of the obligations of individual countries to the community, I feel it my duty to emphasize that reluctance to engage in active talks on reducing naval forces is a sign of neglect of those obligations. Leaving naval forces outside the process of reducing armed forces and armaments would be harmful to universal security. The problem of naval forces could be examined, for example, in special consultations to be attended by all States concerned and, above all, by major naval Powers. They would discuss mutual concerns in this sphere and would exchange views on the mechanism and ultimate objective of future negotiations and on how to move towards them step by step.
The dialectic of developments on the European continent urgently requires the starting of talks on tactical nuclear weapons. The situation does not appear to be deadlocked. Mutually acceptable solutions could be sought in an in-depth discussion of this whole range of issues between the USSR, the United States, the United Kingdom, France and the States where those weapons have been placed. If NATO countries agree to start talks on tactical nuclear weapons the USSR will respond with further unilateral cuts in its tactical nuclear missiles in Europe.
The problem of missile proliferation is also ripe for multilateral discussions. Nearly 20 countries possess such weapons, and the trend towards further geographical spread is still strong.
The approach to this issue could be two-pronged. Barriers could be erected which, first, would preclude the proliferation of combat missiles and associated technology across the globe, and, secondly, would not impinge on the legitimate interest of countries in gaining peaceful access to outer space.
No one in the world can yet bid farewell to arms, but we can abandon, once and for all - and we can do it now - the practice of unconstrained and uncontrolled international weapons transfers, lb that end the principles of glasnost and openness should be asserted here as well. The USSR reaffirms its willingness to participate in the establishment of a United Nations register of weapons sales and transfers, including work on parameters.
The time has come when the idea of preventing war is finding material expression in relations between the armed forces of a number of countries. A new peace-making instrument is being shaped by the Soviet-United States agreement on preventing dangerous military activities and by a series of agreements with the United States, the United Kingdom, West Germany and France on the prevention of incidents on the high seas. Along the same lines. Soviet Union and the People's Republic of China have agreed to start talks short!, on putting an end to their military standoff. The  Soviet union expresses the hope that other states too will engage in this process.
A civilised world is an open world. Breaking the seals on many secrets, the soviet union has revealed to the international community detailed data about all reductions in its armed forces and armaments, their strength, the size of its military budget, and so on.
We reaffirm here the position of the Soviet Union. Our ultimate goal is to have not a single Soviet soldier outside the country. But, speaking of equal responsibilities, let us roundly condemn the continuing encirclement of our country - and not only our country - by military bases of other states.
The soviet union attaches fundamental importance to a transition from individual measures of confidence-building, openness and glasnost in international affairs to a global policy of openness, which would become an integral part of comprehensive security and international peace. The President of the united States, Mr. Bush, has proposed the idea of open skies. We like that idea. In welcoming and supporting the initiative, the Soviet Union calls for the opening up and open space, only then shall  e attain absolute transparency and the necessary level of confidence.
While we duly include in the records of foreign policy such accomplishments as the Geneva Agreements on Afghanistan, the process of granting independence to Namibia, the termination of hostilities on the Iran-Iraq front, and the constructive dynamics in the dialogue on the problem of Cambodia, we cannot yet say that the positive trends are irreversible.
Let us pay a grateful tribute to this Organization for its peace-keeping operations. Let us recognize its unique role, which goes beyond simply localizing conflicts and achieves a qualitatively new level in ensuring stability in the world order. But today's world order is of a far broader category. We have firmly established economic security as one of its pillars.
The Soviet Union shares the entirely justified concern about, and it supports, measures to overcome the crisis in the world economy - measures that were proposed at the Belgrade summit meeting of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. There are a few who continue to dictate to the many the terms of their economic existence. The devotees of diktat should understand that perpetuation of the current situation is fraught with the danger of a catastrophe that would spare no one - and that is no exaggeration.
It would seem that the world of the rich has nothing to worry about since its economy is in good shape. It would seem also that the rich are beyond reproach since, ostensibly, their wealth breeds generosity. In 1988 the aggregate amount of the developed nations' assistance to the developing countries amounted to 3US 90 billion - an impressive sum indeed - but in the same year the developed nations received from the developed world $US 50 billion more in debt servicing and interest payments. That was the largest flow of capital in history from the poor to the rich man's pocket.
Thus the prosperity of the rich is achieved not without help from the poor. There is more to it, however, than this obvious injustice. Such disparities cannot for ever keep testing the strength of the world economy and world politics.
The health of the world economy is also being undermined by the enormous cost of military production, which siphons off vast material and intellectual resources from the civilian sector. Now that there is a prospect of limiting the military-industrial complexes, the problem of conversion has to be addressed. This can be done only by working together and relying on the experience of all States.
Before the very eyes of just one generation the sphere of politics has linked
up with environmental conservation to give mankind the science of political ecology. No one can master it alone, enchained in the fetter of narrow national interests.  
Political ecology requires urgent planetary decisions at the highest political level and the thorough internationalisation of national efforts through the United Nations, through consolidation of its leading environmental branch, the appropriate agency of this Organization. And, since we are speaking of a major component of international security. I would add that political ecology requires the involvement of the Security Council in solving problems and activating such tools as transparency and strict international monitoring.
The United Nations conference on environment and development, to be held in 1992, will undoubtedly be a watershed in establishing universal cooperation and working out a code of civilized ecological behaviour. We call for the holding of this conference at the level of Heads of State or Government.
Defining for itself the main principles of the concept of ecological security, the Soviet Union considers disarmament, the economy and ecology as an integral whole. While participating in implementing conservation strategies, the Soviet Union has programmes for speeding up the integration of its economy, on an equal and mutually beneficial basis, into the world economy, the modern international division of labour and international exchanges in science and technology. that
end we should like to participate actively in the work of international economic organizations and to establish contacts with the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, being convinced that our co-operation with them, as well as with the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations will be useful both for us and for the community as a whole.
In the building of new international relations, our foreign policy looks ahead to a positive evolution of today's world and to its stability. That orientation remains unchanged, even in the face of certain changes which affect our immediate interests and the interests of the community to which we have the honour to belong. But we remain faithful to our avowed principles and continue to affirm that nations' choices cannot and must not be overridden by force and that stability cannot be achieved by threatening the use of force or by intervention, blockade or other sanctions.
It is no secret that we were not enthusiastic about the Polish Communists' election set-back, nor should it be a secret that we hope they can overcome the crisis. Nevertheless, we see nothing threatening in the fact that a coalition Government has been formed, in accordance with the will of the Polish people, We are in no way prejudiced against that Government. We wish it every success and are ready to co-operate with it most actively.
Tolerance is the norm of civilized political behaviour. But if it is mandatory for us in our attitude towards the current Government of Poland, why are others so intolerant as regards, say, Cuba? And if a non-Communist Prime Minister is possible in a Socialist country, why should the appearance of a Communist as head of a Western Government be perceived as heresy? That is something we should not exclude either. The days of traditional demarcation lines are numbered. Only one line remains, to be pursued by all of us together moving to a common goal.
It is not the expression of popular will that threatens countries, but, rather, political and ideological intolerance, chauvinism and extremist excesses of imperial or nationalist mentalities. It is only when they engender violence and destabilize the life of countries and peoples that the machinery of legitimate defence must be activated.
However different may be our ideas of preferable ways of social development, we also have an overriding understanding of our common responsibility for the future of mankind and the survival of civilisation. We know that only together can we step beck from the brink, because an isolated island of development and prosperity would inevitably sink in the ocean of backwardness and poverty peoples and nations cannot be well when mankind is sick. 
There is only one way out of those fateful correlations. As we see it, it is for the world community to move consciously towards harmony between universal and national principles. It is difficult to attain, but it is possible because the collapse of the world is unthinkable. It is possible because we  all share a place where individual national efforts unite in a single "energy field".
The United Nations is that Place, it offers a forum for everybody to talk about his own country and its links with the rest of the world. I should like to take this opportunity to say a few words about my country.
We are building a new model of society, a new model of relations between Peoples and nations, a new model of socialism. As a great concept, socialism is by no means a spent force, indeed, it is revealing its humanistic potential in the bitter and often dramatic confrontation with the forces and flaws that are organically alien to it We in our country are not just repainting the facade, but are rebuilding the entire structure, in which the rules of living together must and will be based on the supremacy of law, people's power, openness to the outside world, inter-ethnic harmony and friendship.
In every sphere of the common life of our State and our people - the national economy, the political system and the people's intellectual endeavour - rejection of the ossified relics of the past goes hand in hand with the enthusiasm of new construction. Even though, in the words of a poet, we may have a gloomy day or two, we are confident that perestroika, which began as a revolution of hopes, will keep those hopes alive. Our people, our nation, will keep perestroika going, for it embodies the aspirations that they cherish.
Today, when some Cassandras hasten to make gloomy predictions, we make our own forecast. We want this historical optimism to be shared by all those who understand that the destiny of the world is inseparable from the future of our Perestroika. So we say to them: our determination to make it irreversible is matched by our belief in victory, a confidence grounded in the democratic institutions, which are ready to assert their genuine and full authority.
We are moving along that path guided by, not least, our awareness of the historic nature and magnitude of our goal, which we must attain ourselves, while not rejecting the support of the world community.
Believe me, we feel that support not only during the tragic days of natural disasters and national misfortunes. I say to representatives: it has been voiced in your statements at this Assembly, it manifests itself every day in your compatriots' generous gestures, their deeds and actions. So I ask you, the envoys of your Governments and nations, to convey to them our warm gratitude.
 
﻿I am honoured to address the General Assembly today at the beginning of its forty-fourth session. I should like to congratulate Joseph Garba of Nigeria, a distinguished diplomat, on his election as President of this session of the General Assembly, and I wish him success in his presidency.
I feel a great personal pleasure on this occasion, for this is a homecoming for both Barbara and me. The memories of my time here in 1971 and 1972 are still with me today - the human moments, the humorous moments that are part of even the highest undertaking.
With the Assembly's permission, I should like to share one story from one of the many meetings of the Security Council. I was the Permanent Representative of the United States, and I was 45 minutes late for the meeting. All 45 minutes were filled by the first speaker to take the floor, and when I walked in and took my seat the speaker paused, with great courtesy, and said: "I welcome the Permanent Representative of the United States. And now, for his benefit, I will start my speech all over again, from the beginning."
That is a true story, at that moment. differences of alliance and ideology didn't matter. The universal groan that went up around that table from every representative present, and the laughter that followed united us all. Today, I would like to begin by recognising - again, a personal privilege - the current Permanent Representatives with whom I served, Ambassador Dugersuren, Ambassador Martinez Ordonez. Ambassador Pabetafika and Permanent Observer Dube. It is wonderful to look around and see so any familiar faces - foreign ministers, members of the Secretariat, and delegates. Of course, the Secretary-General, you were the Permanent representative of your country when we served together. Under-Secretary-General Farah. you were a Permanent Representative back then too. Ambassador Aguilar was here then and is now back. It is an honour to be back with you in this historic Hall, and I apologize if , have forgotten any of you old enough to have served in 1971 and 1972.

The United Nations was established forty-four years ago upon the ashes of war and amidst great hopes. The UN can do great things. No, the United Nations is not perfect, it is not a panacea for the world's problem. But it is a vital forum where the nations of the world seek to replace conflict with consensus, and it must remain a forum for peace. The UN has the support of the United States of America. In recent years, the war of words that is often echoed in this Hall has been giving way to a new mood. 
We have seen a welcome shift from polemics to peace-keeping. United Nations Peace-keepers have given their lives in service to the United Nations. Today, should like to remember one of those soldiers of peace, an American on a mission of peace under the United Nations flag, on a mission for all the world, a man of unquestioned bravery and unswerving, dedication to the United Nations ideal - Lieutenant-Colonel William Richard Higgins. I call on the General Assembly to condemn the murder of this soldier of peace and to call on those responsible to have the decency to return his remains to his family. Let us all - right now, right here - dedicate ourselves and our nations to the cause that Colonel Higgins served so selflessly.
The founders of this historic institution believed that it was here that the nations of the world might come to agree that law, not force, shall govern. And the United Nations can play a fundamental role in the central issue of our time, for today, there is an idea at work around the globe, an idea of undeniable force - and that idea is freedom. Freedom's advance is evident everywhere.- Central Europe and Hungary, where State and society are now in the midst of a movement towards political pluralism and a free-market economy, where the barrier that once enforced an unnatural division between Hungary and its neighbours to the west has been torn down and replaced by a new hope for the future, a new hope in freedom. We see freedom at work in Poland, where, in deference to the will of the people, the Communist Party has relinquished its monopoly on power, and indeed in the Soviet Union, where the world hears the voices of people no longer afraid to speak out or to assert the right to rule themselves.
But freedom's march is not confined to a single continent or to the developed world alone. We see the rise of freedom in Latin America where, one by one, dictatorships are giving way to democracy. We see it on the continent of Africa, where more and more nations see in the system of free enterprise salvation for economies crippled by excessive State control. East and West, North and South, on every continent, we can see the outlines of a new world of freedom.
Of course, freedom's work remains unfinished. The trend we see is not yet universal. Some regimes still stand against the tide. Some rulers still deny the right of the people to govern themselves. But now the power of prejudice and despotism is challenged. Never before have these regimes stood so isolated and alone, so out of step with the steady advance of freedom. Today we are witnessing an ideological collapse, the demise of the totalitarian idea of the omniscient, all-powerful State. There are many reasons for this collapse, but in the end one fact alone explains what we see today: advocates of the totalitarian idea saw its triumph written in the laws of history, they failed to see the love of freedom that was written in the human heart.
Two hundred years ago today, the United States - our Congress - proposed the Bill of Rights: fundamental freedoms belonging to every individual. Rights no Government can deny. Those same rights have been recognized in this congress of nations in the words of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights - a common standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations. From where we stand, on the threshold of this new world of freedom, the trend is clear enough. If, for those who write the history of our times, the twentieth century is remembered as the century of the state, the twenty-first century must be an era of emancipation, the age of the individual. Make no mistake, nothing can stand in the way of freedom's march. There will come a day when freedom is seen the world over to be the universal birthright of every man and woman, of every race and walk of life. Even under the worst circumstances, at the darkest of times, freedom has always remained alive - a distant dream, perhaps, but always alive.
Today, that dream is no longer distant. For the first time, for millions around the world, a new world of freedom is within reach. Today is freedom's moment. You see, the possibility now exists for the creation of a true community of nations, built on shared interests and ideals. A true community, a world where free Governments and free markets meet the rising desire of the people to control their own destiny, to live in dignity, and to exercise freely their fundamental human rights. It is time that worked together to deliver that destiny into the hands of men and women everywhere. Our challenge is to strengthen the foundations of freedom, encourage its advance and face our most urgent challenges, the global challenges of the twenty-first century: economic, health, environmental well-being, the great questions of war and peace.
First, global economic growth. During this decade, a number of developing nations have moved into the ranks of the world's most advanced economies, all of them - each and every one - powered by the engine of free enterprise. In the decade ahead, others can join their ranks, but for many nations, barriers stand in the way. In the case of some countries, these are obstacles of their own making: un-needed restrictions, regulations that act as dead weights on their own economies and obstacles to foreign trade. But other barriers to growth exist, and those, too, require effective action.
Too many developing countries struggle today under a burden of debt that makes growth all but impossible. The nations of the world deserve better opportunity to achieve a measure of control over their own economic fate and build better lives for their own people. The approach the United States has put forward - the Brady plan - will help these nations reduce that debt and, at the same time, encourage the free market reforms that will fuel economic growth.
In just two days, I will be speaking to the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, and I will discuss there, in more detail, the steps that our nations can take in dealing with the debt problem. But I can say now the new world of freedom is not a world where a few nations live in comfort while others live in want. The power of commerce is a force for progress. Open markets are the key to continued growth in the developing world. Today, the United States buys over one-half of the global manufactured exports that all developing nations combined sell to the industrialized world. It is time for the other advanced economies to follow suit, to create expanded opportunities for trade. I believe we will learn, in the century ahead, that many nations of the world have barely begun to tap their true potential for development. The free market and its fruits are not the special preserve of a few, they are a harvest that everyone can share.
Beyond the challenge of global growth lies another issue of global magnitude: the environment. No line drawn on a map can stop the advance of pollution. Threats to our environment have become international problems. We must develop an international approach to urgent environmental issues, one that seeks common solutions to common problems. The United Nations is already at work on the question of global warming and the effort to prevent oil spills and other disasters from fouling our seas and the air we breathe. And I will tell you now the United States will do its part. We have committed ourselves to the world-wide phase-out of chlorofluorocarbons by the year 2000. We have proposed amending our own Clean Air Act to ensure clean air for our citizens within a single generation. We have banned the import of ivory to protect the elephant and rhinoceros from the human predators who exterminate them for profit. And we have begun to explore ways to work with other nations, with the major industrialized democracies, and in Poland and in Hungary, to make common cause for the sake of our environment.
The environment belongs to all of us. In this new world of freedom, the world's citizens must enjoy this common trust for generations to come. Global economic growth and the stewardship of our planet - both are critical issues.
But as always, questions of war and peace must be paramount to the United Nations. We must move forward to limit and eliminate weapons of mass destruction. Five years ago, at the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva, I presented a United States draft treaty outlawing chemical weapons. Since then, progress has been made, but time is running out. The threat is growing. More than 20 nations now possess chemical weapons or the capability to produce them. And these horrible weapons are now finding their way into regional conflicts. That is simply unacceptable. For the sake of mankind, we must halt and reverse this threat.
Today I want to announce steps that the United States is ready to take, steps to rid the world of these truly terrible weapons, steps towards a treaty that will ban - eliminate - all chemical weapons from the Earth 10 years from the day it is signed. This initiative contains three major elements. First, in the first eight years of a chemical weapons treaty the United States is ready to destroy nearly all - 98 per cent - of our chemical weapons stockpile, provided the Soviet Union joins the ban, and I think it will. Secondly, we are ready to destroy all of our chemical weapons - 100 per cent, every one - within 10 years, once all nations capable of building chemical weapons sign that total-ban treaty. And thirdly, the United States is ready to begin now. We will eliminate more than 80 per cent of our stockpile even as we work to complete a treaty, if the Soviet Union joins us in cutting chemical weapons to an equal level and if we agree on the conditions, including inspections, under which stockpiles are destroyed.
We know that monitoring a total ban on chemical weapons will be a challenge. But the knowledge we have gained from our recent arms control experience and our accelerating research in this area makes me believe that we can achieve the level of verification that gives us confidence to go forward with the ban. The world has lived too long in the shadow of chemical warfare? so let us act together, beginning today, to rid the Earth of this scourge.
We are serious about achieving conventional arms reductions as well. And that is why we put forward new proposals just last Thursday at the negotiations in Vienna on conventional forces in Europe, proposals that demonstrate our commitment to act rapidly to ease military tensions in Europe and move the nations of that continent one step closer to their common destiny: a Europe whole and free.
The United States is convinced that open and innovative measures can move disarmament forward and also ease international tensions. That is the idea behind the "open skies" proposal, about which the Soviets have now expressed a positive attitude. It is the idea behind the "open lands" proposal, permitting for the first time ever free travel for all Soviet and United States diplomats throughout each other's countries. Openness is the enemy of mistrust, and every step towards a more open world is a step towards the new world we seek.
Let me make this comment on our meetings with the Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union, Mr. Shevardnadze, over the past few days: I am very pleased by the progress made. The Soviet Union removed a number of obstacles to progress on conventional and strategic arms reductions. We reached agreements in principle on issues from verification to nuclear testing. And, of course, we agreed to a summit in the spring or early summer of 1990. I look forward to meeting Mr. Gorbachev there.
Each of those achievements is important in its own right, but they are more important still as signs of a new attitude that prevails between the United States and the USSR. Serious differences remain; we know that. But the willingness to deal constructively and candidly with those differences is news that we and indeed the world must welcome. We have not entered into an era of perpetual peace. The threats to peace that nations face may today be changing, but they have not vanished. In fact, in a number of regions around the world, a dangerous combination is now emerging: regimes armed with old and unappeasable animosities and modern weapons of mass destruction. That development will raise the stakes whenever war breaks out. Regional conflict may well threaten world peace as never before.
The challenge of preserving peace is a personal one for all individuals right here in this Hall. Mr. Secretary-General, I say with great respect that you have made it your own. The United Nations can be a mediator, a forum where parties in conflict come in search of peaceful solutions. For the sake of peace, the United Nations must redouble its support for the peace efforts now under way in regions of conflict all over the world. I assure the Assembly that the United States is determined to take an active role in settling regional conflicts. Sometimes our role in regional disputes is and will be highly public, and sometimes, like many others do, we work quietly behind the scenes. But always, we are working for positive change and lasting peace.
Our world faces other, less conventional threats no less dangerous to international peace and stability. Illegal drugs are a menace to social order and a source of human misery wherever they gain a foothold. The nations which suffer this scourge must join forces in the fight, and we are. Let me salute the commitment and extraordinary courage of one country in particular: Colombia, where
we are working with the people and their President, Virgil lo Barco, to put the drug cartels cut of business and bring the drug lords to justice.
Finally, we must join forces to combat the threat of terrorism. Every nation and the United Nations must send the outlaws of the world a clear message hostage-taking and the terror of random violence are methods that cannot win the world's approval. Terrorism of any kind is repugnant to all values that a civilized world holds in common. And make no mistake.- Terrorism is a means that no end, no matter how just, can sanctify.
Whatever the challenge, freedom greatly raises the chances of our success. Freedom's moment is a time for hope for all of the world, because freedom, once set in motion, takes on a momentum of its own. As I said the day I assumed the presidency of our country, we do not have to talk late into the night about which form of government is better. We know that free government, democracy, is best. And I believe that is the hard-won truth of our time, the unassailable fact that still stands at the end of a century of great struggle and human suffering. And this is true not because all our differences must give way to democracy , but because democracy makes room for all our differences. In democracy, diversity finds its common home.
At the very heart of the democratic ideal is respect for freedom of belief, freedom of thought and action, in all its diversity, for human rights. The world has experienced enough of the ideologies that have promised to remake man in some new and better image. We have seen the colossal tragedies and dashed hopes. We know now that freedom and democracy hold the answers: what men and nations want is the freedom to live by their own lights and a chance to prosper, in peace.
When I began today I spoke to you about peace-keeping. I want to speak to you now about peace-making. We must bring peace to the people who have never known its blessings. There is a painting that hangs on the wall of my office in the White House which pictures President Abraham Lincoln and his generals meeting near the end of a war that remains the bloodiest in the history of my country. Outside at that moment a battle rages, in this picture, and yet what we see in the distance is a rainbow, a symbol of hope, of the passing of the storm. That painting is called "The Peace-makers". For me, it is a constant reminder that our struggle, the struggle for peace, is a struggle blessed by hope.
I do remember sitting in this Hall, I remember the mutual respect among all of us proudly serving as representatives, yes, I remember the almost endless speeches - and I do not want this to be one of them - the Security Council sessions, the receptions, those long receiving lines, the formal meetings of the General Assembly, and the informal discussions in the delegates' lounge. And I remember something more, something beyond the frantic pace and sometimes frustrating experiences of daily life here: The heartbeat of the United Nations, the quiet conviction that we could make the world more peaceful, more free. What we sought then, all of us, now lies within our reach. I ask each of you here in this Hall:
Can we not bring a unity of purpose to the United Nations? Can we not make this new world of freedom the common destiny we seek? I believe we can. I know we must. My solemn wish today is that here, among the United Nations, that spirit will take hold, and that all men and all nations will make freedom's moment their own.
Thank you, God bless you, and may God bless the work of the United Nations.  
﻿
Permit me to begin by warmly congratulating you. Sir on your election to the presidency of the current session of the General Assembly: I am sure that this session will be a success. I also wish to take this opportunity to express my sincere thanks to the President of the last session, Mr. Dante Caputo. For his outstanding contribution in fulfilling his high mission.
The past year has been marked by fresh achievements in the efforts of various countries to seek solutions to regional conflicts, reduce the threat of war and improve the international situation, and by new prospects for world peace. However, ours is not a trouble-free world. regional conflicts have not yet come to a halt. The arms race is still going on. Certain international contradictions have sharpened, owing to violation of the established norms of international law. The economic situation in the developing countries is further deteriorating. All this demonstrates that the source of world turbulence and tension still exists. The Chinese delegation would like to expound its position on the major questions confronting the world today. 
The first question is regional conflicts. regional conflicts affect peace and tranquillity in the world and have caused direct, tremendous losses, particularly to many third-world countries. As a third-world country and a permanent member of the Security Council, China is naturally very much concerned about the issue of regional conflicts. The Chinese Government has all along stood for a fair and reasonable political settlement of those conflicts, and has played a constructive role in this regard.
In accordance with the Geneva Agreements on the settlement of the Afghan question, the Soviet Union has withdrawn its troops from Afghanistan. That is a positive development. Genuine peace, however, has yet to come to the land of Afghanistan. We hope that the various political forces there will set up a broadly based coalition Government through consultation and achieve peace in that land so that the Afghan people may rebuild its country.
Iran and Iraq reached a cease-fire a year ago on the basis of mutual acceptance of Security Council resolution 598 (1987), and each is now busy rebuilding its war-ravaged economy. We hope that these two developing countries, with which China enjoys friendly relations, will soon resume contacts and negotiations so as to turn their cease-fire into a lasting peace.
The recent summit conference of the five Central American States has been well received by the international community, as it produced important new agreements on promoting the peace process in Central America. It is our hope that the United States also will respect the peace efforts of these countries. The smooth implementation of the agreements will benefit the stability and development of the region.
Over the past year positive changes have occurred on the scene of southern Africa. With the start of the process of Namibian independence, the ultimate accomplishment of the historic mission of decolonisation on the African continent is now in sight. Angola has made headway in trying to bring peace to the country. The Government of Mozambique is working hard to end the unrest in its country. The Chinese Government has always sympathized with and supported the Namibian people in their struggle for independence. We hope that Security Council resolution 435 (1978) and other relevant agreements will be seriously implemented and that the South African authorities will honour their commitment, so as to ensure the holding of a free and fair general election under effective United Nations supervision and to bring about Namibian independence as scheduled. We call on the international community to be watchful, to work to eliminate obstacles to the Namibian independence process and guard against any incident that may arise to the detriment of a free and fair general election.
The Chinese Government has always supported the African countries in their just struggle against racism, and the efforts made by the front-line States and people in southern Africa to achieve peace and stability in the region and develop the national economy. We hope that their efforts will enjoy broad sympathy and vigorous support from the international community. The black people in South Africa are entitled to racial equality and democratic rights. We strongly demand that the South African authorities abrogate the universally condemned apartheid system, which is contrary to the spirit of our times.
Since the last session of the General Assembly there has been an ever-stronger call for a political settlement of the Middle East question. The just struggle of the Palestinians living in the West Rank and the Gaza Strip has clearly demonstrated that the question of ending the Israeli occupation and solving the Palestinian issue with no further delay. The Palestine Liberation organization has adopted a series of flexible and practical policies, winning wide appreciation and support from the international community. It is high time the Israeli Government went along with the trend of history by replacing its rigid position by a flexible approach.
The Chinese Government stands for a settlement of the Middle East question through political means without resorting to force. We support the convocation of the International Conference on the Middle East under United Nations auspices with the participation of the parties concerned, including the five permanent members of the Security Council. We appreciate the efforts of the parties concerned in the Middle East question to conduct dialogues of such diverse forms as they deem appropriate. We demand that Israel stop forthwith its suppression of Palestinian residents in occupation zones and that it withdraw from the occupied Arab territories. We hope to see mutual recognition between the State of Palestine and Israel, guaranteed security both for Arab States and for Israel, and the peaceful coexistence of the Arab nation and the Jewish nation. That, in our opinion, is the correct way to lead a Middle East long plagued by turmoil to peace and tranquillity.
Together with the other justice-upholding countries concerned, the Chinese Government has over the past 11 years consistently worked for a fair and reasonable settlement of the Cambodian question. To that end the United Nations has adopted 10 successive resolutions. The Cambodian question arose as a result of the Vietnamese invasion. Therefore, a comprehensive settlement of the question calls for an end to the Vietnamese invasion and the removal of its consequences. That is the very essence of the successive resolutions adopted by the United Nations on the Cambodian situation, and it is also the consistent position of the Chinese Government. during the transitional period from the withdrawal of Vietnamese forces to the holding of a general election in Cambodia, the only way to ensure peace and forestall a dangerous situation in the country is to set up a provisional coalition Government headed by Prince Sihanouk and composed of the four parties in Cambodia. Cambodia should be restored to its independent, neutral and non-aligned status, while the countries concerned should provide an international guarantee for that status. Recently, the International Conference on Cambodia was held in Paris; it was attended by foreign ministers of many countries and leaders of the four parties in Cambodia. This in itself is of major significance, but regrettably, the Conference did not produce the anticipated results, owing to the rigid position taken by Viet Nam and Phnom Penh on the proposal put forward by the majority of the States participating in the Conference for an international control mechanism under United Nations auspices, the establishment of a provisional quadripartite coalition Government headed by Prince Sihanouk, and a comprehensive settlement of the Cambodian question. As for the withdrawal of forces from Cambodia promised by Viet Nam, without the necessary international supervision people have reason to doubt whether Viet Nam has genuinely pulled out all its forces and military personnel of other categories. We hope that the international community will continue to follow the situation in Cambodia closely, render sympathy and support to the Cambodian people in their just cause, and keep working for a fair and reasonable ultimate settlement of the Cambodian question so as to remove completely this regional hot spot.
The second question is disarmament.
The past year has witnessed new progress in the field of international disarmament. The Treaty between the United States and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the Elimination of Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles - the INF Treaty - is being implemented. Positive results emerged from the International Conference on the prohibition of chemical weapons held in Paris last January. With the start last March in Vienna of. the negotiation on conventional armed forces in Europe and the subsequent specific proposals put forward by each side, long-deadlocked European conventional disarmament has taken a turn for the better. Moreover, the Soviet Union and some East European countries have decided to carry out a unilateral reduction in their forces and armament or withdraw some of them from abroad.
Nevertheless, it is noted that the arms race between the United States and the Soviet Union has not come to a stop. They continue to vie with each other in developing high-technology weapons systems and in going all out to upgrade their nuclear weapons and have even extended their arms race into outer space. So the halting of the arms race and the achievement of effective disarmament remains an arduous task.
The international community expects the United States and the Soviet Union to shoulder their special responsibility for disarmament by taking the lead in drastically reducing their nuclear arsenals and conventional armaments and by stopping their arms race in all forms, including that in outer space. It is our consistent view that chemical weapons should be completely banned and thoroughly destroyed. At the present session of the General Assembly, the United States and the Soviet Union have made proposals on the question of chemical weapons. We hope that they will take practical steps to stop production and development of those weapons and destroy their existing stockpiles, so as to facilitate the conclusion of an international convention on a comprehensive ban on chemical weapons.
Disarmament is a question bearing on world peace and the security of all countries. Therefore, all countries, big or small, strong or weak, nuclear or non-nuclear, should have an equal say in the question, and each can play an active role. The reasonable demands and propositions of the many small and medium-sized countries ought to be respected, and full play should be given to the role of the United Nations and the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva on disarmament issues. All this is highly necessary for the healthy development of the international disarmament process.
The third question is the proper handling of State-to-State relations.
Over the past year a number of countries have improved their relations with each other to varying degrees, which is a valuable contribution to world peace. What is particularly encouraging is that the Arab States have closed their ranks, in a spirit of conciliation. Countries in Africa are working for increased peaceful co-operation on that continent, while Latin American countries have made further headway in their regional co-operation.
China has all along devoted its efforts to the establishment and development of friendly relations and co-operation with other countries on the basis of the five principles of mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence. The past year saw even better and stronger relations between China and many other countries, especially its neighbours.
China maintains a traditional friendship with the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. We are interested in peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula. We support the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's reasonable proposition on the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea, and wish to see positive results flow from the dialogue and contacts between the North and South of Korea. We have always enjoyed good relations with Pakistan, Bangladesh, Nepal, Sri Lanka, Thailand and many other neighbours in South and South-East Asia. We have normalized our relations with the People's Republic of Mongolia and Laos. Our relations with India are improving in many fields. The consultations on normalization of Sino-Indonesian relations are proceeding smoothly. The solidarity and co-operation between China and Arab States, African States and Latin American States have also made new progress.
In May this year, China and the Soviet Union held a top-level meeting, thereby normalizing their bilateral relations. In a spirit of bidding farewell to the past and opening up the future, leaders of the two countries reviewed and summed up the history of Sino-Soviet relations and agreed to develop the bilateral relations on the basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. good-neighbourliness between the two big countries, China and the Soviet Union, is in the interests of not only their two peoples but also peace and stability in Asia and the world at large. This has been well received by the international community as it benefits the whole of mankind.
China's relations with Western countries were on a course of steady development. However, difficulties of varying degrees have emerged over the past few months in our relations with certain Western countries. What has exactly happened? Has China acted contrary to the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence in its relations with these Western countries? No. Has China encroached upon their interests in any way? No. It is known to all that in late spring and early summer this year turmoil occurred in China's capital Beijing, which was aimed at subverting the Government of the People's Republic of China and overthrowing the socialist system stipulated in the Constitution of the People's Republic. It goes without saying that how to deal with this problem is China's internal affair. The whole world witnessed the fact that for almost two months the Chinese Government had exercised the utmost restraint and tried to solve the problem by persuasion and education rather than compulsory measures. It was not until the critical moment when the events had turned into an anti-government rebellion that the Chinese Government was compelled to take decisive measures to quell the rebellion. The overwhelming majority of countries in the world have expressed their understanding of this action by our Government. Only certain Western Governments, ignoring the facts and basing themselves on nothing but distorted news reports and misinformation, levelled unwarranted charges against the Chinese Government and applied pressure on it. It should also be noted that there is much evidence pointing to involvement in the above-mentioned events by some hostile foreign forces, which added fuel to the flames. They know full well what role they have played. In order to maintain State sovereignty and national dignity, it is only natural that the Chinese Government should have firmly rejected their meddling in the events in China and interference in its internal affairs, which contravene the norms governing international relations and the fundamental principles of the United Nations Charter. In their statements at the General Assembly in the past few days, the delegates of some countries continued to attack the Chinese Government groundlessly. To harp on "democracy" and "freedom" while indulging in the habit of making arbitrary criticisms and imposing one's own will on others in State-to-State relations represents precisely the kind of behaviour that goes against the historical tide. This is indeed regrettable.
The day after tomorrow, the People's Republic of China will celebrate its fortieth anniversary. For China, 1 October 1949 is a day of great historic significance, marking the end of an era in which the Chinese people were subjected to every kind of national humiliation. Over the past four decades, foreign pressure on New China has never ceased, but what has come of it? New China is ever forging ahead. It has never feared, and will in no way bend to any foreign pressure. China's affairs can only be decided by the Chinese people, and China's policy can only be determined by the Chinese Government. Through long years of practice, we have found a development path suited to China's conditions, and we will continue along that path. We have formulated an independent foreign policy of peace attuned to the fundamental interests of the people of China and the world, and we will keep pursuing that policy. China will adhere to its policy of reform and opening to the outside world and continue to work for development of relations with other countries throughout the world.
A normal relationship between China and a foreign country serves mutual interests, whereas in case of a disruption of such a relationship, China will by no means be the only one to suffer. Past experience has repeatedly proved that normal State-to-State relations can only be based on the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. China abides by these principles, and if other countries also do so, normal relations can certainly be established and developed between them. Herein lies the way out of the current difficulties in the relations of some Western countries with China.
The fourth question is the establishment of a new international political order.
Now that the world has advanced to a stage where most former colonies and dependencies have won independence, all States should treat one another as equals and an end should be put to hegemonic practice. Yet, facts show that hegemonic practice and power politics still exist. From time to time, there are cases in international relations, such as the big bullying the small, the strong domineering over the weak, the imposition of one's own will on others, or even armed encroachment upon the sovereignty of another State and damage to its territorial integrity by force. Should these acts which contravene the norms governing international relations remain unchecked, there can be no tranquillity in the world or guarantee of peace.
With the concerted efforts of the international community, the world now witnesses a trend towards relaxation of tension and increased contacts among nations. This is a good thing. But meanwhile, in international contacts, there are still obvious attempts to interfere in the internal affairs of other countries by various means in violation of the basic norms governing international relations. It is dangerous for State policies to be formulated and pursued with such attempts in mind, as it will detract from relaxation of international tension and lead to the continuation of the cold war. This is a question which merits the attention of the international community.
On the one hand, there are vast numbers of countries in the world with quite different social systems, ideologies, values, historical backgrounds, cultural traditions and religious beliefs, and on the other hand, their interests predetermine the need for contacts with one another. Consequently, all countries are required to adopt a realistic attitude by recognising the diversity of the world, refraining from interfering in each other's internal affairs, and observing in their contacts the mutually accepted norms governing international relations. We firmly believe that such a world will be in line with the interests and aspirations of the people of all countries. I wish to use the forum of the United Nations to present this idea of the Chinese Government, hoping that statesmen of various countries will give it serious consideration when exploring the future of the world.
The fifth question is the establishment of a new international economic order.
For a long time developing countries have suffered greatly from inequitable exchanges, owing to irrationality in existing international economic relations. For them the recent years have seen worsening terms of trade, plummeting export earnings, dwindling production investment and heavy debt burdens. There has been even the phenomenon of reverse capital flow from poor to rich countries for many years running. So the tendency of poor countries to become poorer and rich countries richer is more pronounced than it was a decade ago. If allowed to continue, this situation will bring in its wake even more serious consequences for the whole world, including both the developing and the developed countries. The economic development of the third world has become a pressing issue affecting the global scene. Current international economic relations should not and cannot remain completely unchanged in the time to coma. The establishment of a new international economic order is the need of the times.
In our view, the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence should also be abided by in the conduct of economic relations between countries. A country's economic problems can be solved only by the government and people of that country with policies appropriate to their national conditions. Economic contacts between countries should serve friendly co-operation between them and not be turned into means of exerting pressure on other countries or interfering in their internal affairs. Any attempt to impose a certain economic system or developmental model on other countries and to interfere in the economic policies or development efforts of developing countries means power politics in the economic sphere, it runs counter to norms of international relations and the current historical trend and will not work in practice.
To promote the establishment of the new international economic order in the interest of common development of all countries, what is urgently needed at present is a new round of truly substantive North-South dialogue with emphasis on solving the pressing problems facing the developing countries, such as debt, trade, capital and finance. We call on the developed countries to respond constructively to the proposals for reviving the North-South dialogue made by the Conference of Heads of State and Government of the Non-Aligned Countries held in Belgrade in Sept either this year and the Special Ministerial Meeting of the Group of 77 held last June in Caracas. We hope that the special session of the General Assembly devoted to growth and development, scheduled for April next year, will arrive at a fresh common understanding on future international economic co-operation and will provide a sound guideline for it. We also hope that the new international development strategy being worked out will offer effective measures in this regard.
Protecting the environment has become a pressing issue of universal concern? it must be given full attention while efforts are made to solve the question of development. China has made the protection of the environment its State policy, we attach importance to and will participate in the United Nations conference on environment and development scheduled for 1992, and are ready to make necessary preparations for its convocation with other countries and relevant international organizations. We note with pleasure that, as the most influential international organization, the United Nations has in recent years had some outstanding achievements in facilitating the political settlement of regional conflicts, maintaining world peace, and promoting international co-operation and economic and social development. As a result, there is universal recognition of the importance of the United Nations. The positive efforts made by the Secretary-General have also won extensive acclaim from the international community.
The final decade of the twentieth century is approaching. A new century is setting in, the times are progressing and the face of the world is changing. Like the entire international community, the United Nations is faced with unprecedented opportunities and extraordinary challenges. In order to adapt better to an ever-changing world, the United Nations needs to continue its own reform and further improve its efficiency. World peace and development need the United Nations, while the success of the United Nations depends on the support and co-operation of all its Member States. Together with the many other United Nations Member States, China is ready to fulfil the duties prescribed in the United Nations Charter and to contribute its share to a strengthened role of the organization in world affairs.
﻿
I congratulate you, Sir, on your election as President of the General Assembly. Your experience and the esteem in which you are held as the former Foreign Minister of Nigeria, as its Permanent Representative to the United Nations and as Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid guarantee that you will excellently perform the duties of your office. At the same time I wish to pay deepest respect to your predecessor, Mr. Dante Caputo of Argentina, and thank him for the exemplary and successful conduct of his functions.
Foreign Minister Dumas of France presented the views of the members of the European Community yesterday. I thank him for his clear statement. Now, at the closing of this millennium we are moving towards a new phase in world politics. The old structures still largely determine the political scene. but new structures are already becoming visible everywhere. We are confronted with global challenges. The natural sources of life are increasingly being jeopardized. In the last two years, world food production dropped for the first time. Plants and animals are becoming extinct. New epidemics are spreading. A large part of mankind lives in dire poverty. Terrorism and illicit drug trafficking call for joint action by the international community. Underdevelopment and the debt burden deprive a large section of mankind of any hope. Excessive armaments and regional conflicts, as well as violations of human rights and of the right of nations to self-determination, require fundamental new thinking and actions, m Europe there is fresh hope for a better future. This will have positive effects on the entire world.
In the year 2030 there will be 10 billion people on earth. For their sake -and it is not for distant descendants whose faces are hidden from us by the mist of distant centuries; it is for our children, our grandchildren - we must today lay the groundwork so that the glebe will remain habitable. No single country on Earth, however rich and powerful, is able to handle this task by itself and through its own ability. Joint efforts by all mankind are needed. First and foremost this means that we must move away from confrontation towards co-operation, we require co-operative structures.
Precisely because we Germans are aware of our responsibility for the Second World war we perceive our duty to work for a better world, for a world of peace, democracy and solidarity between nations, for a world of freedom and human rights, for a world at peace with nature. The Polish nation was the first victim of the war deliberately unleashed by Hitlerian Germany 50 years ago. And I am turning to You Mr. Skubiszewski, Foreign Minister of the new Poland, to say that the Polish people are assured that their right to live in secure borders will not be called into question, not now nor in the future, through territorial claims by us Germans. The wheel of history will not be turned back. Together with Poland we want to work for a better future for Europe. The inviolability of borders is the basis of peaceful relations in Europe.
Ever since its inception the Federal Republic of Germany has framed a European peace policy. As a member of the European Community and of the Atlantic Alliance, we belong to the family of Western democracies. To the United States we are linked through deep friendship, through the Alliance and through a commitment to common values. President Bush impressively reaffirmed this in his speech at Mainz, with France we have established a unique partnership and co-operation, as reflected in the Franco-German Treaty and in our day-today politics. This points to the future. The groundwork for the developments we are today witnessing in Europe, for the prospects that are now discernible, was laid by the founding of the European Community, by the treaties of Moscow and Warsaw, by the treaty with the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, by the Basic Treaty with the German Democratic Republic and by the Helsinki Final Act. These are European paths that come towards each other; they must therefore be strengthened and extended. Nobody will be allowed to stray from them. We shall remain committed to the letter and spirit of those treaties.
Major elements of that peaceful order are the European Community and the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe process. The European Community, which is heading for a European Union, sees itself as a factor for economic and political stability in the world, it maintains closer relations, including those based on agreements with its neighbours in Europe and with States and groupings of States in all other continents. It strongly promotes voluntary regional associations in other parts of the world. It has to be open to multifaceted and broad-based co-operation with those countries of Central and Eastern Europe that desire it. New forms of co-operation and exchange are required. EUREKA is an offer open to all those who are interested. The new environment agency set up by the European Community can become the starting-point of new pan-European co-operation in the area of the protection of the environment.
Transport structures covering the whole of Europe are needed. We are receptive to ideas and suggestions from others. The trade limitations introduced for strategic reasons must be adapted to the changed quality of political, security-policy, economic and technological co-operation between West and East. They must not become an obstacle to a far-sighted policy.
East and West have opted for the path of co-operation. That is a source of hope for the nations of the world - not only the nations of Europe, The vision of a peaceful order in Europe, from the Atlantic to the Urals - as the West proposed in the Harmel report as early as 1967, and as recurs in General Secretary Gorbachev's concept of the common European house - is opening up. The bold reforms in the Soviet Union, in Hungary and in Poland point in that direction.
We agree with our Western friends that the reform processes in Central and Eastern Europe are in the interests of all Europe and of the world. They deserve our support, not least through common, co-ordinated action, through a plan of solidarity for Europe. This process of reform in Central and Eastern Europe is not a case of one side's opinion being adopted by the other; it is a process of self-reflection on the common foundations of European culture and European history, to which all European nations have made great contributions. The reforms have become irreversible because man's yearning for more freedom is irreversible, but the developments are not immune to standstills, or even setbacks. In the long run, however, no country can evade this development. Anyone who hopes that the reforms will fail will be overtaken by the development.
In the West, too, nobody should underestimate the new possibilities; instead, people should make resolute use of them for the benefit of all Europe. History tends not to repeat the opportunities it offers. I appeal to the countries of 
Europe not to let this historic juncture slip by. We Western democracies offer stable-framework conditions for this reform process. Statesmanly foresight and statesmanly responsibility are required now on all sides. Nobody can want others to be destabilized. The Federal Republic of Germany regards a peaceful order in Europe as the framework also for the goal defined in the Letter on German Unity: "to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will recover its unity in free self-determination". We want to attain this goal while fully observing the treaties that we have signed. That can be achieved only together with all other States in Europe - not against them. Nobody in Europe has cause to fear our policy. Our policy is linked to the destiny of the entire continent. It is a European peace policy. This precludes any national solo efforts. We consider it our task to work for a pan-European peaceful order from which no country may be excluded or nay exclude itself, our foreign policy, in accordance with the dictates of our Constitution, rejects any kind of power politics. It is a policy of responsibility, it is determined by the fundamental values of our Constitution, it is based on unconditional fidelity to treaties.
The Federal Republic of Germany, as a country situated in the heart of Europe, brings all its weight to bear for the purpose of co-operation, understanding and disarmament conducive to a better Europe. This includes cooperation with the German Democratic Republic. The two German States are aware of their responsibility for peace in Europe. This responsibility weighs more heavily than do those things that divide us. On the basis of this common responsibility,  the two German States have already made substantial contributions towards detente and disarmament in Europe. In particular, the people in our States have benefited from this. In these endeavours we act on the foundation of the basic Treaty with the German Democratic Republic and are guided by the Joint declarations issued by Chancellor Kohl and General Secretary Honecker on 12 March 1965 and 8 September 1,87. New and closer forms of co-operation are needed in many fields - economic and technological, scientific and cultural, transport and protection of the environment.
The two German states - each in its own fashion - must contribute towards overcoming the things that separate Europeans from each other. They must face the new developments occurring in the whole of Europe and work for their success. The Federal Republic of Germany wholeheartedly supports the process of European unification within the European Community, as well as the efforts of European
countries aimed at reform. The German Democratic Republic, under its own conditions, can contribute, through reforms, towards greater openness in Europe. just as the Soviet Union, Poland and Hungary are doing already. We have been deeply moved as we have witnessed, in recent weeks, the fate of young people who are sorrowfully leaving their home and familiar borrowings. Nobody can want such a development. A policy of reform would open up new prospects for the people of the German Democratic Republic, as in other Central and Eastern European countries. These would encourage the people to stay where they grew up and where they are at home. Today, East and West no longer discuss only the problems that have accused between them since the War. They Jointly focus their attention also on those tasks of the future which, as is stated in the Joint German-Soviet Declaration of June 1989, can be mastered only through concerted action by all states and  peoples. The Moscow Treaty continues to form the foundation of the relationship between our two countries. The German-Soviet Declaration underscores the importance of German-Soviet relations for the whole of Europe. This calls for new thinking by everyone and for everyone.
That declaration defined goals to which we have long been committed along with our Western partners-, the preservation and shaping of peace, the settlement of existing conflicts, the right of nations to self-determination, the precedence of international law in politics, international co-operation in the economic, scientific and technological fields, the results of which should benefit all mankind, the preservation of the natural environment and the overcoming of hunger and poverty in the world, and the combating of new threats such as epidemics and international terrorism. 
A peaceful world of free people subject only to the rule of law and whose dignity is no longer impaired by hunger and poverty: that is seen as the true goal of politics. In that way, the design of a peaceful order for all Europe, the architecture of a pan-European house, is becoming clearly visible. Through arms control and disarmament we want to reduce the military elements of the East-West relationship. We want to demilitarise East-West relations, just as international relations must be demilitarized. We want to create an increasing number of co-operative security structures. We welcome and support the efforts of the United states and the Soviet Union to achieve co-operation marked by increasing mutual trust.
An entire continent is seriously committed to agreed and controlled disarmament. The Treaty on intermediate-range nuclear forces - the INF Treaty - was an important step towards that end. The two sides accept the principle that whoever has more weapons must disarm more. The aim is to ensure that the armed forces of the two sides have the capability of defence only and not of attack, especially surprise attack and large-scale offensive action. Ever more co-operative security structures will emerge, thus providing additional guarantees of security. The negotiations in Vienna on conventional stability and confidence-building measures, as well as the global prohibition of chemical weapons, will lend a new quality to those security structures. The meetings between Secretary of State Baker and Foreign Minister Shevardnadze have provided further signs of hope. In Vienna, Western proposals have created the conditions for far-reaching conventional disarmament. Given good will on the part of all concerned, an initial agreement could be achieved as early as 1990.
We strongly support the United States-Soviet negotiations in Geneva on nuclear and space weapons. By reducing their nuclear weapons, the nuclear Powers are living up to their responsibility towards the international community. The need for all countries to accede to the non-proliferation Treaty is becoming all the more urgent.
The negotiations on a comprehensive, global and verifiable ban on chemical weapons must finally be completed. Only in that way can the spread of those barbaric weapons be prevented. President Bush's declaration here at the United Nations that his country is ready to destroy over 80 per cent of its existing chemical weapons stocks even before the conclusion of a chemical weapons convention, provided that the Soviet Union reduces its chemical weapons to the same level, is unprecedented in the history of disarmament negotiations. The Federal Republic of Germany has constantly striven for the successful completion of the Geneva negotiations. President Bush's remarks concerning verification of compliance with a future chemical weapons convention have a significance that goes far beyond the scope of disarmament negotiations. Openness is becoming a guiding principle in dealings between countries. In fact, every step towards a more open world is a step towards the new world we seek.
The recent Canberra Conference made an important contribution in support of the Geneva negotiations. All producers are called upon to control trade in chemical substances and facilities that are suitable also for the manufacture of chemical weapons. The Federal Republic of Germany has considerably tightened its own control laws; as acknowledged in the final declaration of the Canberra Conference, it has thus made an advance contribution to the implementation of a future chemical weapons convention.
Disarmament is a task not for the industrial nations alone. The developing countries spend $200 billion a year for military purposes. That is four times the official development assistance they receive. Moreover, those resources are unavailable for their development. Regional theatres of conflict are exacerbated by the unbridled trade in arms. The arms trade must become more transparent to the international public. Such transparency forces both the importers and the exporters to account for and justify their actions, which itself has a moderating effect. The wholly disproportionate level of arms in all parts of the world makes disarmament a global task which must be dealt with by the United Nations.
A country's attitude towards disarmament is the most reliable measure of how far it is prepared to abandon old thinking. A State's attitude towards human rights is the most reliable measure of its stance on the inalienable dignity of each individual. A peaceful order in Europe - a peaceful order in the world - can rest only on the universal application of human rights and on the right of nations to self-determination. The future Europe is thus to be a large heterogeneous area based throughout on the rule of law.
To us, respect for human rights is the indispensable basis for any policy. In our view, there is still an urgent need to appoint a United Nations high commissioner for human rights and set up an international court of human rights. We ask that our initiative on abolishing capital punishment be supported also by those countries which, frequently for religious reasons, want to retain such punishment. The form of optional protocol we have chosen leaves the door open to those States that are not yet able to decide in favour of signing it. International terrorism world wide and international drug crimes constitute aggression against human dignity and against mankind. They threaten every political and social order. In future, countries will have to be measured by their efforts in this fight. Anyone who provides refuge for terrorists or spares those who commit drug crimes is placing himself outside the community of nations. The drug problem, that scourge of mankind, has become a global challenge.
This demands resolute co-operation by all countries. The common fight against illicit drug trafficking must be stepped up. Co-operation among all countries in combating cross-border illicit drug trafficking must be intensified. The social causes of drug production must be eliminated in the relevant countries through common efforts, and the social causes of drug dependence in the consumer countries must be eliminated as well.
We shall survive the third millennium only if all countries - large and small, weak and strong alike - unconditionally make international law the yardstick of their political actions. We must overcome force, both within and between States. The decade ahead of us must be a decade of pacifying regional theatres of conflict. A historic opportunity is emerging for the Central American peace process. All Governments interested in the fate of Central America have in the meantime fully endorsed the Esquipulas peace agreement. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany supports the United Nations contribution to that process.
Namibia, the last colony in Africa, will gain independence in a few months' time. The Western Contact Group, to which we belonged, initiated this process and participated substantially in shaping it. We are convinced that the Secretary-General of the United Nations and his special representative will bring the peace process in Namibia to a good conclusion. In so doing, they have the full confidence and support of the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany. Our participation in the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) reflects this, we all hope that an independent Namibia that espouses democracy, pluralism and human rights will send signals to the Republic of South Africa that cannot be ignored. Apartheid is inimical to human rights. It cannot be reformed. It must be eliminated. We call upon the South African Government to terminate the state of emergency, to release all political detainees, Nelson Mandela in the first place, and to admit the opposition. That must pave the way for negotiations involving all the country's political forces for the purpose of developing a just constitutional order. we shall do "whatever is possible to help bring about round-table negotiations.
In the Middle East the objective continues to be a peaceful settlement that guarantees the right of all States in the region, including Israel, to live within secure and recognized boundaries and that enables the Palestinian people finally to exercise its right to self-determination. During the past few months there has been some movement in the Middle East conflict: the Israeli plan for elections in the occupied territories and President Mubarak's proposal to open up prospects for talks between Israel and the Palestinians.
The suffering of the Lebanese nation must be ended through a political solution. The cease-fire brought about by the Arab League's Committee of Three is an encouraging signal. We support all suitable efforts aimed at national reconciliation in Lebanon and the restoration of the country's full sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence.
In view of the dangers constantly generated by regional conflicts, a far-reaching improvement of the United Nations instruments for coping with those conflicts is needed. The Declaration on the prevention of conflicts, which we helped to draft in the Special Committee on the United Nations Charter and which was unanimously adopted at the forty-third session of the General Assembly, is a step towards that end. We have launched a new initiative designed to facilitate early and comprehensive fact-finding by the United Nations, particularly by the Secretary-General. The efforts of the United Nations and the Secretary-General to resolve conflicts must not fail for want of money.
Underdevelopment in large parts of the world is one of the global challenges of our time. People in all countries are entitled to a life that is worth living. Industrial and developing countries must collaborate to achieve economic development and social justice. The debt crisis can only be resolved through joint action by everyone concerned: the debtor and creditor countries, the Governments and the international financial institutions, as well as the private banks. All creditor countries are now, as before, called upon to frame their national regulations in such a way as to encourage participation by banks in debt relief. That is already the case in our country, without considerable funds from private banks the developing countries will not return to the path of growth.
The initiative of United States Secretary of the Treasury Brady is an important step in solving the debt crisis. At the forefront of the intensified debt strategy is the reduction of debts and interest. Fresh money must be made available. The rescheduling agreements with Mexico and the Philippines are major landmarks in the efforts to solve the debt crisis. The debts of the least-developed countries must be cancelled-, the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany has already done so. For years now it has been providing development aid to those countries exclusively in the form of grants.
Many developing countries are carrying out radical and painful reforms in order to reshape their economic structures. They are thereby making a substantial contribution towards the stability of the world economy. These reforms should restore the confidence of domestic and foreign investors.
The prosperity of all countries can be increased most effectively through the free exchange of goods and services. That is why it is so important to make the Uruguay Round a full success. That still calls for considerable exertions and concessions, not least in areas that are sensitive for the industrial nations. All countries must resist the temptations of protectionism. The weakest are always hardest hit by the consequences of protectionism. The basic principles of the new thinking - openness instead of isolation, co-operation instead of confrontation - must also apply to international trade. The Belgrade conference of the Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms this new thinking and reflects the growing awareness of global interdependence.
Today it is a question of reconciling economic and ecological factors. People are increasingly resisting the destruction of the natural sources of life. There is no nation that is not affected, no nation that does not bear responsibility. Global warming, destruction of the ozone layer, desertification, contamination of soil, air and water through pollutants and waste and forest depletion all threaten life on our earth. We have but this one Earth, and it has been entrusted to us. It must remain habitable for all future generations as well. 
Mankind's duty to preserve peace includes making peace with nature. The first steps have been taken with the Vienna Convention and the Montreal Protocol, the Convention on hazardous waste and the Convention to combat marine pollution. Those Conventions must now be applied worldwide. They must constantly be supplemented and improved until all known pollutants are covered. The World Climate Convention and measures to save the forests must be vigorously promoted. Protection of tropical rain forests is also a matter for the United Nations. The Organization must pool and co-ordinate the efforts of the international community in the field of environmental protection. Binding limits and levels must be fixed, and agreed deadlines must be met. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany will do its utmost to support all environmental activities of the United Nations, especially the United Nations conference on the environment which this General Assembly is to decide on at this session. This applies also to the international decade for the prevention of natural disasters. The Federal Government has made substantial efforts to protect natural resources. It will contribute to the work of the United Nations the experience of a country that has a strong environmental awareness, high environmental protection standards and advanced scientific and technological know-how.
The industrial nations must make a special contribution through the transfer of ecologically sound technology and through financial support for environmental projects in the developing countries. We must increase the responsibility of the United Nations for environmental matters and develop further its relevant organs, especially the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), widen their powers and, in particular, provide them with more funds.
The nations will achieve a new spirit of coexistence only if they acknowledge and respect each other's cultural achievements and characteristics. The awareness of mutual dependence in questions concerning our survival must be accompanied by unconditional respect for the dignity and achievements of every nation. The worldwide cultural dialogue should preserve the cultural identity of all nations. This calls for exchange on equal terms through mutual give-and-take.
The prestige of the United Nations increases with the new spirit of coexistence and the awareness of the need for a global domestic policy. This is not least a consequence of the growing understanding between West and East. The turn of the tide in international relations will also enable the United Nations to play the role its founders intended it to have, after the terrible experiences of the Second World War.
We can no longer afford confrontation and national egoism, as our extinction would be the penalty. The United Nations must evolve into a universal community of States and peoples in which everyone can express his views freely and openly, in which the rights of the stronger do not prevail. To all individuals and nations, the United Nations is already a symbol of a new international order founded on human rights and self-determination, on dialogue and co-operation. We are called upon to create peace between individuals, between nations. We are called upon to create peace between man and nature. Inalienable human rights and the right of nations to self-determination must form the bedrock of our actions.
﻿I am speaking on behalf of the European Economic Community. Mr. President, allow me in my turn to extend to you on behalf of the European Community and its member States warmest congratulations on your unanimous election to the office of President of the General Assembly. Your experience in international affairs, your perfect familiarity with the United Nations system and your personal qualities particularly qualify you to occupy that important office. We have no doubt that those attributes will enable you to work wonders.
Let me also include in this tribute your predecessor at the head of the Assembly, Mr. Dante Caputo. The energy and efficiency with which he discharged that office merit the gratitude of the entire Organization.
I should like also, on behalf of the Twelve, to assure the Secretary-General of our unswerving and unqualified support in his weighty task, and to express our admiration for his untiring activity throughout the world in favour of peace.
The European Community and its member States have always considered that they have a special contribution to make to the efforts being made to build a more just and peaceful world bound by ever-closer ties of solidarity.
I should now like to put forward a few thoughts about the main thrust of our external action, by pointing to our common struggle for peace, the outlook for economic development and the fight against the scourges inflicted on our societies by human rights violations, terrorism and drug abuse.
I should like first to say a few words about the hopes that have been kindled by developments in the year gone by. while the progress made is still too fragile for the international community to be certain that it will soon see the dawn of peace break upon the world, and while tensions still exist or are worsening here and there and indeed new conflicts are emerging, the fact is that, all in all, the cause of peace has advanced more than it probably ever has done in recent times.
In relations between the eastern and western parts of Europe, recent developments suggest that the deep wounds of history, once considered as incurable, are now beginning to heal. On both sides, a common language is enabling us to talk to one another, negotiate and reach agreements that only a short time ago seemed beyond our grasp.
The European Council has sought to give fresh impetus to East-West relations, as this is warranted by the changes towards greater political and economic freedom that have taken place in the Soviet Union and several Central and Eastern European countries, notably Poland and Hungary. While we must regret that there remain serious violations of human rights in some of those countries, how could we fail to welcome the reforms on which they have embarked and support and encourage them when they are quite plainly contributing to overcoming the divisions of the last War at a pace and on a scale hitherto unprecedented in Europe.
The proceedings of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe are closely bound up with that prospect. Since the adoption of a closing document last January in Vienna, two key meetings - the Information Forum in London and the first session of the Conference on the Human Dimension in Paris - have made it possible to take greater advantage of the scope of the Helsinki process to advance the cause of fundamental freedoms, the rule of law and the values of democracy.
As for the negotiations on measures aimed at building confidence and security and on conventional forces in Europe, whose purpose is to remove the imbalances liable to undermine the stability and security of the continent, they have taken a decisive turn, and there are hopes that in the coming months significant progress can be made which would have major importance for the future of East-West relations.
In the broader setting of the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva, there have been encouraging results following the impetus created by the Conference on chemical disarmament held in Paris in January 1989. The Twelve would like to see the conclusion at the earliest possible opportunity of a comprehensive, verifiable treaty banning chemical weapons. The results achieved in that field at the recent United States-Soviet meetings are a most encouraging sign in this respect.
By the same token, I welcome the progress announced yesterday by the President of the United states and moments ago by the Soviet Foreign Minister with regard to their bilateral negotiations on reducing by half their stockpiles of strategic weapons. We hope there will be an early outcome to these negotiations and that the significant gains of the past, such as the anti-ballistic missile Treaty, will be preserved.
But Europe is not the only theatre in the struggle for peace, to which our Organization attaches universal significance. Encouraging signs have emerged in many parts of the world, holding out promise of the settlement of some conflicts. The utmost must be done to give added impetus to those favourable develops, and the Twelve are setting about that task.
In Namibia, the process towards independence and peace is under way. The twelve unreservedly support the action of the Secretary-General and earnestly call on all the parties not to impede the movement towards peace. The European community stands ready to welcome an independent Namibia among its partners under the Lome Convention.
The rewarding dialogue started with the front-line States, notably in Luxembourg last June, shows that everyone aspires to an early settlement of these long-standing conflicts which have delayed or thwarted the region's development plans. Here again, the Community is more than ready to foster reconstruction and, whether it be in Angola, Mozambique or elsewhere, to help the population build a new era of peace. 
In that connection, the Community and its member States have always insisted on the need to put an end to the apartheid system and bring about the establishment of a just, democratic society in South Africa. I shall come back to that basic demand.
The Twelve are particularly attentive to the implementation of the Secretary-General's peace plan for Western Sahara, which is expected to lead to a referendum on self-determination and holds out hopes for a settlement of this issue. They are convinced that the creation of the Arab Maghreb Union will contribute to that end.
Through the recent Tela agreements, the countries of Central America have demonstrated their determination to take their destiny in their own hands. This is a source of satisfaction to us. The success of the exercise will depend on the different parties abiding by the undertakings they have given. It is also envisaged that the United Nations and the Organization of American States (OAS) will lend their support to the implementation of the peace agreements.
The Community and its member States wish to pay a tribute to the sense of moderation and dialogue displayed by the Central American Heads of State, moved as they have been by the spirit of democracy. The San Pedro Sula Conference, held in February 1989, showed the determination of the European Community and the Contadora group of countries to give their support to the process of negotiation and economic integration which the Central American Governments have set as their goals.
The Twelve also note with satisfaction the progress made by democracy in South
America, and especially the prospect of positive developments in Chile, heralded by free elections.
Since the announcement of the cease-fire between Iran and Iraq, which was welcomed by the entire international community, the Secretary-General has, with the Twelve's support, pursued his endeavours to ensure that the negotiations move progressively towards a final settlement. But we should not be content with the current "no war - no peace" situation. The Twelve accordingly wish to launch an appeal to the Governments of the two countries to contribute to the efforts of the
Secretary-General and his colleagues to transform the present armistice into a lasting peace and to lose no more time in fully implementing Security Council resolution 598 (1987).
The Twelve express the hope that the Iranian leaders will demonstrate their readiness to contribute to international life in a constructive and peaceful manner consonant with the norms governing relations among States, so that that country can again take its rightful place in its region and in the international community at large.
The withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan was a necessary, but not sufficient, condition for a political solution. As long as the conflict continues, there will still be a need for all the Afghan parties to seek ways and means of bringing about a genuine process of self-determination, leading to the formation of a fully representative government and the existence of a truly independent and non-aligned Afghanistan. The Twelve confirm their support for the United Nations Secretary-General in the efforts he is making to facilitate a settlement, in the hope that the refugees will be able to return to their homes in freedom and dignity, the Community and its member States stand ready, once a settlement has been reached, to contribute to the reconstruction of Afghanistan, in the same way as they are already contributing to the humanitarian assistance being provided for the long-suffering people of that country.
In Cambodia, signs have emerged in recent months, albeit tentatively, of a possible return to peace. The Twelve have welcomed the decision of Viet Nam to withdraw its troops and consider that their withdrawal has made it possible to seek an overall political solution to the Cambodian conflict. The Twelve's support could not but encourage France to take the initiative of convening an international conference in Paris, with the co-presidency of Indonesia, bringing together all the 
Khmer parties and the countries most directly involved, in the presence of the UN Secretary General. Although the meeting did not make it possible to reach an agreement, it can be said to have marked a very important turning point in the search for a peaceful solution. The process which has now started should be pursued, with the requisite determination, with the aim of arriving at least at an overall settlement guaranteeing the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and neutrality of Cambodia and enabling the Cambodian people to control its own destiny through free end internationally supervised elections. The temptation of the different parties involved to seek a solution in the field still by force of arms could lead only to a stalemate.
The Twelve are convinced that the only way out of this long-drawn-out conflict lies in dialogue and national reconciliation. The continuing instability in that region is also adding to the tragedy of the Vietnamese boat people. The Twelve share the determination of the Secretary-General and the international community to find a solution to this problem. In the case of the Korean peninsula. we should like again to voice the hope that, in accordance with the principle of universality enshrined in our Organization, the Korean people may enjoy full representation in the United Nations at an early date.
The progress that has been accomplished and the stronger conviction we now have that peace is possible everywhere can only strengthen our resolve to work the Middle East. In the Middle East at a time when, on the Palestinian  side, a number of important decisions have opened up fresh prospects for a realistic search for a settlement of the Israeli conflict and the Palestinian question, no real progress has yet been made in responding to those moves. Yet the passage of time is not working to anybody's advantage. Let us beware of the disappointment that is bound to be aroused by such missed opportunities.
The Community is making the same message plain to one and all: if a peace settlement is to be reached, then it is necessary to recognize, both in the Middle East and elsewhere in the world, the right of all States, and of Israel in particular, to security and the right of all peoples to justice - in other words, the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination, with everything which that implies. In the Community's view, the appropriate way to attain those goals remains the organization of an international peace conference under the auspices of the United Nations.
The situation in the occupied territories provides a dramatic illustration of the effects of the lack of progress in seeking a settlement. The measures taken against the population in those territories - the continued closure of the universities, the expulsions, the extension and increase in the number of detentions on administrative grounds - have prompted the Twelve to appeal yet again to the Israeli authorities to abide by their obligations as the occupying Power, in accordance with the Security Council resolutions.
The Twelve, in the Madrid Declaration, have made their position known on the Israeli plan for organizing elections and granting provisional self-governing status to the territories. For the impact of such elections to be really meaningful, they should form part of a comprehensive settlement process based on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the application of the principle of land for peace, and they should be held with adequate guarantees of freedom throughout the occupied territories, including East Jerusalem. In the same spirit and on the basis of the same principles, the Twelve welcome Egypt's contribution to the peace process, as set out in the 10 Points  which President Mubarak has Put forward. The Twelve hope that this will
make it possible, in particular, to set in motion the necessary dialogue between Israelis and Palestinians.
Without waiting for the settlement which, they so earnestly desire, the Community and its member states plan to step up their cooperation with the occupied territories and to develop their program of assistance to the population, which has suffered so severely from the continuing occupation and its attendant restrictions. 
I now  wish to refer to Lebanon. In Lebanon, the tragedy of a nation that has been torn apart has lasted for 14 years now. Never has the suffering been so great as over the past few months, nor the battles so bloody, nor the ordeals borne by everybody so horrendous.
It is this that has prompted the Community and its Member States to call for an effective cease-fire and the lifting of the blockades and for a start to be made towards a process of national reconciliation ensuring the full restoration of Lebanese sovereignty on the basis of fresh institutions. They have constantly given their support to the moves made by the Arab League, which were initially led by the Committee of Six and subsequently by that of the three Heads of State. They welcome that top-level Committee's resumption of its mission, which they fully support, and hope that once the parties have all agreed to its proposals, dialogue and the quest for peace will prevail.
It is now essential that, at a moment when dialogue is being renewed, all Lebanese parties be freed from external pressures so that they may be able to agree on a new system for living side by side, one that takes into account the existing demographic and social situation. Through the introduction of such a system and the withdrawal of all foreign forces - with the exception of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) - Lebanon must regain its full sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity. 
This is what France has been endeavouring to do, and will continue to do with the support of its partners in the Community, while making it its constant concern to support the Arab moves led by the Tripartite Committee until hope is rekindled in Lebanon.
At the same time the Community and its member States have signified their solidarity with the entire Lebanese people by undertaking an assistance programme aimed at alleviating their suffering and at contributing to the restoration of normal living conditions and the resumption of economic and social activities.
We cannot speak of Lebanon without referring to the fate of the hostages, several of whom are nationals of the Community's member States. How can we forget Colonel Higgins, who was serving the United Nations? The Twelve condemn the taking of hostages, which must be fought with all the means at our disposal in the spirit of the relevant resolutions adopted by the Security Council. The Twelve wish to appeal to those countries which might be able to exert some influence in secure the liberation of the hostages.
I should like to state the Community's unchanging position with regard to Cyprus, a member of the European family. The Twelve call on all the parties to co-operate with the Secretary-General and his Representative on the spot with a view to overcoming the existing obstacles and finding the paths to dialogue. The Twelve ask them not to let slip the opportunity now available for a just and lasting settlement that will safeguard the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of Cyprus in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations.
We all know that world peace is a sacred cause. It warrants all the energy and resolve we can devote to it. It calls for determination and obstinacy. We may. no doubt, feel rather discouraged when no sooner has one hotbed of tension died down than others flare up, for we are then dogged by feelings of hopelessness, like those which Sisyphus may be felt at the top of his mountain before the stone started to roll down again.
And yet, hope remains alive when the chain of men and women epitomized by our Assembly are still linked together in the service of peace. We know that that unremitting task is a collective one and that progress cannot be made unless we are all mobilized.
Hence it is with the same determination, the same degree of hope and the same trust in good fortune that we have to tackle other conflicts and other areas of tension, evidence of further rifts here and there.
I should here like to turn to the case of those two countries, Senegal and Mauritania, which were living in harmony and united by a common design, but which have suddenly been rocked by violence to the point where they have now become brother enemies. Can Senegal and Mauritania soon return to the path of understanding and dialogue? The Twelve earnestly hope so. This is why they are supporting the mediation efforts of President Mubarak and hope that conciliation and reason will prevail.
Other tragedies are being played out. In Ethiopia, where the civil war continues to rage bringing in its wake a host of displaced populations, suffering and poverty, prospects for dialogue seem nevertheless to be emerging. The Twelve hope to do all they can to pave the way for negotiation and reconciliation. The same holds true for the Sudan and Somalia.
In this connexion I should like to pay a tribute to the action of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), whose work everyone considers irreplaceable.
Lastly, I should like to mention the hopes aroused by the discussions between the Governments at Colombo and New Delhi in a bid to restore peace and national unity in Sri Lanka. 
In the case of East Timor, the Twelve reaffirm their support for the contacts between Portugal and Indonesia under the auspices of the Secretary-General. They hope that early progress will lead to a just and comprehensive settlement, accepted internationally.
The cause of peace is making progress in spite of everything, as we can see, and our Assembly bears special witness to the fact. It is making progress through multilateral and bilateral dialogue, through the readiness of States to renounce war in settling their differences, and through the action of the United Nations in every instance where its mediation is imperative. The Twelve intend to associate themselves fully with this ever renewed task and they will play a major role in quelling conflicts, by reasons, I would say, of their very nature and calling, and through the example they are setting through the agreement among them and their prospective union.
Yet peace-making, the reduction of tensions and the banishment of violence cannot be dissociated from the struggle against the inequalities marking international economic development. We must take care - I say again - not to provoke new trouble spots that might be stirred up by the revolt of the poor. We must make sure that growth world-wide is shared more fairly and is more balanced and more geared to coping with the abject poverty of those countries which have few natural endowments or which have been ill-treated by history or crushed by the burden of debt. Action in favour of growth and development is, more than ever, an integral part of the struggle for peace. The Community has made that fact a key feature of its relations with the rest of the world.
Since the beginning of the 1980s, economic growth has recovered and has brought about a sharp increase in trade. Our aim is to consolidate that trend while at the same time continuing the struggle against inflation and unemployment. We have to ensure that everybody benefits from the movement. The fact that whole regions, in particular in Africa and Latin America, are continuing to lag behind
would reduce all efforts to naught if priority were not given to North-South solidarity.
As the world's foremost trading power and its leading provider of aid, the European Community considers that tangible steps have to be taken in the three key areas of international economic co-operation, development and the environment, about which I shall now say a few words.
In recent years Europe, together with Japan and a number of other Asian partners, has progressively taken over the momentum formerly generated by growth in the United States. Such growth is healthy and is the outcome of efforts of investment and modernization and the determined and convergent action of member States to hold down inflation and, above all, to finalize the establishment of the internal market by 1993.
This internal market will not be self-contained. The Europe of 1993 will be a "Europe of partners". The programme for finalizing the creation of the internal market will not entail any weakening of the Community's international obligations. All its multilateral or bilateral commitments are and will be respected. It is in our very interest to preserve and encourage a free and open trading system.
All Europe's partners will benefit from the single market of 1993 as a result of the dismantling of frontiers, the improvement of access procedures and the greater degree of transparency. The economic growth generated by the merger of 12 markets into a single market of 320 million consumers will work to the advantage of everybody when it is borne in mind that imports, which already account for one quarter of its gross domestic product, are expected to progress even further.
In more specific areas, the efforts deployed by the Community at the internal level will also have positive effects for third countries. For instance, the progressive accomplishment of economic and monetary union - which will be one of our major priorities in the coming months - will be instrumental in contributing to the stability of the international monetary system.
The reform of the Common Agricultural Policy, on which work started five years ago, is continuing, it is contributing to the improvement of the world market situation. The Co-unity reaffirms the undertakings it gave at the mid-term meeting of the Uruguay Round negotiations in April 1989. The efforts it is making
are considerable, and I would recall that it remains the world's largest importer of agricultural products.
In 1989 the Community has continued to strengthen its relations with all the regions of the world. First, it is making preparations with the European Free Trade Association for a renewed framework for dialogue and co-operation. Then, a series of agreements have been concluded with the countries of Eastern Europe: with Hungary, Czechoslovakia and, even more recently, with Poland, to which Commissioner Adriessen and myself paid a visit. Developments in this last-named country make it increasingly urgent to dispatch the aid that was decided on at the Summit of the Arch and accepted by 24 countries. We must force the pace to respond to the extent of the need.
Negotiations are being conducted with the Soviet Union and Bulgaria, and are being envisaged with the German Democratic Republic. This is the basis on which the Community plans to engage in a variety of forms of co-operation to supplement that in which its member States are already engaging.
The creation of the Arab Maghreb Union will enable the European Economic to step up and diversify the already very rewarding relations it maintains with those Mediterranean countries. Discussions are proceeding with the countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council for the purpose of supplementing the Cooperation Agreed signed in 1988 by means Of a fresh trade agreement.
In Asia, 1989 has been a year marked by new joint steps taken by the EEC and the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN, in their bid to further industrial cooperation by stepping up investments. With its Latin American partners, the Community is pursuing its efforts to diversify cooperation and trade. in Central America, it is developing it cooperation under the San Jose Agreements, thereby enhancing the efforts being made by the countries of the isthmus.
Lastly, I should like to express my deep satisfaction at the improvement in the Community's trade relations with its main partners in the developed world, where willingness to negotiate is now the overriding consideration.
This improvement in the climate is fragile, and our best chance of consolidating it is to complete the Uruguay Round negotiations by the date scheduled and to secure substantive results in all areas.
In the coming months, North-South solidarity will be in the international headlines: the renewal of the lome Convention, the special session of the United Nations General Assembly on economic cooperation and development, the second international conference on the least developed countries in Paris, and the launching of the fourth development decade.
Let us grasp the opportunity offered by these various occasions, for they will make it possible to take stock of what has been achieved and also to realize that we need to go further. Development depends to a large degree on the domestic strategies adopted by the countries concerned themselves. A large number of developing countries have embarked on a courageous adjustment process that is an essential requirement, even though it may sometimes give rise to problems from the social and political standpoints. I wish to pay tribute to their efforts which often demand heavy sacrifices.
However, these efforts will be useful only if they are made in a favourable international environment. In the first place, it is absolutely essential to lighten the burden of excessive indebtedness which has now become intolerable. In this crucial area, the concerted and constructive approach that has prevailed has already made it possible to overcome the inhibiting factors and to record some measure of progress.
Several of the Community's  member States have taken additional steps in favour of the poorest countries by cancelling official development assistance loans. France, for its part, has announced through the President of the Republic an across-the-board cancellation of the debts accruing from development assistance in the case of 35 of the poorest African entries. This measure will come into force on 1 January 1990 and is - I must say here - free of any conditions.
At the same time, other countries which are certainly not as poor but which are grappling with a heavy burden of indebtedness to the banks are having to face difficult political and economic choices. This is particularly the case in Latin America where solving the debt problem should make it possible to consolidate and strengthen democracy in the region. 
Two countries, Mexico and the Philippines, have already successfully embarked on that path. But progress in coping with indebtedness cannot be sufficient in itself to ensure development, and fresh resources are necessary. Such resources must, in the first instance, be generated by trade. The Community has already, to a large extent, opened up its market to products from the developing countries, without awaiting the conclusion of the Uruguay Round, it has recently made significant improvements in the access of tropical products to its market.
In the ongoing renegotiation of the Lome Convention, it will endeavour to improve further an arrangement that is already proving advantageous. Even so, for the vast majority of the developing countries, dependent as they are on a handful of export comities, access to the markets of the industrialized countries is not enough. The Common Fund for commodities, should now come into force. For its part, the Community plans to strengthen the STABEX and SYSMIN mechanisms for the stabilization of export earnings under the Lome Convention.
Alongside these measures, official development assistance still represents a lifeline, and the Community is already making a considerable effort in that regard. The assistance proved by its member States taken together has been quite clearly moving in the direction of the 0.7 per cent target since the early 1980s.
In the final analysis, however, economic development hinges on an unfailing international mobilization of forces to protect our environment. The heating up of the atmosphere, the deterioration of the ozone layer, the pollution of the oceans and freshwater resources and desertification - all pose a threat to our entire planet.
Contending with this threat at an early date is a responsibility that is incumbent upon all of us.
Many developing countries do not always have sufficient funds for that purpose. An effort by the industrialized countries to introduce new forms of co-operation and financing will make it easier for the individual countries in the world to take care of the environment and to manage their natural resources in a common endeavour. This must surely be one of the most necessary forms that international solidarity can take.
Such solidarity is exemplary when it takes the form of protecting the tropical forests, helping Bangladesh to combat the incalculable consequences of flooding, or setting up an observatory in the Sahara.
The planetary scale of the threat is such that international negotiations are needed to spell out the objectives of common interest.
With that prospect in mind, the conference on the environment and development, which the United Nations Secretary-General is convening in 1992, will represent a major turning-point. Before then, the world climate conference which will take place in 1990 should afford an opportunity for making significant progress on the question of the greenhouse effect. The Community earnestly calls for the conclusion of an international agreement on climatic changes, and it would also like a dialogue to be started on ocean-bed mining. The Community has already taken, or is about to take, a number of decisions having immediate effects the early implementation, and at a faster pace, of the Helsinki decisions on the eradication of chlorofluorocarbons; the launching of a programme of action on the greenhouse effect; accession to the Basle Convention on movements of dangerous waste; the creation of a European environmental agency and the drawing-up of a tropical forest assistance programme.
These actions, coupled with support for the current international negotiations and with the integration of environmental issues into co-operation with the developing countries, are indicative of the Community's growing commitment to the preservation of our planetary environment.
There are other threats that also call for our vigilance and decisive action. We likewise cannot keep silent at the violations of mankind's most fundamental freedoms and rights. There are many such violations and they unfortunately continue to exist in too many countries on all the continents.
The Twelve are constantly waging war on behalf of human rights, which are the foundation of the United Nations, for they cannot remain indifferent to the intolerable violations to which those rights are being subjected. It is not that they are trying to behave as a censor, rather their fight is inspired by the values which underpin the Community and have brought its member States together.
The events of Tiananmen Square are still present in our memories, we may ask whether the European Community's relations with Beijing have been compromised for a long time to case. We sincerely hope that this will not be the case. We shall show vigilance, however, in the hope that the leaders of the People's Republic of China will eventually heed the appeals addressed to them by the entire international community. 
We also attach considerable importance to ensuring that China fully abides by the undertakings it has given in respect of the constitutional instruments for Hong Kong.
The Twelve wish to launch a further appeal for the Burmese people to be allied freely to exercise its right of expression.
Free elections have been held in Panama also. The Twelve are giving their support to the efforts of the Organization of American States to put forward a solution to the crisis, they reaffirm their reservations about the new regime currently in power, which does not enjoy any form of institutional legitimacy.
I turn now to South Africa - yet again. It has to be asked whether the winds of change bluing over southern Africa as a whole will also have a positive impact in South Africa. The Twelve, which have constantly denounced the particularly odious apartheid regime, have taken note of the statements made by the South African leaders asserting their determination to embark on reforms. However, the
twelve likewise note - and deplore - the extension of the state of emergency, the continuing ban on anti-apartheid organizations, the pursuit of repression and the continued detention of a large number of political prisoners, starting with Nelson Mandela. They will not let up the pressure until the aims being sought have been attained.
Violations of human rights are the blight of international relations, the leprosy of modern times. The Assembly has been witness to the emergence of the most admirable legal instruments and high-minded resolutions, which every State has accepted. How can one not speak here of the emotion of people who are suffering and whose hopes have been suddenly dashed in the face of brute force and the abuse of authority or merely a lack of understanding at man's relentless and courageous march towards freedom? I should like to pay tribute to the Commission on Human Rights, which is striving with all its might to win respect for the values enshrined in the United Nations. This year the Commission has submitted two particularly important drafts to the Assembly, after some years spent on the
difficult task of putting them together. These are the draft of the second optional protocol covering the abolition of the death penalty and the draft of a convention on the rights of the child. I hope that final consultations will permit the General Assembly to adopt these two drafts by consensus at this session.
Respect for freedom cannot be dissociated from the rejection of terrorism. Resorting to the barbaric practices of terrorism is unwarranted, whatever the circumstances. All terrorists have to be brought to justice. That means that every country must adopt a very firm attitude and that there has to be a concerted response.
With the early prospect of the creation of a Community area without internal borders, there is increased collaboration between the agencies responsible for public order in the Twelve, which consider that, as the threat stands at present, there are no grounds for relaxing their vigilance.
But there is another challenge to democratic values which cannot go un-mentioned: the scourge of drug abuse. The tragic events in Colombia last month, when the drug traffickers demonstrated their deadly power, have once again underscored the need to strengthen international cooperation in the fight against drugs. I wish to pay tribute to the authorities of Colombia for their coverage. The Community gives its full backing to them and to the measures taken by the President of the United States. Over and above the action being taken at the regional level, the Twelve consider that an effective solution to drug problems has to be sought in an international context involving producer countries, consumer countries and the countries of transit. It is with that in mind that the Twelve consider that the right forum for this purpose is the United Nations, with its Commission on Narcotic Drugs and the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control, and that they have contributed to the adoption of the new United Nations Convention against illicit drug trafficking, opened for signature on 20 December 1988.
The Community attaches the utmost importance to the work of the United Nations, as demonstrated by its very active participation in peace-keeping operations. That is why our first concern is to see the efficiency of the United  Nations enhanced and to learn about the initial results of the reforms undertaken for that purpose.
This is the first time that it has fallen to France, which is the current President of the Council of the European Communities, to speak in this capacity before the Assembly on behalf of the Europe of the Twelve. I am conscious of the honour that has been done to me. In France's eyes, the European Community is a very great undertaking whose scope it readily adopts as its own. I hope that the Community's identity will grow stronger as it increasingly opens to the world. Through its voice in international organizations and the presence and action of the "troika" when urgent issues arise, the Community sends out a message of peace from its own people to the other peoples of the world. I am happy to have been able to speak on behalf of Europe.
Allow me, in conclusion, to say a few words on behalf of my own country. The ardent desire for peace, the aspiration for progress and the sacred defence of the law all represent, for every man and woman on our planet, the sum total of hope that no force on earth can ever stifle. That is the significance of the steps which France has taken in 1989, with the Conference on the prohibition of chemical weapons, action on human rights, action on behalf of Lebanon, and the Paris Conference on Cambodia. That is also why France has resolutely chosen, in the family of nations, to support the most impoverished and least favoured peoples. 
On the threshold of the year 2000, we are faced with and involved in fresh struggles. Let us wage them without beating around the bush and without asking futile questions. Future generations will judge us by the manner in which we have responded to the major challenges of the present, such as the threat to the environment, the crushing poverty of millions of human beings, and the violation of rights and freedoms. 
  The key word in response to all these problems is .is solidarity. It is France's fervent hope that voices will speak out in unison from this prestigious forum to enjoin the international community to give fresh impetus everywhere to dialogue, development and peace.
﻿
Let me first, if I my, sir, add my congratulations to those you have already received on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly. The first country .that I ever lived and worked in outside my own was Nigeria - in Jos, your home town - and I have a very great affection for the country and for its citizens. I wish you the greatest possible success in your presidency. I wish also to thank the outgoing President, Mr. Dante Caputo, and to pay a tribute to the tireless work of the Secretary-General throughout the past year.
Fifty years ago this month, war began in Europe and spread throughout the world. Fifty-five million people died. The landscape of international relations was profoundly changed. That war inspired the creation of this Organization. The United Nations, conceived out of war, was the best framework our predecessors could devise for law, for order, and for peace. Hopes for it then were high, but they did not last. Even as the General Assembly was meeting for the first time, in London, divisions were opening between the two halves of Europe. The peoples of the East, for whom my country went to war, found that victory had been secured at an appalling price. They had won the peace, but they had lost their freedom. That division of Europe and that loss of freedom imposed a polarity on world affairs which has bedevilled international politics for over 40 years. Today, I am struck by the enormous and cheering contrast with those times. I believe that the feeling of hope and opportunity in world affairs is greater today than at any time since the Assembly first met, in London, my home town. 
The hopes of the early days have been revived. Ideologies have become less Potent: it is less and less relevant to talk of Easiest, or North-South, or the first, second, third or even fourth worlds. Instead, we should talk of a world whose nation States have reciprocal rights, responsibilities and obligations. There is only one world. We all share in it and must make of it what we can. Today, the opportunities for the United Nations to make good use of that fine framework for law, order and peace I spoke of have suddenly become real. There are new problems that we must face together. We have moved from cold war to global warming. Fresh ideas and attitudes are changing the face of the Soviet Union and
Eastern Europe. I agree with Mr. Shevardnadze that it is in the interests of all of us for perestroika to succeed.
Liberty is reasserting itself in Poland and in Hungary and is drawing thousands of Germans from East to West. The cold war is ending where it started. Even the Berlin Wall cannot stem the exodus of people seeking a new life in freedom. No one doubts, I think, that we are only at the beginning of a long and difficult process. Patience and goodwill are necessary on a11 sides. Yesterday, Mr. Shevardnadze offered an authoritative Soviet view of recent events in Poland. I warmly welcome his remarks. I hope and believe that in making them he was burying, once and for all, the so-called Brezhnev doctrine, which was used to justify the invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968. with freedom no longer seen as a threat, there is a real opportunity to build a new Europe.
The first priority for East-West relations must be to support and encourage the process of reform which is now under way. That will reinforce trust and confidence. A co-ordinated approach, including very substantial economic support, is essential. The European Community has made clear its readiness to play its full part, with both short- and long-term measures. Both will be needed. The challenge is to work in partnership with others to bring about a Community of Europe, to stand alongside the Community in Europe. The goal is a Europe of peace, prosperity and freedom, where the terms East and west have more to do with geography than with politics - a Europe without enforced divisions, whose people are at liberty to determine their own future.
Increasing trust will assist the process of arms control. Success in this field is a priority. For the past 40 years the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) has resolutely maintained the peace in Europe. Now it is taking new opportunities to consolidate that peace. NATO countries have tabled far-reaching conventional arms proposals. Their aim is clears it is enhanced security at equal and lower levels of forces in Europe. More peace at less cost is an attractive bargain for everyone.
We are encouraged by the steps agreed upon between the United States and the Soviet Union to achieve faster progress towards an early START agreement. The proposed 50 per cent cuts in their nuclear arsenals will make a major contribution to international security and stability.
We are working also for the achievement of a global chemical weapons ban. I warmly welcome the proposals made by President Bush on Monday and the positive Soviet response to them. The reduction of United States and Soviet stockpiles ahead of a convention will do much to reassure countries that do not possess chemical weapons and will also remove the rationale for other countries to cling to their stocks. It is through practical steps like these that Governments can best show their determination to get rid of these gruesome weapons. My country gave up its chemical weapons 30 years ago. We look forward to other countries destroying theirs.
We should look also for a way to give more impetus and focus to the Geneva negotiations on chemical weapons. Today I propose one way to do this: let us move from the present intermittent pattern of negotiations to round-the-year meetings, as already happens in other areas of arms control. We can also be encouraged by the progress that has been made towards the resolution of regional conflicts in different parts of the world. In Namibia the international community, and the united Nations in particular, has shown what co-operation can achieve. Security Council resolution 435 (1978) is more than a decade old, but its principles have remained valid. That in turn has opened the way to Namibian independence.
The Namibian independence process is the direct responsibility of the United Nations and the Secretary-General personally, since we met last year, there has been major progress towards implementation of the United Nations plan. Now, as Namibia's elections draw near, it is vital for all of us to give our full support to the Secretary-General and the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG). All the parties involved must show restraint, particularly in the face of provocation, such as the recent murder of Anton Lubowski. Violence and intimidation will serve only those who wish to deny Namibia its freedom.
But Namibia will need help after independence as well. Britain will Play a full part in that effort. At the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting next month we shall also be considering what help the Commonwealth can provide. Next year, I hope, a free, independent Namibia will have taken its place in the Assembly and also, I trust, as a welcome new member of the Commonwealth. 
Fighting still continues in Angola and in Mozambique, but there is now some movement towards peace in both of those countries. I urge both sides in Angola to restore the cease-fire and to resume negotiations on the basis of the common ground identified in June. For our part, we shall continue to give full support to President Chissano's efforts to achieve a peaceful settlement with Renamo. We call upon the new South African Government to support those efforts in the letter and spirit of the Nkomati accord. That means making sure that no support - no support - goes from South Africa to Renamo.
South Africa remains the key to lasting stability in that region. In the recent elections, 70 per cent of the white-minority electorate voted for change. One hundred per cent of the black population, denied a vote, are calling urgently for change. Mr. de Klerk campaigned from a platform of reform. He committed himself to work for a new South Africa, in which all the people would be fully represented. He made a clear declaration of intent. There is now a clear mandate. Now the declaration and the mandate must be turned into action.
Of one thing I am sure. Apartheid cannot survive and it does not deserve to survive. It is not something to be tolerated or to be patient with, it is something to oppose constantly and comprehensively. 
Violence is not the answer. Nor are economic sanctions. They weigh the possibility of change against the certainty of immediate, lasting hardship to the black community whose growing economic muscle is already contributing to the erosion of apartheid.
No. The answer to apartheid is unremitting political pressure on South Africa to reform itself, wise policy lies in assistance and support for the innocent victims of apartheid within South Africa - political prisoners and township dwellers alike. It lies also in support for the economies of South Africa's neighbours and help for them to defend themselves against attempts at destabilization. Positive action, constructive action - action in which Britain's record is second to none and will remain so.
 Many brave men and women in South Africa have struggled peacefully and Persistently against apartheid. If I single out Helen Suzman, it is because, for 40 years, often alone in the South African Parliament, often in the face of threats and intimidation, she fought for freedom. She is in London today. I am pleased to tell the Assembly that she will be honoured by Her Majesty the Queen with one of our highest awards for all she has done in the campaign for justice. In her name, Britain will be funding a new scholarship scheme, soon bringing to 1,000 the number of our annual scholarships for black South Africans.  The new Government in South Africa must now move quickly and unambiguously to meet its commitment to fundamental reform. A new and just society cannot be constructed overnight. But we are clear what should happen. We want to see the release of detainees, the lifting of the state of emergency, the suspension of violence and a dialogue with black leaders to consider and to implement the changes that must be made.  I hope that the United Nations will be ready to respond appropriately to clear and practical signs of change. But signs there must be. That should be our common message to South Africa's leaders.
Since we last met, my country and Argentina have taken significant steps towards achieving a more normal relationship, in doing so, the two countries have agreed to set the question of sovereignty over the Falkland Islands on one side. Following preliminary talks here in August, both sides will be meeting again in Madrid this month. For our part, we shall work hard to ensure the success of the process which has now begun. It will not be easy. And our ambitions should not be set too high too soon. But we enter these negotiations hoping for agreement. In the Middle East, the resolutions which are the core of the search for peace are now nearly a generation bid. Another generation of refugees and dispossessed people has new been added to what is first and foremost a human tragedy.
Last year's renunciation of terrorism by the PLO and its willingness to recognize Israel were a major breakthrough. I hope that Israel will come to recognize that. The Israeli Government's proposal for elections in the occupied territories is a positive step too. I hope the PLO will come to recognize that. I pay tribute to the efforts of President Mubarak in taking these ideas forward. Elections must be part of a process leading to final status negotiations on the basis of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). We believe that the best framework for these negotiations is an international conference under United Nations auspices.
In Lebanon, we have witnessed for years a process of national self-destruction. Now it seems there is a glimmer of hope. We have welcomed and supported the efforts of the Arab League Committee of Three. They offer a bridge to peace. We hope all concerned in Lebanon's conflict will cross it. A particular threat hangs over the hostages in Lebanon. They are the victims of a detestable form of blackmail which threatens the entire international community.
It is hard to appreciate the anguish of those held hostage, although I have seen the suffering of some of their families, and seen, too, their courage and determination, which is remarkable. John McCarthy, Terry Waite, and now Jackie Mann, three British hostages, have been held for a total of more than 2,000 days. We must keep them and the other hostages constantly in the public eye. They most not be forgotten or overlooked. We must make every effort to press for their unconditional release. There are countries with influence on the hostage-takers. They should use that influence without delay to secure the hostages, safe release, state terrorism is no more acceptable through agents than carried out directly.  It is time to return the hostages to their families, and that should be the message from this Assembly.  
Upon one further Point we must all be clear. We must and we dare not give in to the blackmail of terrorists. The Security Councils resolution on terrorism last July added the authority of this Organisation to that message. We need to work for the wide adoption of specific counter-measures. After horrific bombing of Pan Am night 103, the United Kingdom, with Czechoslovakia. is seeking an international agreement on the marking of explosives. All of us are naturally concerned at inflict or tension between countries, or within countries. A number of instates were raised on behalf of European Community countries by my colleague, Roland Dumas. yesterday. I would single out only one, Burma, where  here is an urgent need for the restoration of human rights and democracy through free elections. Earlier this year millions of us around the world were shocked to see Chinese troops kill and wound their fellow citizens on the orders of their own Government. 
The measures that we have taken in response to those events are not. however, intended to isolate China. We hope to see China return to genuine reform and to repair the damage done to its international relations. No Government can survive indefinitely by the suppression of peaceful dissent. By treaty. Hong Kong will revert to China in 1997. By treaty, Hong Kong will also preserve its traditional freedoms and way of life. That treaty, the Sino-British Joint Declaration of 1984, is binding. It has been registered as such at the United Nations by both Britain and China.
I welcome unreservedly China's reaffirmation of its commitment to the Joint Declaration. Britain is likewise committed, bindingly and whole-heartedly. But our common commitment must now be reflected in action. And practical reassurances are required from China to the people of Hong Kong, so that they may feel secure in their future, both up to 1997 and beyond. Hong Kong is resilient. Its economy continues to thrive. But it will take time, steady nerves and, above all, an explicitly supportive attitude on the part of China to restore Hong Kong's confidence in its future.
For our part, Britain will continue vigorously to represent the interests of Hong Kong's people in our discussions with China, we intend also to introduce concrete measures to reassure people in the territory about their future. They include-, the early introduction of a Bill of Rights; the development of more representative government; and a package to encourage people essential to Hong Kong's future stability and prosperity to stay there, by giving them guarantees of resettlement in Britain if they wish. That package will be designed not to strip Hong Kong of its people, but to give them hope and confidence to remain in Hong Kong. 
	Hong Kong's continued confidence and success is in the interest of the entire international community. In return, Hong Kong needs international understanding and support. That was recognized by the Paris economic summit, and I hope it will also be recognized by this Assembly. International understanding and support is also required in response to the intractable problem of the Vietnamese boat people.
The continuing human exodus from Viet Nam has imposed an insuperable burden on Places of first asylum in the region. Hong Kong alone has more than 56,000 boat people in its camps-, over 32,000 of them have arrived this year.
Yet the bleak reality is that for most of these people there are no homes to go to outside their own country. They are not political refugees. Under the criteria laid down by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, they have left Viet Nam for economic reasons, and not under political pressure.  In June, at Geneva, the International Conference on Indo-Chinese Refugees agreed that: "Persons determined not to be refugees should return to their country of origin in accordance with international practices reflecting the responsibility of States towards their own citizens." That is surely the only answer. Alas, there is no room for them in Hong Kong. There is no hope of a home in any new country. The existing situation is, therefore, unsustainable.
The international community knows that it cannot simply leave this problem with Hong Kong in the hope that somehow they will cope. They cannot cope. The Government and the people of Hong Kong have done all they can. They have put up 15 camps. They have provided food, clothing, schooling. But the limit of their capacity to help has been reached.
For those boat people who are genuine refugees, homes are being found in countries around the world. That is as it should be. But for those boat people who are not refugees, there can ultimately be only one home: the one they came from, so far, only a few of them have recognized this and volunteered to return. We look to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to step up counselling of the non-refugees to ensure that more of them know that there is no future for them outside their own country.
In mid-October, the international community will review developments since the Geneva Conference. The main purpose must be to agree a programme of repatriation under the good offices of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. That must involve the phased, orderly and monitored return and re-integration in safety and dignity of all those who are not genuine refugees. To achieve that, Viet Nam must assume full responsibility for its own people and co-operate in the programme. We shall work in good faith with the Vietnamese authorities to that end.
The world that many of us grew up in was haunted by memories of war and overshadowed by the threat of nuclear destruction. Yet, for many of us, it was a much more innocent world than today. Our parents did not live in fear that their children could be exposed to the lethal menace of drugs. We as parents today can have no such peace of mind.
That is why the town of Medellin is now a household name throughout the world. That is why Colombia's battle against drugs is a battle on behalf of us all. The power of the traffickers transcends national boundaries. It demands an international response. I can announce today that, following discussions with the Colombian authorities, my Government has approved a substantial package of assistance for Colombia. It draws on our experience in fighting terrorism. It will comprise communications and towards equipment, technical assistance, and training for those in Colombia involved in the anti-drugs campaign. However, it is vital to make intensified efforts to reduce demand in consumer countries - to put the traders in human misery out of business. Britain will be hosting, in close co-operation with the United Nations, a major international conference in London next April to tackle the problems of demand reduction and cocaine.
The United Nations already makes a significant contribution to international efforts to combat the drugs menace. But we must all do more. All states should ratify the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances. Britain will do so and has also signed nine agreements so far with other countries permitting the tracing and confiscation of the assets of drug traffickers. The world in which many of us grew up was also a more ignorant world. Pew then appreciated the fragility of the environment which sustains life. But today, if ever there was an issue that should unite the nations, it is this one. To meet this global challenge we need stronger international institutions and clearer priorities. 
That is why Britain has more than doubled its voluntary financial contribution to the United Nations Environment Programme. That is why Britain called in May for the early negotiation of an international convention on climate change. And that is why Britain is active in helping to protect tropical forests, whose importance in terms of both climate and resources is now far better understood. The priorities of preservation must live alongside the priorities of development and economic growth. A balance has to be struck. Our philosophy has to be sustainable development, development that benefits mankind and protects his environment. Partnership is a new watchword for the relationship between developed and developing countries. The priorities for that partnership are clear. In the first instance it must be for developing countries themselves to pursue sound economic policies. But development aid has an important part to play. So does action by creditor countries to relieve the debt burden on countries pursuing reform, and most especially on the poorest. International trade must be kept open and inflation contained to assist growth. Britain will continue to work for progress in all those areas.
Experience has shown us that focusing tightly and in turn on the key issues is a better approach than looking for generalized global solutions. The international community, with the United Nations as its chosen instrument, faces a formidable range of challenges. But they are matched by opportunities. The demands on the United Nations are growing. But so is its prestige. So is its authority. So too is the extent of its engagement in new areas.
As we recall the conflict which created the United Nations, it is reassuring to find the Organization developing its role so successfully today. With the membership's continued support the process can be taken further still. All of us will gain from that. For, as the then British Prime Minister told the very first session of the General Assembly:  "The United Nations is really a coming together of all peoples in all countries and continents. It is not 'them' - it is; every one of us seeking, as citizens of the world, peace and security for humanity." Now, at last, we cure doing just that.
﻿
My delegation warmly welcomes the assumption by Ambassador Garba of- the stewardship of the forty-fourth session of the General Assembly. He is an eminent personality and distinguished representative of a country with which we have the friendliest of relations. We are confident that, with his well-known diplomatic skill and experience, the deliberations of this session of the Assembly will be both fruitful and purposive.
I should like to pay tribute to my friend Mr. Dante Caputo for the outstanding leadership he provided for the forty-third session of the Assembly. 1989 has been a year of consolidation of the much-enhanced role of the United Nations in international affairs. The Organization has had its peace-keeping or observation teams in almost all the troubled regions of the world, and everywhere they have been creditably discharging their functions. The critical contribution of the United Nations peace-keeping in the world was recognized by the well-merited award last year of the Nobel Peace Prize to the United Nations peace-keeping forces.
We admire the sure touch, assurance and promptness with which the Secretary-General, Mr. Perez de Cuellar, has been discharging the onerous aid growing responsibilities now being entrusted to the United Nations. In this he has displayed quiet competence aid a remarkable insight into the Organization's great potentialities as well as its limitations.
The Secretary-General referred in his report to "the renewal of confidence in multilateralism" (A/44/1, p. 3). Today multilateralism is no longer an ideal; it has become a necessity. Its ultimate validity has been driven home by the threat posed to human survival by the nuclear-arms race, the degradation of the environment and other non-military threats to security, such as poverty, underdevelopment, over-population and inequality, both within and among nations.
Multilateralism today has to deal with a new generation of problems. We have to cope with the rapid changes in the pattern of production, consumption and trade brought about by the technological revolution. We have to give direction to the new integrationist trends in the world economy, with a view to optimising their benefits. We have to evolve new rules, regulations and regimes to cope with new problems and opportunities in the fields of trade, manufactures, services, environment and science and technology.
The United Nations, as a linchpin of this multilateralism, must be strengthened. This is the only organization which is global in scope, universal in membership aid mandated by a treaty in the form of the Chatter. India welcomes the renewed confidence in the United Nations on the part of the major Powers.
Renewal of confidence in multilateralism cannot be partial or selective; it has to be total and all-embracing. It is unfortunate that, whereas the United Nations is now able to assert its rightful role in the political field, it is still not regarded by the major economic Powers as an appropriate forum for serious negotiations on economic issues. My delegation sincerely hopes that this imbalance will soon be redressed. The ongoing process of the formulation of an international development strategy for the 1990s and the forthcoming special session of the General Assembly devoted to international economic co-operation provide an excellent opportunity for it.
On the United Nations lies the onerous responsibility of bringing to the Namibian people their long-awaited independence, for which they have undergone so much suffering and made such heroic sacrifices. The process is well under way. The United Nations Transition Assistance Group, under the guidance of the Secretary-General, has so far done a creditable job under trying conditions. However, the path to Namibian independence is still strewn with many obstacles. To ensure the conduct of free and fair elections, great vigilance and caution need to be exercised, particularly by the Security Council. The lacunae and distortions in the election process should be identified and speedily removed. After the elections the Constituent Assembly should have the sovereign and unfettered right to frame the country's Constitution. The United Nations must ensure that there is no set-back to the process now under way and that the outcome of the elections truly reflects the wishes, hopes and aspirations of the Namibian people.
While Namibia's independence will signify the end of the South African regime's illegal occupation of that country, the citadel of apartheid in South Africa itself will still remain intact. Claims are being matte that the racial atmosphere in South Africa is undergoing change. The world is, however, watching carefully to see the quality, extent and pace of the change that the South African regime is willing to bring about. Apartheid cannot be reformed; it has to be totally dismantled. There is no half-way house to restoring human dignity and protecting human rights. The South African regime must demonstrate its willingness to negotiate unconditionally with the genuine representatives of the people of South Africa. In order to create a suitable climate for negotiation, it should release Nelson Mandela and other political prisoners, lift restrictions on political organizations and end the state of emergency. It must also show a desire to deal with the front-line States without intimidation and on the basis of equality and the principles enshrined in the United Nations Charter.
The forty-third session of the General Assembly closed on a note of optimism on the Palestinian question. The bold and courageous initiative of President Arafat and the initiation of the United States-Palestine Liberation Organization dialogue had created a positive climate. However, the situation still remains deadlocked. The intifadah, the unarmed Palestinian struggle, continues amidst increasing repression.
There can be no durable peace in West Asia without a just and comprehensive settlement, based on the realization by the Palestinian people of their inalienable right to self-determination and the recognition of the rights of all States in the region, including Palestine and Israel, to live in peace and security within internationally recognized borders. We are convinced that for this purpose the United Nations-sponsored International Peace Conference needs to be convened urgently.
The long civil strife in Lebanon has fractured the country's constitutional, political and economic framework. The success of the latest effort of the high-level Committee of the Arab League in bringing about a cease-fire is a glimmer of hope on the horizon. We hope that the current political dialogue will lead to national reconciliation and that peace and stability will soon return to Lebanon.
Two months ago the Conference convened in Paris raised hopes for the future of Cambodia. Significant progress was made at the Conference on many elements of the overall package. However, differences persisted among the Cambodian factions and some of the basic issues, resulting in the Conference's aiding without making any breakthrough. The completion of the withdrawal of the Vietnamese troops from Cambodia is a major, positive development. For further progress now it is necessary to adapt a balanced approach that takes into account the reality prevailing in Cambodia and the security and other interests of the countries of the region, and that provides for the cessation of all foreign interference and intervention in the internal affairs of Cambodia, so that the people of Cambodia can exercise their right to determine their own destiny. It is equally important to ensure at all costs that Cambodia is prevented from becoming once again the victim of the universally condemned genocidal policies and practices of the Pol Pot regime. The danger of the recurrence of fighting in Cambodia, of which the first signs are already visible, must be arrested. For this purpose, there is an imperative need for the cessation of arms supplies to all Cambodian factions.
India is concerned at the blood-bath in Afghanistan, Which has continued even after the Soviet Union completed the withdrawal of its troops on schedule. We call once again upon all parties to observe strictly and implement the Geneva accords in letter and spirit, to give up the futile search for a military solution and to come to the negotiating table for a political solution. Those who are trying to resolve the question by military means ate only prolonging the agony of the people of Afghanistan. President Najibullah recently made a series of far-reaching proposals for national reconciliation which in our opinion deserve serious consideration.
India has maintained traditionally close relations with both Iran and Iraq. We are therefore dismayed at the lack of progress in translating the cease-fire agreed upon last year between the two countries into a durable peace. My delegation supports the Secretary-General in his efforts to secure the implementation of Security Council resolution 598 (1987) and help resolve the vexatious issues between the two countries.
We are encouraged by the optimistic note struck by the Secretary-General regarding the prospects for resolving the long-standing problem in Cyprus on the basis of the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of that country. We urge him to redouble his efforts so as to take full advantage of the present propitious climate.
We are happy at the prospect of peace in Central America and the role the United Nations has been called upon to play in that process. The leaders of five Central American countries and the parties directly involved in the problems besetting Central America deserve our compliments for their statesmanship and foresight. We wish them success in implementing the Esquipulas process and the Tela agreement in their collective bid to restore peace.
In the Korean peninsula, which unhappily remains divided, there is an overwhelming sentiment in favour of peace, reconciliation and dialogue. India supports all efforts aimed at the peaceful reunification of Korea. In conformity with the principle of universality, India supports the aspirations of the Korean people to contribute actively towards the realization of the purposes aid principles of the United Nations through representation in this world body.
The international community should oppose racial discrimination wherever it is practiced. In Fiji efforts to institutionalise racial discrimination are continuing with hardly any resistance from the international community. The report of the Constitution Inquiry Advisory Committee does very little to eliminate the racially discriminatory character of the draft constitution. As the Foreign Minister of New Zealand has pointed out, "the Committee has failed to question the serious departure from fundamental democratic principles". We hope better sense will prevail before it is too late.
In Myanmar, the situation remains unstable as a result of the continuing repression of the democratic aspirations of the people. We sincerely hope the Burmese authorities will respond to the urging of their people for freedom and democracy and work with them to bring the present tensions to an end.
The recent breakthrough on some crucial aspects of the negotiations in the framework of the Strategic Arms Reduction Talks (START) has come as a welcome relief and has brightened hopes of an early conclusion of the negotiations. It is essential that the agreement be clinched without further loss of momentum.
In the meantime, the arms race moves apace without any sign of a let-up. Nuclear-weapons testing goes on unchecked, and so does the search for new systems and technologies and the modernization of existing weapon systems. The continued testing of nuclear particle beams, stealth bombers, smart weapons and new missiles is hardly going to inspire confidence in the world at large, much less among the interlocutors themselves. Those developments tend to confirm our basic apprehensions regarding the qualitative arms race, as clearly referred to by the Secretary-General in his report. Hence India's proposal for monitoring scientific and technological developments which have a bearing on international security.
There can be no meaningful progress either in nuclear disarmament or in achieving nuclear non-proliferation in the true sense of the term unless the doctrines of nuclear deterrence which underpin the present nuclear-arms race are discarded. In our view, that is at the root of the present dithering.
It was in view of those considerations that at the third special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi presented India's action plan for the total elimination of nuclear weapons by the year 2010. I call once again upon all countries, particularly the nuclear-weapon States, to initiate the necessary multilateral negotiations with the overall aim of moving towards a nuclear-weapon-free and non-violent world.
For the past several years, the international community has been pressing for a comprehensive chemical-weapons convention. The agreement recently reached between the United States and the Soviet Union, and the statements made last week in this Assembly by President Bush and Foreign Minister Shevardnadze, will no doubt facilitate an early conclusion of such a convention. We hope that all outstanding issues will be resolved and a chemical-weapons convention signed during 1990.
With the positive prospect of disarmament there is now a real opportunity to release resources from the military sector for development purposes. Even if such resources are utilized for development in the countries involved in the process of disarmament, it will bring some benefit to the world economy. However, a conscious effort must be made to ensure that pert of those resources go where they are most needed: to the developing countries. Appropriate institutional arrangements should be made within the United Nations for giving concrete shape to the link between disarmament and development so that the present opportunities are harnessed in the direction of global peace and security.
In recent years the world has witnessed a cancerous growth of terrorism at all levels. India supports all measures that would discourage terrorist acts, particularly the taking of innocent men and women as hostages. The recent international awareness against this menace must be translated into concrete actions to curb terrorism.
Since the General Assembly last met there has been an encouraging expansion in world trade aid output. However, the external environment for the development of developing countries continues to remain unfavourable. Official development assistance has been stagnating in real terms well below the internationally-agreed target of 0.7 per cent of gross national product. Other financial flows, particularly commercial flows, virtually dried up in the latter half of the 1980s. Commodity prices, in real terms, remained at the lowest levels reached in the past 50 years. Protectionism continues to constrain developing countries in their efforts to increase their exports. Decisions can global economic issues that affect developing countries continue to be taken in forums which exclude them.
Many developing countries are carrying out structural adjustments in their economies, as part of their effort to interact more closely with the mainstream of the world economy. This task can be performed in the context of a much more open, co-operative and growing world economy. The major challenge is to work out a package of policies which should ensure the return of the world economy to higher growth conditions shared by all groups of countries.
It is essential for this purpose to revitalize the north-south dialogue on the basis of mutuality of interest. Hence the Presidents of Egypt, Venezuela and Senegal and the Prime Minister of India took the initiative, in Paris in July this year, to call for the commencement of a process of summit-level consultations among developed and developing countries on global economic and environmental issues. Some major industrialized countries, such as France and Canada, have already responded positively to this initiative. We hope for a positive response from others.
The debt problem is shackling the growth of the heavily indebted countries. A welcome development in this regard is that various plans have been mooted and in a few cases, notably Mexico, elaborate packages involving cancellation or reduction of debts, have been negotiated. However, the level of resources required for these plans to make a real dent on the problems of indebtedness, while putting their economies back on the path of growth, are not forthcoming. And the conditionalities attached are far too onerous.
The debt problem threatens to engulf even those developing countries which despite severe difficulties, have so far managed their debts and balance-of- payments accounts well. In most of these countries, the debt-gross national product ratio has increased rapidly. This has coincided with a decline in real terms in concessional flows of resources which has pushed these countries towards higher commercial borrowings. This, in turn, has aggravated their already serious debt-servicing burden. Any comprehensive solution to the debt problem should include a set of anticipatory measures to prevent this category of developing countries from falling into the debt trap, by increasing the flow of development finance, particularly concessional resources, to them.
The Uruguay Round of trade negotiations provides an excellent opportunity to the international community to address itself to the asymmetries and distortions in the international trading system and to take measures for preserving and strengthening it. We are, however, concerned over the emerging imbalances in the negotiations because of the inadequate priority being given to the areas of special interest to developing countries and the growing pressures on these countries to undertake new obligations. In the new areas, the developmental, technological and public-interest needs of the developing countries should be taken fully into consideration. High priority should be given to the removal of barriers to the transfer of technology to these countries, and to the elimination of restrictive business practices followed by transnational corporations. Specific measures should be provided for the promotion of service industries of importance to developing countries.
There is, unfortunately, a tendency in some major industrialized countries to force their will on trading partners and to adopt unilateral coercive means to penetrate their markets in the name of liberalization. Such measures are unjust and irrational. They are hardly conducive to the success of a ma jot multilateral undertaking like the Uruguay Round.
The new centres of economic power are becoming the focal points for regional integration efforts. But we are concerned that this new economic regionalism may lead to the vivisection of the world economic system. Answers to our present-day complex economic problems do not lie in the narrow havens of regionally integrated markets but in a larger harbour of truly multilateral exchanges aid interactions.
Collective self-reliance through south-south co-operation constitutes a principal plank of the platform of the non-aligned arid other developing countries. Unfortunately, progress in this field has so far lagged behind expectations. A more determined effort backed by political will at the highest level is required. We look forward to the recommendations of the South Commission on this important subject.
Drug abuse and illicit trafficking in drugs have become the scourge of the present-day world. Hardly any corn try is immune from it. It is imperative, consequently, that the entire international community co-operate in the urgent task of combating this menace. In this connection, I welcome the proposal made by the distinguished President of Colombia calling for a special session of the General Assembly to deal with the drug problem.
Environmental issues have recently surged to the forefront of international concern. This is one of the major items on the General Assembly's agenda end, as we prepare for the world conference on environment and development proposed to be held in 1992, India strongly supports a comprehensive multilateral approach to solving the environmental problems.
Environmental issues are closely related to development and they cannot be viewed in isolation. In the first World Conference on Environment and Development held in Stockholm in 1972, the then Prime Minister of India, Shrineti Indira Gandhi, had driven home the crucial link between economic development and the protection of the environment by characterizing poverty as the greatest pollutant.
Here in the General Assembly, environment has been an area of consensus, a unifying concern. We hope it will remain so. This can happen only if the legitimate concerns of the developing countries are addressed adequately in any global endeavour to tackle environmental problems. International measures to deal with these problems should not attempt to freeze development and progress at the present unequal level.
Since the process of development in developed countries has led to the present environmental predicament, these countries have the major responsibility for taking corrective action, apart from the fact that they have also the wherewithal, both financial and technological, for this, unfortunately, the tendency recently has been to rely on regulatory measures which do not fully take into account the existing asymmetries in the level of industrialization and modernization of the developed and developing countries. From the point of view of the developing countries, supportive measures that enable them to protect the environment without compromising their development needs and priorities are of greater importance.
Turning to the practical aspect of the question, the proposal of the Prime Minister of India, Shri Rajiv Gandhi, made at the Ninth Summit Conference of the Non-Aligned Countries held in Belgrade in September, for the creation of a Planet Protection Fund (PPF), has received wide attention and support. 
We are particularly encouraged by the support extended by the PPF by President Vassiliou of Cyprus and the Prime Minister Brundtland of Norway. The proposal envisages a fund to which all countries, developing and developed, will contribute, except the least developed countries. The fund will be used to protect the environment by developing and purchasing conservation-compatible technologies in critical areas that can then be brought into, the public domain for the benefit of both developed and developing countries. In our view, the creation of such a Fund is sine qua non for arriving at a global compact for combating environmental degradation. I hope the General assembly will be able to lend its support to that proposal. 
As I speak here in my capacity as representative of India, my mind inevitably goes to a date next month, 14 November. It was on that day, 100 years ago, in 1889, that a great Indian was born. His name was Jawaharlal Nehru. He was born in riches, but sacrificed his all to join the struggle for India's freedom. In 1947, when India became free, the mantle of leading independent India fell upon him.  
Having see, the atrocities and indignities heaped upon man by man, having imbibed the lesson of truth and non-violence from his mentor Mahatma Gandhi, he emerged with a vision for India and for the world that was different from conventional wisdom. He spoke of the opportunity of moral force over military force. He spoke of non-alignment against bloc politics. He spoke of one world even as the world itself was being pulled asunder.  
In the beginning, his was a lone voice. But soon his association with Tito, Nasser and many other leaders led to the birth of the Non-Aligned Movement. Today, a vast majority of the nations of the world are members of the Movement; and those who are outside it recognize it as a major force in world politics and seek to associate themselves with it. Jawaharlal Nehru brought to the Non-Aligned movement the age-old message of peace - a precious heritage of all the great civilizations of the world. It was that message of peace that rescinded at the ninth Summit of the Nan-Aligned Movement, which happened to coincide with the centenary of Nehru's birth. Let me conclude with the message of peace that Nehru gave to the Assembly 33 years ago. He said-.
-I have no doubt that all the peoples of the world are passionately desirous of peace. I doubt if there are any people anywhere who desire war. Certainly the common man all over the world desires peace passionately, if that is so, why should we not follow the path of peace? Why should we be led away by fears, apprehensions, hatred and violence?"
﻿The United Nations was founded by the nations that had fought and won the most terrible war mankind has known - a war against racism, fascism, and man's inhumanity to man. This war began with Hitler's onslaught on Poland.
Fifty years ago this week, after intense fighting, the German army entered Warsaw, it was the inevitable outcome of the agreement reached at Munich a year earlier, in which Britain and France surrendered to Hitler's demands and sacrificed democratic Czechoslovakia in the name of self-determination and for the sake of what they thought was "peace in our time".
The month of September 1939 marked the beginning of the greatest and most terrible war known to mankind. That war will for ever be associated with the Holocaust - the systematic attempt by Nazi Germany to annihilate the Jewish people. Six million Jews - almost all of Europe's Jews - were murdered, first by being starved, beaten and shot to death, and later by being gassed in industrialized murder factories designed and installed for the express purpose of mass murder of Jews at Auschwitz, Majdanek, Treblinka, Sobibor, Dachau, Bergen-Belsen and other now infamous sites. Wherever the German army reached, no Jewish community escaped. In every town and village occupied by the Wehrmacht scarcely any Jews survived.
At first, no one knew; and then no one believed. And then when it was already known in the capitals of the Allied Powers that day by day thousands of Jews - men, women and children - were being put to death, nothing was done to help. Many still prefer to believe that nothing could have been done - that the German army was too powerful, the Allies too weak, the distances too great. But now we know. Much could have been done; many could have been saved. In April of 1943, the Jews of the Warsaw Ghetto revolted. A handful of men and women, almost unarmed, facing impossible odds, they held out against the German army for one whole month. At that time, von Paulus' army had already been crushed at Stalingrad, Rommel had been defeated in the Western Desert and Allied armies had landed in North Africa. Allied forces were bombing the cities of Germany by day and night. The Allies were winning the war on land, at sea, and in the air.
But no help, not even a sign of encouragement, was extended to the Jewish fighters of the Warsaw Ghetto.
It was in the two following years, leading up to the Nazi surrender, that the Nazi murder machine moved into high gear and millions of Jews were murdered. In the closing months of the war in Europe, while the German army was reeling in defeat on all fronts, the crematoria continued to devour their victims. It was during the very last months of the war that Hungarian Jewry perished.
Many of those Jews who succeeded to escape Hitler's Europe and tried to reach the shores of Palestine were turned back to certain death.
The Holocaust, the murder of six million by Nazi Germany and its henchmen, the abandonment of the Jews by the rest of the world, remains engraved forever in the heart and soul of mankind.
In November 1947, the Holocaust still a vivid memory, the United Nations General Assembly reaffirmed a decision taken by the League of Nations 26 years earlier. Then the League had given international recognition to the Zionist movement and its goal - the establishment of a Jewish State in Palestine. In 1947, the United Nations called for the establishment of the Jewish State in a fraction of the territory originally designated for this purpose by the League of Nations.
That decision was rejected by the Arab world, just as the Arab world had over the years consistently denied the rights of the Jewish people in their ancient
homeland. As the British Mandate expired on 15 May 1948 and Israel's independence was declared, Israel was invaded by the armies of the surrounding Arab States. In those days, Israel stood alone, 650,000 Jews fighting for their lives only a few years after Europe had been turned into a Jewish graveyard. Israel had no choice but to win that war, just as it had to win four succeeding wars launched against it by the surrounding Arab countries.
The United Nations resolution of 1947 is today part of Israel's history, an expression of support for Zionism - the right of the Jewish people to their own State in their ancient homeland. But in 1975, the United Nations General Assembly, greatly enlarged, but unfortunately not grown in moral stature, adopted the infamous "Zionism is racism" resolution that makes a sham of the United Nations resolution adopted 2 8 years earlier, and that continues to this day to be a stain on the record of the Organization. As long as this resolution is not revoked, no moral authority can accompany United Nations decisions, and an air of hypocrisy continues to envelop its debates.
Israel has learned to be in the minority at the United Nations, just as we have learned to exist in the dangerous environment of the Middle East. We live in a constant state of alert, allocating a great part of our resources to defence, determined to fight terrorism and ward off aggression.
Some say that this is paranoia - a paranoia engendered by the Holocaust, the Jews still living in fear of their very existence, preparing to defend themselves against imaginary enemies. But is this really a figment of Israel's imagination? The Arab armies surrounding Israel maintain an inventory of modern weaponry - tanks, aircraft, missiles, artillery - larger than all the weaponry of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. During the past decade, military equipment valued at about 100 billion dollars was purchased by the countries of that area. We
ask ourselves, why is this weaponry there, most of it directed against Israel? Is it possible that these weapons might be used against Israel, and against Israel's civilian population?
We have already experienced five wars? we have lost thousands of our sons in Israel's defence. We see around us a Middle East that is brutal and fanatic, where no mercy is shown even to civilians. A million soldiers were killed in the Iraqi-Iranian war, where the most modern weapons of mass destruction were applied, including chemical warfare used on a massive scale by the Iraqi army. The universal agreement against the use of chemical warfare was broken not only in attacks against combatants, but also against Kurdish civilian villages. These outrages went almost unnoticed by the world, but not by us in Israel, remembering our own experience and knowing that Iraq is closer to Israel than New York is to Washington.
In recent months, the civilian population of Beirut and the Christian enclave north of Beirut were under fire from Syrian army artillery. The killing of innocent civilians went on day by day, the attackers gaining confidence that they can continue the killings with impunity. Is it then paranoia when Israel, in this environment and under these circumstances, feels itself threatened?
Are we aspiring to a needless luxury when we put forth the claim to secure and recognized boundaries? Are we wasting our resources when we maintain an army capable of defending ourselves? Are we imposing on the great nations of the world when we plead with them not to arm those of our neighbours that daily announce their hostility to Israel? Are we wrong when we ask that no encouragement be given to terrorists who in their war on Israel have committed some of the worst atrocities the world has seen since the Second World War? And yet Israel, embattled and beleaguered, continues in the quest for peace. Many of the Arab rulers seem to have no desire for peace with Israel, no matter what the conditions. Worse yet, it is the aim of these rulers to prevent others from making peace with us.
As a result, the peace process in the Middle East moves at a glacial pace. It took 30 years before Egypt reached out to meet Israel's outstretched hand - 30 years and five wars. Israel paid a tremendous price for the Israeli-Egyptian peace Treaty, a price unprecedented in the annals of conflict resolution between nations, with the signing of that Treaty 10 years ago, we had hoped that the other Arab States would quickly enter into negotiations with us, but this has not happened - at least not yet.
In May of 1983 we signed an agreement with Lebanon that would have normalized relations between our two countries and that entailed the withdrawal of the Israel Defence Forces from Southern Lebanon. But that agreement was scuttled by Syrian interference. They had other plans for Lebanon. Six years have passed and the Lebanese tragedy continues. Southern Lebanon is still a staging-ground for terrorist attacks by the PLO and the Hezbollah against the towns and villages on Israel's northern border.
This is the threatening nature of our environment, and we ignore it only at our peril. However, we will not resign ourselves to this cruel reality. We will leave no stone unturned in our quest for peace.
That is why, in April of this year, Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir unveiled Israel's four-point peace initiative. We call for a common Israeli-Egyptian effort to build, on the foundations of the Camp David accords that brought about the Israeli-Egyptian peace treaty, a comprehensive peace for the Middle East. We call on the 20 Arab countries, at present in a state of war with Israel, to cease hostile propaganda and economic boycott and begin a process of normalizing their relations with Israel. We call on the international community of nations to participate in an effort to rehabilitate the Palestinian refugee camps in Judea, Samaria and Gaza.
We call on the Palestinian Arab population in Judea, Samaria and Gaza to cease acts of terrorism and violence, and we announce our readiness to hold free democratic elections so that they can choose their representatives for negotiations with Israel on an interim agreement and eventually on the terms of a permanent settlement. There is no alternative way to move the Middle Eastern peace process forward. Rejection of this initiative is synonymous with rejecting progress towards peace. We call on all nations to support Israel's peace initiative, and we call on the Arab world to respond favourably to it. This is not the time to attempt to
wring concessions from Israel that relate to the permanent settlement. Our immediate objective must be to put an end to violence and to get negotiations going. Putting the cart before the horse can only stall the process itself.
If the representatives of the Palestinian Arab population in Judea, Samaria and Gaza will come to the negotiating table cognizant not only of the rights and aspirations of the population that will have freely chosen them, but also aware of Israel's rights and legitimate concerns, there is an excellent chance that negotiations will lead to agreement. Moreover, the democratic experience not as yet prevalent in the Middle East will no doubt serve as an example to all nations of the region. That in itself will be an important contribution to peace in the area, because war and terrorism do not flourish in democratic societies. I urge all member nations of this Organization to lend their support to Israel's continuing efforts to end warfare and bloodshed in the Middle East.
I call on the representatives of Algeria, Bahrain, Djibouti, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, Mauritania, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, the United Arab Emirates, the Yemen Arab Republic and the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen to utilize the opportunity of our presence at the United Nations General Assembly and to meet with me to discuss how we can move from belligerency to peace, and from hostility to friendship.
I call on the Palestinian Arab population in Judea, Samaria and Gaza to desist from violent acts and to make every effort to help establish the conditions that will permit the holding of free, democratic elections.
The peace process in the Middle East requires courage, patience and perseverance. We in Israel are dedicated to the peace process. We shall continue to pursue it despite all obstacles. We expect your support.
﻿
It is a great pleasure to see a distinguished leader such as Ambassador Garba presiding over this Assembly. We have come to know him well from contacts between New Zealand and Nigeria, and we are confident that the Assembly is in very good hands.
I last attended the General Assembly in 1985. I was then the Deputy Prime Minister of a recently elected Labour Government. I spoke on behalf of New Zealand in the general debate during the fortieth session. That year, of course, we celebrated the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations.
We all spoke with pride and enthusiasm about the Charter. We analysed its potential and looked at what had been achieved in the United Nations system over 40 years. And it was true much had been accomplished. But we all knew in our heart of hearts that despite the praise, the plaudits and the peace, it threatened to be a hollow anniversary.
The failure to make progress on nuclear disarmament had distorted the fabric of international life. Seemingly intractable conflicts proliferated in many parts of the world. The peace-keeping machinery of the United Nations lay almost dormant and apparently dismissed. In our own region, the South Pacific, we watched anxiously the process of decolonisation and self-determination in New Caledonia, where violence seemed imminent. Sadly, these fears proved well founded. In South Africa, the regime in Pretoria continued year by year its unremitting and abhorrent practice of apartheid and its illegal occupation of Namibia. In 1985 there was all too much evidence that respect for international law and the basic norms of the United Nations Charter were being ignored. We saw the International Court being treated with cynical disdain. There was a steady erosion of State willingness to accept the rule of law and compulsory jurisdiction. New Zealand itself, in 1985, had been the victim of an unlawful act of force during the Rainbow Warrior incident. I was obliged to draw that incident to the Assembly's attention in some detail.
But times have changed. Four years later I am back in New York and I find a new picture. We have turned a corner. There have been encouraging signs concerning many of the intractable problems that we faced in 1985. It is a matter of enormous satisfaction to New Zealand that the United Nations, has been a key component in these developments. Even in the darkest days of cynicism about the United Nations, New Zealand stood up and spoke out in support of the United Nations, the Charter principles and the rule of law. We applaud what has happened and what is continuing to happen. Let me cite some examples.
In the area of peace-keeping, we see the United Nations proving what can be done, with hard-won progress in the conflict between Iran and Iraq. In southern Africa, a very important step has been taken in Namibia. New Zealand is pleased to have been able to contribute personnel to United Nations forces in both those situations, and also in Afghanistan. In the Pacific, we see grounds for hope in New Caledonia. We look forward to a genuine act of self-determination in accordance with United Nations principles.
On disarmament, we have also seen a marked change in the atmosphere, in the attitudes of the two super-Powers. One major agreement has been achieved: the intermediate-nuclear-forces Treaty. Other agreements, on strategic nuclear forces and conventional forces, are being negotiated. We in New Zealand appreciate the complexities of these negotiations. We applaud what has been achieved and what is being done. But our message must continue to be put bluntly: Do not return to the snail's pace of the 1970s and early 1980s. Deep cuts in strategic weapons and conventional forces are urgent. We have a historical opportunity that may not come again for a very long time. If the momentum slows and the moment is lost, history and all humanity will judge those responsible very harshly indeed.
I also have to say quite plainly that we remain disappointed that the United Nations plays a less than central role in key disarmament negotiations. The United Nations must be a primary forum for the discussion of disarmament issues and the eventual negotiation of disarmament treaties. New Zealand, together with Australia, has a special interest in promoting, through the United Nations system, progress towards a comprehensive test ban. We again urge in the strongest terms that the powerful few reconsider our resolution with an open mind.
New Zealand has a particularly well known position on the question of nuclear weapons. I want to reiterate what I said to the Assembly in 1985:
"We have ... declared unambiguously that we do not want any country to defend New Zealand with nuclear weapons ..„ We will not have any nuclear weapons on our territory." (A/40/PV.7, p. 66) Since 1985 this policy has attracted widespread public support in New Zealand. This support continues to grow. It is clearly reflected in public opinion polls. New Zealand is, and will remain, a nuclear-weapon-free State. Consistent with that position we urge, in the strongest terms, that nuclear testing and nuclear weapons themselves be eliminated at the earliest possible date.
Another field in which we have observed significant developments in recent years is the rule of international law. It was a matter of great encouragement to many small countries when last year, in the Assembly, President Gorbachev announced that the Soviet Union was adopting a new policy towards the International Court of Justice. We also warmly welcome the fact that the Foreign Ministers of the Non-Aligned Movement, at their meeting at The Hague in July, began a constructive analysis of the Court and the role of international law. These developments went further and were reinforced by the welcome news of the recent agreement between the United States and the Soviet Union on the compulsory settlement of disputes in the fields of drug trafficking and terrorism. New Zealand urges all countries to review their positions on compulsory jurisdiction and the settlement of disputes by third-party mechanisms. In this context I would also refer to the variety of roles that the Secretary-General can play to resolve disputes.
I should also like to acknowledge in this Hall the people in the United Nations system who have done so much to ensure the progress made over the past few years. I do not mean only the staff that supports meetings here and in Geneva. I remember also the unseen United Nations employees and volunteers who work in the field, often in very dangerous environments and suffering considerable hardship, negotiating cease-fires, organizing peace-keeping forces, serving in peace-keeping operations and running emergency relief and development assistance programmes. I want them to know that the people of New Zealand welcome and appreciate their very real contributions.
It would be tempting at this point to conclude that the United Nations is in good shape, that things are all headed in the right direction and that we can all go home feeling good about what we have achieved. But that is not the case. The United Nations system is still struggling with major problems. The evil of apartheid is still with us. We have not done enough to reduce poverty and indebtedness. Political solutions still elude us in the Middle East and Cambodia. But I have to tell the Assembly that, in New Zealand's assessment, a much larger
problem has crept up on the world's leaders. It has caught us unawares. The problem I refer to is the health of the planet Earth itself.
I know that the United Nations has not ignored the environment. Mr. Tolba and his staff in the United Nations Environment Programme have laboured valiantly. They have had real success on ozone depletion with the Montreal Protocol and, more recently, with the Helsinki Declaration. We in New Zealand have worked very hard indeed to support their efforts, end we shall continue to do so.
The general debate is itself demonstrating the growing international concern about the global environment. Action is under way in other parts of the United Nations system as well. A major United Nations conference on environment and development is scheduled for 1992, and it will offer a timely opportunity to take stock of the measures necessary to protect planet Earth.
New Zealand strongly endorsed the decision of the UNEP Governing Council in May this year to identify, in preparation for the 1992 conference, the eight critical global environmental problems: atmospheric degradation, fresh-water limitations, pollution of the oceans, deforestation and the others. 1 also want to acknowledge the work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. It is proving to be a very useful and effective mechanism, and New Zealand is playing an active role in its work.
All these measures are consuming a great deal of time and energy. Environmental statements, seminars and conferences have become the political flavour of the month. But it sometimes seems that a lot of talk takes the place of action.
The 1992 conference will give us an ideal chance to prove to all the doubters and denigrators of the United Nations the real worth of the Organization. Our efforts in the coming weeks must be focused and they must be effective. We need vision, courage and action on the environment, not just talk. I want to ask some hard questions.
Politicians are sometimes accused of getting on the green bandwagon because it is politically safe, simplistic and relatively cost-free. But I want to put it to the Assembly that anyone here who believes that environment issues are a soft option is sadly misguided. The global environmental crisis is real. Human development has altered the global ecosystem in which we live. We have been taking the good out of the air, the sea and the land and putting back poison. For most of human history the impact was so slight as to barely affect the balance. But in the last 50 years humanity has wrought havoc on this Earth. We have suddenly come to the knowledge that we can affect the ecological balance very seriously. More frighteningly, we have discovered that the balance has already been changed. The question now is, have we damaged our planet beyond repair? Can we get back to equilibrium? Can we arrest the process of change? The jury, of course, is still out on these questions. If the answer is that the change is irreversible, the ultimate effects could be just as catastrophic for humanity as global nuclear war.
I saw a cartoon recently. It pictured some aliens from outer space landing on a ravaged Earth where human life had ceased. One alien says to the other, "It's too bad. They just achieved general and complete disarmament and some hole in the ozone layer got them".
The message I have for the United Nations system is that we must look urgently at our priorities and our institutions. We must give real priority to the problems of the environment. We must give them attention at least equal to that which we devote to the political and security issues which have mesmerized the United Nations system and Governments for so long.
Degradation of the environment is a problem that threatens out security every bit as gravely as the arms race. It affects everyone. But we must recognize that, unlike the issue of nuclear disarmament, where a few very powerful countries have control of the means of destruction, every country in the United Nations, no matter how small, contributes in some way to the threat of environmental destruction. All contribute? all suffer. Pollution recognizes no political boundaries. It is therefore beyond any doubt a problem for the United Nations.
	
Of course, not every country is equally responsible, and not every country stands to be equally or as rapidly affected. Sometimes the innocent will suffer more than the guilty. It is a fact that more than 80 per cent of the greenhouse gases are produced by a small group of economically privileged countries. It is also a fact that the contribution of the developed world to the depletion of the ozone layer is overwhelming. New Zealand understands the anxiety these facts cause to the peoples of the developing world.
We are especially conscious of the plight of the countries of the South Pacific. Last year I represented New Zealand at the South Pacific Forum meeting. We discussed climate change and the disastrous impact of possible sea-level rises. Imagine being the President or leader of an atoll country in the Pacific, such as Tuvalu or Kiribati or Tokelau, and learning that the effluent and by-products of other people's development not only threaten sustainable development in your small island country but indeed threaten to submerge every bit of land on which your people live. Small island communities in the Caribbean and Indian Ocean face similar problems. Pollution could literally wipe them off the face of the Earth.
Or imagine representing one of the countries in the South Pacific with few or no natural resources other than the fish in the ocean. You discover that foreign fishermen from outside the region have begun to use in your region a fishing technology not used there before, a technology which threatens to collapse the albacore tuna fishery which is of vital economic importance to the coastal States of the region.
I am speaking of the "wall of death": the enormous drift-nets which in the last few years have been employed in the South Pacific by distant water fishermen. The technology is not new in itself. What is new, and what, makes it quite unacceptable, is a new technique for the use of drift-nets. This involves several vessels working in co-operation, each deploying a series of very long nets. Each net can be up to 50 kilometres in length. Each vessel sets a number of these nets in a very long line across the ocean. They sometimes cover thousands of kilometres of ocean. In the North Pacific, at the height of the season, an estimated 50,000 kilometres of drift-nets are set nightly. They then drift, literally like a wall of death. They catch and kill, like a vacuum cleaner, virtually every living creature, including some endangered species, that comes in contact with them.
The indiscriminate nature of the catch makes this an unacceptable fishing technology. Turtles, whales, dolphins, birds: all are trapped and killed. Large percentages of the catch are lost or wasted when the nets are recovered. In the North Pacific, drift-net fishing has seriously damaged valuable salmon stocks.
I have to say that this technology was rejected unanimously by the countries of the South Pacific. In July of this year at the South Pacific Forum meeting at Tarawa, South Pacific Heads of Government adopted a Declaration condemning the practice of large-scale drift-net fishing. But "wall-of-death" fishing is not just a moral problem. It is a legal, political and economic problem, and has global implications. Freedom of the high seas cannot be invoked to protect what is in effect a systematic assault on the regional marine ecosystem. There was a time when some argued that freedom of the high seas legitimised unacceptable and illegal practices. But customary international law has responded over the years to outlaw unreasonable and repugnant practices. At the present time, international law is again responding to the unacceptable and unreasonable use of the high seas for drift-net fishing.
There is already some evidence of the international community's response to this unreasonable use of the high seas. Many Pacific island States, including New Zealand, have already taken action to outlaw the practice in their domestic regulations and in their 200-mile acres. The Declaration was vigorously supported only four weeks ago at the South Pacific Conference on Nature and Conservation of Protected Areas. It will be reinforced and codified later this year when the South Pacific countries adopt a regional convention to prevent "wall-of-death" fishing in our region.
I want to make it clear that what is troubling the South Pacific nations is not the practice of small-scale in-shore use of drift-nets of limited size, which are used by various developing countries. Our concern is with the new and highly destructive phenomenon of very long pelagic drift-nets. The Tarawa Declaration called on the international community to support the position of the South Pacific countries on drift-netting. We have asked the Secretary-General to circulate the Tarawa Declaration as a United Nations document for the information of all delegations.
The South Pacific will be vigorously pursuing this issue bilaterally, regionally and globally. We will be proceeding in a dispassionate, rational and reasonable way. But those who engage in this ecologically irresponsible activity should be in no doubt that the techniques they use are unacceptable wherever they are used. New Zealand looks to the United Nations to support the Tarawa Declaration. Resolutions in the United Nations system to combat drift-netting are inevitable if these practices are not phased out quickly. New Zealand, in close co-operation with the South Pacific countries and other Members of the United Nations who have declared their abhorrence of the new drift-net technology, will be pursuing this issue within the United Nations system. At the present session opportunities exist under agenda items before several Committees of this Assembly.
We note that the Government of the Republic of Korea has temporarily halted drift-net fishing in the South Pacific. That is welcome. We also welcome the decision by Japan in the past few weeks to reduce its drift-net fishing fleet. This is a step in the right direction. But a cessation of this fishing technique is the only ecologically acceptable solution. Only Taiwan has yet to respond to the concerns of the Pacific countries on this matter. We urge all concerned to act quickly. Indeed, the state of our global fisheries is a good example of the broader' environmental problems that our planet is facing.
There is really only one international measure regulating fisheries that proceeds on acceptably sound ecosystem principles. That is the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine and Living Resources. In this connection, I would remind the Assembly of the important and valuable environmental protection measures that have been achieved under the Antarctic Treaty, and note that further significant steps will be sponsored by New Zealand at the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in Paris next week. The Antarctic Treaty is an effective institution. We are making it even more effective in the environmental field. It is an institution that should be supported by the United Nations General Assembly.
Even 20 years ago it was generally assumed that the fish in the open sea were inexhaustible. In general, anyone could go fishing without limitation. Yet we all now know that the biomass of any fishery can easily be over fished. We face a situation where the world's fishing capacity may already be close to, or in excess of, sustainable yield from the commercial fisheries in the world's oceans. We are technically capable of catching fish faster than they can breed. Fishing rights are therefore tightly regulated and licensed. Will we soon have to apply to our atmosphere regulatory principles similar to those we are now applying to out fisheries.
I have to say that, if this is the case, then the example we have set with our fisheries is a frightening one. Drift-netting is simply the latest in a long history of irresponsible fishing practices. It is just as well that humanity has not depended on fisheries alone for its survival. The record of international fisheries management is such a sorry one that, if that had been the case, whole populations would have long since perished in the wake of collapsed fisheries.
But the reality is that there is no alternative atmosphere to breathe. There is only one global climate. We must do better than the halting attempts at fisheries conservation in that respect. I have some very specific and challenging thoughts about where we go from here to deal with the problems of the global environment generally.
The intimate connection between the global environment and the global economy is beyond dispute. It does not need to be argued here. The conclusion of the Brundtland report that development only makes sense if it is sustainable has been widely recognized.

The concept of sustainable development is, in its own right, an enormous challenge for the international community. But we must add to that challenge the need to address the disturbances that have been caused to the natural ecosystems. The ozone layer is already seriously depleted. Disposal of hazardous and toxic wastes has become a global threat through dumping in the oceans. We have already witnessed unacceptable attempts to pay developing countries to accept a role as waste receivers. Acid rain and desertification threaten economic progress on several continents, reforestation is limiting the environment's capacity to heal itself and, more importantly, our atmosphere and our climate itself are threatened. Restoring the equilibrium, in all of these areas is going to involve quite significant impacts on the global economy.
I do not believe that the full extent of those impacts is yet appreciated by the general public in any of our countries. It is time that ordinary people everywhere stopped and thought for a moment. It is time to acknowledge that we are all adding to the environmental problems every day and that there are no free rides. In the end, we are all going to have to contribute to the solutions, and this will require a major change of attitude all over the world.
In this connection I want to pay tribute to the foresight shown by the Prime Ministers of the Netherlands, France and Norway, who in March this year brought together 24 Heads of government to consider the solutions. I was privileged to represent New Zealand at that meeting. We adopted the Hague Declaration. That document called for the development of some very new and important principles to protect the global environment.
What then does all this mean in practice? The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and its Working Groups are focusing on that issue in a great deal of detail. But it seems to me that there are two very clear messages for the future: first, if effective measures are to be taken to reduce greenhouse emissions some quite radical economic measures will be required. Secondly, as is clearly spelt out in the Hague Declaration, some major institutional changes are going; to be required. As to economic measures, these will prove particularly radical for some economic theorists in many countries, including New Zealand. As many of you will know, my Government has drastically reformed the New Zealand economy. We have eliminated subsidies, deregulated commercial activity and reversed the stultifying effects of unnecessary governmental intervention in the economy. And it has proved to be good economic medicine.
But it is abundantly clear from the evidence of environmental impacts that the definition of "necessary governmental intervention" is going to have to change. Indeed, in New Zealand we have already begun to implement interventions co protect the global environment. The first step was the implementation of the Montreal Protocol in 1988. As a second step, I will shortly be putting before our Parliament legislation going beyond the Montreal Protocol. By 1994 we shall reduce consumption of chlorofluorocarbons to only 5 per cent of 1986 levels, and we shall phase them out altogether by the year 2000. Thirdly, to address our national policies for resource management, I have commissioned the complete overhaul of our law relating to land use, water use, minerals, pollution and hazardous substances, legislation radically reforming all these areas will be submitted to our Parliament before the end of the year. The New Zealand Government will make sustainable development the guiding principle behind decision-making in each of these areas.
But it is clear that these interventions will be insignificant by comparison with what will be required to combat the greenhouse effect. I am aware that there are still many unknowns relating to the greenhouse effect, but the evidence overwhelmingly points to the need to act.
Effective action will require measures to reduce carbon dioxide and other industrial emissions. We shall have to look at ways to encourage measures of reforestation that absorb carbon dioxide. We shall have to look at energy use, and that will have spin-off implications for economic activity and development throughout all our economies.
But there are solutions as well as problems. Radical improvements in energy efficiency and energy conservation make sense economically as well as environmentally. But these alone will not be enough. The United Nations may even need to consider the possibility that, within the limitations of present technology, if development is to be sustainable, it must be rationed - in other words, that humanity has reached the point in history where sustainable development is only possible if "rights to pollute" are allocated according to agreed criteria. New Zealand would be the first to acknowledge that this proposition is a frightening one, and it is all the more frightening because of its potential impacts on the aspirations of the developing world for economic and social development.
New Zealand understands that we cannot solve global environmental problems unless we can work simultaneously and in a co-ordinated fashion to eradicate poverty. Sustainable development, in its true sense, will require action: to relieve debt burdens; to liberalize multilateral trade; and to promote flows of development assistance without extra conditions. The burdens of improving the global environment must be shared by us all, and they must be shared fairly. That means that some who are already at higher stages of development will have to carry the greatest part of the burden.
So clearly we are facing an immensely complex negotiating task. It involves balancing a wide range of technical, scientific and political judgements and meshing them with international economic, trade and aid policies. This is a task which requires the most delicate and co-ordinated oversight. Almost by definition it is beyond the mandate of any existing institution.
That brings me to my second major point - institutional reform. We are conscious that a number of proposals have been canvassed in recent times for institutional reform. They range from a new form of Security Council to an ad hoc institution with limited scope and a limited mandate. We are also conscious that existing machinery, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN), and others, must be given the room and support necessary to achieve their functions while we are discussing the institutional reforms of the future.
We accept that reform will have to be evolutionary. But a United Nations declaration on the environment may be needed, and in our view we need a vision that is clear and cogent, because if by 1992 existing institutions are not coping adequately, the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development will need to address squarely the key issue of institutional reform. I have no doubt the issue will not go away. It will have to be faced. In New Zealand's judgement, the traditional response of international law, developing international legal standards in small incremental steps, each of which must subsequently be ratified by all countries, is no longer appropriate to deal with the highly complex environmental problems of the future.
The time has come for something more innovative, for a conceptual leap forward in institutional terms. And we see the need for the establishment of a new organ in the United Nations system - perhaps it could be called the "Environmental Protection Council". The United Nations already has a Security Council. We also have an Economic and Social Council and a Trusteeship Council. We have two chapters of the United Nations Charter on the settlement of disputes and the maintenance of peace. We have a chapter laying down the rules and principles with respect to Non-Self-Governing Territories. I have no doubt that if the Charter were being drawn up today, there would be widespread support for including among the organs of the United Nations a body empowered to take binding decisions on global environmental issues. In our view, nothing less than an institution with this status will command the necessary respect and authority to achieve what is required.
Perhaps the most effective way to achieve this would be through the inclusion in the United Nations Charter of a new chapter dealing with the environment. Another option would be a major declaration of principle adopted by the United Nations. But we do not envisage any new body replacing UNEP. Far from it. UNEP brings together vital scientific and technical expertise. It has demonstrated both skill and ability in constructing and implementing programmes to analyse global issues and to support operational activities at the regional level. This is a vital function. Not only must it continue, but UNEP's role of developing scientific, technical and policy advice must be enhanced. UNEP may need to be built in as an integral part of the new structure. The missing institutional link, however, is the equivalent of a legislature. We would envisage the new environmental protection council becoming the point in the United Nations system which links the streams of economic and environmental advice. It would perform the function that currently falls between the cracks in the mandates of all the existing organizations. It would have responsibility for taking co-ordinated decisions on sustainable policies for global environmental protection. It would be empowered to take binding decisions. And if decisions are to be binding, the membership of the Council may need to be very wide - perhaps including all Members of the United Nations. But the key thing is that it should have power to act - not just to talk. The time is coming for a bold new step in developing the structures of the United Nations. We must show that the United Nations is ready to meet new challenges and meet them by changing itself to cope with the needs of humanity in the course of the next century.
In 1945, the present Charter was born out of the conviction that the horrors of the Second World War must never be repeated. The environmental challenge which we now face may be every bit as devastating for humanity. Let us hope that we have learned from the past and that it will prove possible to put in place effective institutions now, rather than repeat the sad experience of the League of Nations, a well-meaning but inadequate institution. If we wait for the aftermath of an ecological disaster, it may be too late.
May I conclude with a quotation from one of my predecessors, Prime Minister Peter Fraser, who in his statement at San Francisco, on 1 May 1945, at the adoption of the present Charter, had this to say:
"The failure of the League of Nations, one of the noblest conceptions in the history of mankind, was a moral failure on the part of the individual members, and was not due to any fundamental defect of the machinery of the League. [It] failed because its members would not perform what they undertook to perform. It failed because of the recession that took place in public morality ... It failed because the rule of expediency replaced that of moral principles.
"I would therefore stress that unless in the future we have the moral rectitude end determination to stand by our engagements and our principles, then ... this new organization will avail us nothing, the sufferings and the sacrifices our people have endured will avail us nothing, and the countless lives of those who have died in this struggle for security and freedom will have been sacrificed in vain."
These words are a solemn reminder to us all that in the end it is not only a question of institutions, of conventions and protocols. It is, in the final analysis, the scourge of pollution, like the scourge of war, that can arid will destroy us unless we are willing to put principle above expediency. Strong medicine is called for a sick planet. We have no choice. And if we take no action, we will have no future.
﻿My task as head of the delegation of the Soviet Union to the General Assembly has been greatly facilitated by two fundamental statements made by Mikhail S. Gorbachev concerning the place and role of the United Nations in building new international relations at this crucial stage of world development for mankind, at time when it is moving out of the cold war into a period of peace in its development and affirming a new political order resting on a comprehensive approach to security.
The profound analytical report of Mr. Perez de Cuellar on the work of our Organization over the past year has impressed us with its convincing evidence of the expansion of the role of the United Nations as a global peace-maker. Addressing the Assembly, its new President, the representative of Nigeria, Mr. Garba, also referred to that.
The heads of many delegations have put forward some far-reaching and original ideas at this session. Yesterday we listened with close attention to the statement of President George Bush of the United States, which, in our view, contained a number of very important and interesting ideas.
As always, during these days of the General Assembly's regular session representatives of the world community have together been recreating a panorama of the past year in the life of mankind. Its overriding idea is that of peace and security, its ideal composition is harmony of universal human values and national interests.
In making our own national contribution to this grand agreement each of us, I am
sure, wants it to become a part of an organic and unitary whole. Unfortunately, in some places the overall composition is still marred by cracks that impair its integrity. Over the past 12 months we have seen a rather contradictory picture of the state of the world.
Of course, the central concept remains the same and the theme, a product of mankind's thought and suffering, as we were appropriately reminded by the fiftieth anniversary of the outbreak of the Second World War, has not changed: it is the piloting of our common ark towards a new shore and our common desire to chart its course so as to avoid a storm that might destroy it. Nevertheless, there have been some new developments which have aroused concern. It is not just that the ship of the world has not yet negotiated the dangerous straits; it is encountering new threats that could give it a critical lurch.
The twentieth century has released the tremendous energy of nations and peoples, and this has become a major factor in the development of universal civilization. It is capable of and has been working miracles by extricating entire national communities from backwardness and poverty in what is historically an amazingly brief span of time. It is adding to the mosaic of the world more and
more bright and clear-cut elements of progress and prosperity. However, the same national energy, when it takes the form of inflated egotism and self-interest, often makes for aggression and expansion, a grasping for one's own good at the expense of others.
Here the problem of the self-defence of nations arises, the problem of their Physical survival, preserving their unique historical and cultural identities. Action provokes counteraction, which assumes some highly ambivalent forms. Centrifugal tendencies are prevailing over centripetal ones, thus upsetting the balance of world relationships, which is so hard to build.
This diverts the focus of our attention from traditional international issues to domestic and inter-ethnic conflicts. It has now become quite clear that internal strife in some countries extends the process of their destabilization to vast areas and that regional upheavals convulse the whole world. Lebanon is a case in point. It is often much easier to resolve the external issues in a settlement than to deal with its internal conditions, and this is clearly evident in Afghanistan and Cambodia.
Today the notion of "inside the country" often has a bearing on that of "outside". The trouble, however, is that the isolated fragments of the world which yearn for a better life fail to see beyond the mountain ridges, jungles, dunes and other features of their own national landscapes, the threat to their own existence, that might objectively result from such a fragmented view. Equally, those who want to prosper at the expense of others do not see that their own existence is also threatened.
This leads us to the question of the responsibility of the part vis-à-vis the whole and of nations vis-à-vis mankind. This places on our agenda the problem of harmonizing universal and national interests.
Some clarifications and explanations are in order here.
The supremacy of universal human values and observance of universal rules of the world community are the imperatives of our time. The objective requirements of the age we live in, its trends, character and circumstances leave mankind no other choice but to reject the traditional polarization. This is the axiom which underlies both the concept and the practical policies of the new thinking. Of course, it cannot resolve the existing contradictions overnight, but as a start it can alleviate them.
On the question of the primacy of universal human values, we are also implying the mature readiness of nations to accept this. Where that maturity has not yet been attained, and where the national idea is being juxtaposed with the common interest, domestic conflicts directly complement and impel global destructive processes.
Now I should like to stress this: freedom of choice continues to crown the hierarchy of a nation's supreme values. Every nation is free to choose the ways and means of its own development, but to do so in a responsible manner. It must not lock itself in the dark rooms of national selfishness or ignore the interests of other peoples and of the entire community of nations. Freedom does not mean irresponsibility towards others, for in the final analysis that would mean irresponsibility towards oneself.
The time has finally come to realize that not all means are good for attaining even the most noble ends.
The international community has become aware of the danger of narcotics traffic, of terrorism, it condemns and outlaws both phenomena. We need equally determined action against any kind of violence, whatever the motives or excuses for it. Violence by the State against its own people must be totally excluded. Violence on national, ethnic or religious grounds can no longer be tolerated.
To repeat, we advocate freedom of choice. However, we reject its interpretation as the licence to use any means, to commit any violence or to shed blood. Freedom must not be sought at the expense of others. No support or sympathy should be extended to so-called movements that countenance actions"
humiliating to other nations or use terrorist, barbaric and inhuman methods in waging their struggle. It is to be deplored that. 50 years after the Second World War. some politicians have begun to forget its lessons. Let us remember that political and ideological differences did not prevent Comments and nations from joining forces to defend universal human values from nazism and fascism. The dividing line in that battle was drawn not by ideology but by the rules of and attitudes towards morality. The Soviet Union, the United States. Great Britain and other countries and peoples found themselves in the same camp and. fighting side by side, saved civilization.
Fascism, which started the war is the extreme and ugliest form of nationalism and chauvinism. German nazism marched under the banner of revanchism. Now that the forces of revanchism are again becoming active and are seeking to revise and destroy the post-war realities in Europe, it is our duty to warn those who, wittingly or unwittingly, are encouraging those forces. The revanchist movement is dangerous and inimical to the march of peace, to which President Bush referred here yesterday.
While expressing respect for healthy national movements, let me refer to one modern concept of nationhood. it defines a nation as a collective personality, endowed with certain rights, in many respects similar to and even sometimes identical with individual human rights. But there are no rights without responsibilities, either for the individual or for the State.
It is the mission of the United Nations to promote among the world's peoples the idea of the interdependence of national aspirations and the common good of mankind, and to encourage nations to behave responsibly. This fundamental position of the Soviet Union is clearly reflected in our bilateral contacts. Relations between the Soviet Union and the United states Provide the best illustration of this. I will permit myself to touch upon the  United States-Soviet dialogue only because I am convinced that its importance far transcends the frontiers of the two States.  In the view of the Soviet leadership, this is not a kind of privilege but a clearly understood responsibility towards the world community. Therefore my account of the results of our talks with President Bush and Secretary of State Baker is my report to you.
These talks demonstrated increasing awareness by both sides of the need to co-operate for the benefit of mankind and growing confidence that such co-operation, such interaction, is possible.
Agreement to hold a meeting of the top leaders of the Soviet Union and the United States shows that we have moved far ahead in solving a number of major bilateral and international problems. Extraordinary efforts at the highest level will be needed to attain the goal of concluding treaties.
I am referring in particular to the preparation of the agreement on 50 per cent reductions in strategic offensive arms. We have proposed to the United States side options for resolving the key issues in that agreed: the Treaty on the Limitation of Anti-ballistic Missile Systems, space, and long-range sea-launched cruise missiles. Our partners have accommodated us on mobile intercontinental ballistic missiles. Positions on other outstanding problems have come closer to each other. In our view, by the time the summit meeting is held next year, in late spring or early summer, we may have passed the last turn on the road towards a treaty reducing strategic offensive arms. This is a real prospect. The protocols to the 1974 and 1976 Treaties on nuclear explosions could also be signed at the summit meeting so that they could enter into force very soon thereafter. We are confident that the summit meeting will give a powerful impetus to the talks on major reductions in the armed forces and conventional armaments in Europe.
We welcome the proposal concerning chemical weapons put forward yesterday by President Bush. Generally consistent with the initiatives of the Soviet leadership, it indicates to us that we share the desire to rid mankind of these barbaric weapons. The Soviet Union is ready, together with the United States, to go further and assume mutual obligations prior to the conclusion of a multilateral convention: cease the production of chemical weapons, as we have already done - I am referring here also to binary weapons, on a bilateral basis, radically reduce or completely destroy Soviet and United States chemical weapons, regarding this as a step towards the global destruction of chemical weapons: renounce the use of chemical weapons under any circumstances, institute rigorous verification of the cessation of the production and the elimination of chemical warfare agents. I think there is no need to say how beneficial all this would be for the overall world climate.
In addition to the problems of security, the Soviet-United States agenda encompasses issues of humanitarian cooperation, regional topics and joint efforts in the fields of the environment and economic development, reflecting the process that brings together national and universal concerns. We are more aware today than ever before that Soviet-United States relations cannot be built outside the global context, divorced from the problems concern to all mankind.
Our discussions in Washington and Wyoming have moved us ahead in our efforts to bridge the continuing gap between the attitudes to one's own good and the attitudes to the common good. Much remains to be done, however, to alleviate the disparities of political objectives, for such disparities endanger all of us.
Let us examine the situation, taking nuclear weapons as an example. Why are they dangerous? Not only because of their sheer destructive power. They are unacceptable because they widen the chasm between national and universal interests. The equality of nations and the unity of the world become empty talk when someone's national selfishness is driven by the idea of nuclear supremacy over the world, camouflaged as national security interests.
I would say that the world community has as yet no reason for complacency or euphoria. The nuclear threat has only been reduced by the Soviet-United States Treaty eliminating intermediate and shorter-range missiles.
We believe that reliance on nuclear weapons does not serve anyone's national interests. It is also an obstacle in the way of more democratic international relations. Only the complete elimination of nuclear capabilities would help to attain real security.

The advocates of nuclear deterrence do not believe this will be possible in the foreseeable future. They respond with concepts of so-called minimum nuclear deterrence. In our view, that is a step forward, if only a timid one, a step that can be taken. But first we must define what we mean by minimum nuclear deterrence and what capabilities should be considered sufficient.
The Soviet Union proposes that those questions be discussed at a meeting of representatives of the nuclear Powers and the States on whose territories nuclear weapons are placed. Of course, the persistence of the concepts of nuclear deterrence is due not only to the undue emphasis placed on national rights and interests at the expense of obligations, but also to the lack of trust. The problem should not be easily dismissed. What is the way out of these vicious circles? It lies in affirming glasnost and openness and in building a wide-ranging infrastructure of pervasive verification. If we do need to deter each other, let deterrence be transparent and verifiable.
To that end, the Soviet Union is proposing that all nuclear Powers conclude multilateral agreements on measures to reduce the risk of the outbreak of nuclear war. Detailed discussions to work out such an agreement could be held in consultations among the permanent members of the Security Council.
In the same context, we wish to raise once again the problem of the cessation and prohibition of nuclear tests. This is the question of questions. Why are we still unable to put an end to such tests despite the express will of the overwhelming majority of nations? Because there are those who want to maintain their superiority at any cost.
Guided by its obligations to the world community, the Soviet Union has revised its nuclear-testing programme by reducing the number and yield of explosions.
Let me point out, however, that the efforts of one State are not sufficient for a comprehensive solution to this problem. We see a number of possibilities here. First of all, the USSR is ready to reinstate its moratorium on all nuclear explosions on any day and at any hour if the United States reciprocates. Secondly, it is time finally to end the procedural impasse at the Conference on Disarmament and start concrete discussions there on the problem of a complete test ban. Thirdly, as one possible way of achieving such a ban, we are now considering the possibility of extending the 1963 Treaty to cover underground nuclear explosions. There is an urgent need for a verifiable cessation of the production of fissionable material for weapons purposes. We have declared that this year we are ceasing the production of enriched uranium, that in 1987 we closed down one reactor producing weapons-grade plutonium, and that we plan to close down in 1989 and 1990 a few more such reactors. By the year 2000 all remaining reactors will have been shut down.
In addition, the Soviet Union is proposing that all nuclear Powers should begin preparing to conclude an agreement on the cessation and prohibition of the Production of such material. We believe that in the verification of compliance with the agreement the vast experience of applying International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safeguards could prove useful.
It would seem that even the way the Second World War began ought to have made clear that weapons do not guarantee security - the more weapons there are, the greater the danger of aggression. And yet for the 45 post-war years security has been sought in the arms race. It is only today that we are beginning to understand the need for a fundamentally different concept of security in Europe, a security that relies increasingly on political means and, only as insurance, on the necessary minimum of armaments.
The Vienna accord heralded a new European situation, opening up broad vistas for humanitarian cooperation and exchanges of people, ideas and information. It holds out the prospect that the European idea will rest itself on a foundation of trust and openness. But the groundwork has to be prepared for that by clearing the continent of excessive quantities of arms. That work has begun.
When the negotiators do not consign their responsibilities to the back rooms, when they sincerely want to strike a balance between their interests and those of their partners, progress is always achieved. One example is the Vienna talks between the Warsaw Treaty countries and the countries of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) on reducing armed forces and conventional armaments in Europe.
In response to our alliance's initiative the NATO countries have made some meaningful proposals, which go a long way towards accommodating the positions of the Warsaw Treaty countries. In parallel talks between the countries participating in the European process to develop a qualitatively new generation of confidence- and security-building measures the Warsaw Treaty member countries have proposed a far-reaching approach calling for a comprehensive set of such measures, and extending them to air force and naval activities.
Reverting to the topic of the obligations of individual countries to the community, I feel it my duty to emphasize that reluctance to engage in active talks on reducing naval forces is a sign of neglect of those obligations. Leaving naval forces outside the process of reducing armed forces and armaments would be harmful to universal security. The problem of naval forces could be examined, for example, in special consultations to be attended by all States concerned and, above all, by major naval Powers. They would discuss mutual concerns in this sphere and would exchange views on the mechanism and ultimate objective of future negotiations and on how to move towards them step by step.
The dialectic of developments on the European continent urgently requires the starting of talks on tactical nuclear weapons. The situation does not appear to be deadlocked. Mutually acceptable solutions could be sought in an in-depth discussion of this whole range of issues between the USSR, the United States, the United Kingdom, France and the States where those weapons have been placed. If NATO countries agree to start talks on tactical nuclear weapons the USSR will respond with further unilateral cuts in its tactical nuclear missiles in Europe.
The problem of missile proliferation is also ripe for multilateral discussions. Nearly 20 countries possess such weapons, and the trend towards further geographical spread is still strong.
The approach to this issue could be two-pronged. Barriers could be erected which, first, would preclude the proliferation of combat missiles and associated technology across the globe, and, secondly, would not impinge on the legitimate interest of countries in gaining peaceful access to outer space.
No one in the world can yet bid farewell to arms, but we can abandon, once and for all - and we can do it now - the practice of unconstrained and uncontrolled international weapons transfers, lb that end the principles of glasnost and openness should be asserted here as well. The USSR reaffirms its willingness to participate in the establishment of a United Nations register of weapons sales and transfers, including work on parameters.
The time has come when the idea of preventing war is finding material expression in relations between the armed forces of a number of countries. A new peace-making instrument is being shaped by the Soviet-United States agreement on preventing dangerous military activities and by a series of agreements with the United States, the United Kingdom, West Germany and France on the prevention of incidents on the high seas. Along the same lines. Soviet Union and the People's Republic of China have agreed to start talks short!, on putting an end to their military standoff. The  Soviet union expresses the hope that other states too will engage in this process.
A civilised world is an open world. Breaking the seals on many secrets, the soviet union has revealed to the international community detailed data about all reductions in its armed forces and armaments, their strength, the size of its military budget, and so on.
We reaffirm here the position of the Soviet Union. Our ultimate goal is to have not a single Soviet soldier outside the country. But, speaking of equal responsibilities, let us roundly condemn the continuing encirclement of our country - and not only our country - by military bases of other states.
The soviet union attaches fundamental importance to a transition from individual measures of confidence-building, openness and glasnost in international affairs to a global policy of openness, which would become an integral part of comprehensive security and international peace. The President of the united States, Mr. Bush, has proposed the idea of open skies. We like that idea. In welcoming and supporting the initiative, the Soviet Union calls for the opening up and open space, only then shall  e attain absolute transparency and the necessary level of confidence.
While we duly include in the records of foreign policy such accomplishments as the Geneva Agreements on Afghanistan, the process of granting independence to Namibia, the termination of hostilities on the Iran-Iraq front, and the constructive dynamics in the dialogue on the problem of Cambodia, we cannot yet say that the positive trends are irreversible.
Let us pay a grateful tribute to this Organization for its peace-keeping operations. Let us recognize its unique role, which goes beyond simply localizing conflicts and achieves a qualitatively new level in ensuring stability in the world order. But today's world order is of a far broader category. We have firmly established economic security as one of its pillars.
The Soviet Union shares the entirely justified concern about, and it supports, measures to overcome the crisis in the world economy - measures that were proposed at the Belgrade summit meeting of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. There are a few who continue to dictate to the many the terms of their economic existence. The devotees of diktat should understand that perpetuation of the current situation is fraught with the danger of a catastrophe that would spare no one - and that is no exaggeration.
It would seem that the world of the rich has nothing to worry about since its economy is in good shape. It would seem also that the rich are beyond reproach since, ostensibly, their wealth breeds generosity. In 1988 the aggregate amount of the developed nations' assistance to the developing countries amounted to 3US 90 billion - an impressive sum indeed - but in the same year the developed nations received from the developed world $US 50 billion more in debt servicing and interest payments. That was the largest flow of capital in history from the poor to the rich man's pocket.
Thus the prosperity of the rich is achieved not without help from the poor. There is more to it, however, than this obvious injustice. Such disparities cannot for ever keep testing the strength of the world economy and world politics.
The health of the world economy is also being undermined by the enormous cost of military production, which siphons off vast material and intellectual resources from the civilian sector. Now that there is a prospect of limiting the military-industrial complexes, the problem of conversion has to be addressed. This can be done only by working together and relying on the experience of all States.
Before the very eyes of just one generation the sphere of politics has linked
up with environmental conservation to give mankind the science of political ecology. No one can master it alone, enchained in the fetter of narrow national interests.  
Political ecology requires urgent planetary decisions at the highest political level and the thorough internationalisation of national efforts through the United Nations, through consolidation of its leading environmental branch, the appropriate agency of this Organization. And, since we are speaking of a major component of international security. I would add that political ecology requires the involvement of the Security Council in solving problems and activating such tools as transparency and strict international monitoring.
The United Nations conference on environment and development, to be held in 1992, will undoubtedly be a watershed in establishing universal cooperation and working out a code of civilized ecological behaviour. We call for the holding of this conference at the level of Heads of State or Government.
Defining for itself the main principles of the concept of ecological security, the Soviet Union considers disarmament, the economy and ecology as an integral whole. While participating in implementing conservation strategies, the Soviet Union has programmes for speeding up the integration of its economy, on an equal and mutually beneficial basis, into the world economy, the modern international division of labour and international exchanges in science and technology. that
end we should like to participate actively in the work of international economic organizations and to establish contacts with the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, being convinced that our co-operation with them, as well as with the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations will be useful both for us and for the community as a whole.
In the building of new international relations, our foreign policy looks ahead to a positive evolution of today's world and to its stability. That orientation remains unchanged, even in the face of certain changes which affect our immediate interests and the interests of the community to which we have the honour to belong. But we remain faithful to our avowed principles and continue to affirm that nations' choices cannot and must not be overridden by force and that stability cannot be achieved by threatening the use of force or by intervention, blockade or other sanctions.
It is no secret that we were not enthusiastic about the Polish Communists' election set-back, nor should it be a secret that we hope they can overcome the crisis. Nevertheless, we see nothing threatening in the fact that a coalition Government has been formed, in accordance with the will of the Polish people, We are in no way prejudiced against that Government. We wish it every success and are ready to co-operate with it most actively.
Tolerance is the norm of civilized political behaviour. But if it is mandatory for us in our attitude towards the current Government of Poland, why are others so intolerant as regards, say, Cuba? And if a non-Communist Prime Minister is possible in a Socialist country, why should the appearance of a Communist as head of a Western Government be perceived as heresy? That is something we should not exclude either. The days of traditional demarcation lines are numbered. Only one line remains, to be pursued by all of us together moving to a common goal.
It is not the expression of popular will that threatens countries, but, rather, political and ideological intolerance, chauvinism and extremist excesses of imperial or nationalist mentalities. It is only when they engender violence and destabilize the life of countries and peoples that the machinery of legitimate defence must be activated.
However different may be our ideas of preferable ways of social development, we also have an overriding understanding of our common responsibility for the future of mankind and the survival of civilisation. We know that only together can we step beck from the brink, because an isolated island of development and prosperity would inevitably sink in the ocean of backwardness and poverty peoples and nations cannot be well when mankind is sick. 
There is only one way out of those fateful correlations. As we see it, it is for the world community to move consciously towards harmony between universal and national principles. It is difficult to attain, but it is possible because the collapse of the world is unthinkable. It is possible because we  all share a place where individual national efforts unite in a single "energy field".
The United Nations is that Place, it offers a forum for everybody to talk about his own country and its links with the rest of the world. I should like to take this opportunity to say a few words about my country.
We are building a new model of society, a new model of relations between Peoples and nations, a new model of socialism. As a great concept, socialism is by no means a spent force, indeed, it is revealing its humanistic potential in the bitter and often dramatic confrontation with the forces and flaws that are organically alien to it We in our country are not just repainting the facade, but are rebuilding the entire structure, in which the rules of living together must and will be based on the supremacy of law, people's power, openness to the outside world, inter-ethnic harmony and friendship.
In every sphere of the common life of our State and our people - the national economy, the political system and the people's intellectual endeavour - rejection of the ossified relics of the past goes hand in hand with the enthusiasm of new construction. Even though, in the words of a poet, we may have a gloomy day or two, we are confident that perestroika, which began as a revolution of hopes, will keep those hopes alive. Our people, our nation, will keep perestroika going, for it embodies the aspirations that they cherish.
Today, when some Cassandras hasten to make gloomy predictions, we make our own forecast. We want this historical optimism to be shared by all those who understand that the destiny of the world is inseparable from the future of our Perestroika. So we say to them: our determination to make it irreversible is matched by our belief in victory, a confidence grounded in the democratic institutions, which are ready to assert their genuine and full authority.
We are moving along that path guided by, not least, our awareness of the historic nature and magnitude of our goal, which we must attain ourselves, while not rejecting the support of the world community.
Believe me, we feel that support not only during the tragic days of natural disasters and national misfortunes. I say to representatives: it has been voiced in your statements at this Assembly, it manifests itself every day in your compatriots' generous gestures, their deeds and actions. So I ask you, the envoys of your Governments and nations, to convey to them our warm gratitude.
 
﻿I am honoured to address the General Assembly today at the beginning of its forty-fourth session. I should like to congratulate Joseph Garba of Nigeria, a distinguished diplomat, on his election as President of this session of the General Assembly, and I wish him success in his presidency.
I feel a great personal pleasure on this occasion, for this is a homecoming for both Barbara and me. The memories of my time here in 1971 and 1972 are still with me today - the human moments, the humorous moments that are part of even the highest undertaking.
With the Assembly's permission, I should like to share one story from one of the many meetings of the Security Council. I was the Permanent Representative of the United States, and I was 45 minutes late for the meeting. All 45 minutes were filled by the first speaker to take the floor, and when I walked in and took my seat the speaker paused, with great courtesy, and said: "I welcome the Permanent Representative of the United States. And now, for his benefit, I will start my speech all over again, from the beginning."
That is a true story, at that moment. differences of alliance and ideology didn't matter. The universal groan that went up around that table from every representative present, and the laughter that followed united us all. Today, I would like to begin by recognising - again, a personal privilege - the current Permanent Representatives with whom I served, Ambassador Dugersuren, Ambassador Martinez Ordonez. Ambassador Pabetafika and Permanent Observer Dube. It is wonderful to look around and see so any familiar faces - foreign ministers, members of the Secretariat, and delegates. Of course, the Secretary-General, you were the Permanent representative of your country when we served together. Under-Secretary-General Farah. you were a Permanent Representative back then too. Ambassador Aguilar was here then and is now back. It is an honour to be back with you in this historic Hall, and I apologize if , have forgotten any of you old enough to have served in 1971 and 1972.

The United Nations was established forty-four years ago upon the ashes of war and amidst great hopes. The UN can do great things. No, the United Nations is not perfect, it is not a panacea for the world's problem. But it is a vital forum where the nations of the world seek to replace conflict with consensus, and it must remain a forum for peace. The UN has the support of the United States of America. In recent years, the war of words that is often echoed in this Hall has been giving way to a new mood. 
We have seen a welcome shift from polemics to peace-keeping. United Nations Peace-keepers have given their lives in service to the United Nations. Today, should like to remember one of those soldiers of peace, an American on a mission of peace under the United Nations flag, on a mission for all the world, a man of unquestioned bravery and unswerving, dedication to the United Nations ideal - Lieutenant-Colonel William Richard Higgins. I call on the General Assembly to condemn the murder of this soldier of peace and to call on those responsible to have the decency to return his remains to his family. Let us all - right now, right here - dedicate ourselves and our nations to the cause that Colonel Higgins served so selflessly.
The founders of this historic institution believed that it was here that the nations of the world might come to agree that law, not force, shall govern. And the United Nations can play a fundamental role in the central issue of our time, for today, there is an idea at work around the globe, an idea of undeniable force - and that idea is freedom. Freedom's advance is evident everywhere.- Central Europe and Hungary, where State and society are now in the midst of a movement towards political pluralism and a free-market economy, where the barrier that once enforced an unnatural division between Hungary and its neighbours to the west has been torn down and replaced by a new hope for the future, a new hope in freedom. We see freedom at work in Poland, where, in deference to the will of the people, the Communist Party has relinquished its monopoly on power, and indeed in the Soviet Union, where the world hears the voices of people no longer afraid to speak out or to assert the right to rule themselves.
But freedom's march is not confined to a single continent or to the developed world alone. We see the rise of freedom in Latin America where, one by one, dictatorships are giving way to democracy. We see it on the continent of Africa, where more and more nations see in the system of free enterprise salvation for economies crippled by excessive State control. East and West, North and South, on every continent, we can see the outlines of a new world of freedom.
Of course, freedom's work remains unfinished. The trend we see is not yet universal. Some regimes still stand against the tide. Some rulers still deny the right of the people to govern themselves. But now the power of prejudice and despotism is challenged. Never before have these regimes stood so isolated and alone, so out of step with the steady advance of freedom. Today we are witnessing an ideological collapse, the demise of the totalitarian idea of the omniscient, all-powerful State. There are many reasons for this collapse, but in the end one fact alone explains what we see today: advocates of the totalitarian idea saw its triumph written in the laws of history, they failed to see the love of freedom that was written in the human heart.
Two hundred years ago today, the United States - our Congress - proposed the Bill of Rights: fundamental freedoms belonging to every individual. Rights no Government can deny. Those same rights have been recognized in this congress of nations in the words of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights - a common standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations. From where we stand, on the threshold of this new world of freedom, the trend is clear enough. If, for those who write the history of our times, the twentieth century is remembered as the century of the state, the twenty-first century must be an era of emancipation, the age of the individual. Make no mistake, nothing can stand in the way of freedom's march. There will come a day when freedom is seen the world over to be the universal birthright of every man and woman, of every race and walk of life. Even under the worst circumstances, at the darkest of times, freedom has always remained alive - a distant dream, perhaps, but always alive.
Today, that dream is no longer distant. For the first time, for millions around the world, a new world of freedom is within reach. Today is freedom's moment. You see, the possibility now exists for the creation of a true community of nations, built on shared interests and ideals. A true community, a world where free Governments and free markets meet the rising desire of the people to control their own destiny, to live in dignity, and to exercise freely their fundamental human rights. It is time that worked together to deliver that destiny into the hands of men and women everywhere. Our challenge is to strengthen the foundations of freedom, encourage its advance and face our most urgent challenges, the global challenges of the twenty-first century: economic, health, environmental well-being, the great questions of war and peace.
First, global economic growth. During this decade, a number of developing nations have moved into the ranks of the world's most advanced economies, all of them - each and every one - powered by the engine of free enterprise. In the decade ahead, others can join their ranks, but for many nations, barriers stand in the way. In the case of some countries, these are obstacles of their own making: un-needed restrictions, regulations that act as dead weights on their own economies and obstacles to foreign trade. But other barriers to growth exist, and those, too, require effective action.
Too many developing countries struggle today under a burden of debt that makes growth all but impossible. The nations of the world deserve better opportunity to achieve a measure of control over their own economic fate and build better lives for their own people. The approach the United States has put forward - the Brady plan - will help these nations reduce that debt and, at the same time, encourage the free market reforms that will fuel economic growth.
In just two days, I will be speaking to the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, and I will discuss there, in more detail, the steps that our nations can take in dealing with the debt problem. But I can say now the new world of freedom is not a world where a few nations live in comfort while others live in want. The power of commerce is a force for progress. Open markets are the key to continued growth in the developing world. Today, the United States buys over one-half of the global manufactured exports that all developing nations combined sell to the industrialized world. It is time for the other advanced economies to follow suit, to create expanded opportunities for trade. I believe we will learn, in the century ahead, that many nations of the world have barely begun to tap their true potential for development. The free market and its fruits are not the special preserve of a few, they are a harvest that everyone can share.
Beyond the challenge of global growth lies another issue of global magnitude: the environment. No line drawn on a map can stop the advance of pollution. Threats to our environment have become international problems. We must develop an international approach to urgent environmental issues, one that seeks common solutions to common problems. The United Nations is already at work on the question of global warming and the effort to prevent oil spills and other disasters from fouling our seas and the air we breathe. And I will tell you now the United States will do its part. We have committed ourselves to the world-wide phase-out of chlorofluorocarbons by the year 2000. We have proposed amending our own Clean Air Act to ensure clean air for our citizens within a single generation. We have banned the import of ivory to protect the elephant and rhinoceros from the human predators who exterminate them for profit. And we have begun to explore ways to work with other nations, with the major industrialized democracies, and in Poland and in Hungary, to make common cause for the sake of our environment.
The environment belongs to all of us. In this new world of freedom, the world's citizens must enjoy this common trust for generations to come. Global economic growth and the stewardship of our planet - both are critical issues.
But as always, questions of war and peace must be paramount to the United Nations. We must move forward to limit and eliminate weapons of mass destruction. Five years ago, at the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva, I presented a United States draft treaty outlawing chemical weapons. Since then, progress has been made, but time is running out. The threat is growing. More than 20 nations now possess chemical weapons or the capability to produce them. And these horrible weapons are now finding their way into regional conflicts. That is simply unacceptable. For the sake of mankind, we must halt and reverse this threat.
Today I want to announce steps that the United States is ready to take, steps to rid the world of these truly terrible weapons, steps towards a treaty that will ban - eliminate - all chemical weapons from the Earth 10 years from the day it is signed. This initiative contains three major elements. First, in the first eight years of a chemical weapons treaty the United States is ready to destroy nearly all - 98 per cent - of our chemical weapons stockpile, provided the Soviet Union joins the ban, and I think it will. Secondly, we are ready to destroy all of our chemical weapons - 100 per cent, every one - within 10 years, once all nations capable of building chemical weapons sign that total-ban treaty. And thirdly, the United States is ready to begin now. We will eliminate more than 80 per cent of our stockpile even as we work to complete a treaty, if the Soviet Union joins us in cutting chemical weapons to an equal level and if we agree on the conditions, including inspections, under which stockpiles are destroyed.
We know that monitoring a total ban on chemical weapons will be a challenge. But the knowledge we have gained from our recent arms control experience and our accelerating research in this area makes me believe that we can achieve the level of verification that gives us confidence to go forward with the ban. The world has lived too long in the shadow of chemical warfare? so let us act together, beginning today, to rid the Earth of this scourge.
We are serious about achieving conventional arms reductions as well. And that is why we put forward new proposals just last Thursday at the negotiations in Vienna on conventional forces in Europe, proposals that demonstrate our commitment to act rapidly to ease military tensions in Europe and move the nations of that continent one step closer to their common destiny: a Europe whole and free.
The United States is convinced that open and innovative measures can move disarmament forward and also ease international tensions. That is the idea behind the "open skies" proposal, about which the Soviets have now expressed a positive attitude. It is the idea behind the "open lands" proposal, permitting for the first time ever free travel for all Soviet and United States diplomats throughout each other's countries. Openness is the enemy of mistrust, and every step towards a more open world is a step towards the new world we seek.
Let me make this comment on our meetings with the Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union, Mr. Shevardnadze, over the past few days: I am very pleased by the progress made. The Soviet Union removed a number of obstacles to progress on conventional and strategic arms reductions. We reached agreements in principle on issues from verification to nuclear testing. And, of course, we agreed to a summit in the spring or early summer of 1990. I look forward to meeting Mr. Gorbachev there.
Each of those achievements is important in its own right, but they are more important still as signs of a new attitude that prevails between the United States and the USSR. Serious differences remain; we know that. But the willingness to deal constructively and candidly with those differences is news that we and indeed the world must welcome. We have not entered into an era of perpetual peace. The threats to peace that nations face may today be changing, but they have not vanished. In fact, in a number of regions around the world, a dangerous combination is now emerging: regimes armed with old and unappeasable animosities and modern weapons of mass destruction. That development will raise the stakes whenever war breaks out. Regional conflict may well threaten world peace as never before.
The challenge of preserving peace is a personal one for all individuals right here in this Hall. Mr. Secretary-General, I say with great respect that you have made it your own. The United Nations can be a mediator, a forum where parties in conflict come in search of peaceful solutions. For the sake of peace, the United Nations must redouble its support for the peace efforts now under way in regions of conflict all over the world. I assure the Assembly that the United States is determined to take an active role in settling regional conflicts. Sometimes our role in regional disputes is and will be highly public, and sometimes, like many others do, we work quietly behind the scenes. But always, we are working for positive change and lasting peace.
Our world faces other, less conventional threats no less dangerous to international peace and stability. Illegal drugs are a menace to social order and a source of human misery wherever they gain a foothold. The nations which suffer this scourge must join forces in the fight, and we are. Let me salute the commitment and extraordinary courage of one country in particular: Colombia, where
we are working with the people and their President, Virgil lo Barco, to put the drug cartels cut of business and bring the drug lords to justice.
Finally, we must join forces to combat the threat of terrorism. Every nation and the United Nations must send the outlaws of the world a clear message hostage-taking and the terror of random violence are methods that cannot win the world's approval. Terrorism of any kind is repugnant to all values that a civilized world holds in common. And make no mistake.- Terrorism is a means that no end, no matter how just, can sanctify.
Whatever the challenge, freedom greatly raises the chances of our success. Freedom's moment is a time for hope for all of the world, because freedom, once set in motion, takes on a momentum of its own. As I said the day I assumed the presidency of our country, we do not have to talk late into the night about which form of government is better. We know that free government, democracy, is best. And I believe that is the hard-won truth of our time, the unassailable fact that still stands at the end of a century of great struggle and human suffering. And this is true not because all our differences must give way to democracy , but because democracy makes room for all our differences. In democracy, diversity finds its common home.
At the very heart of the democratic ideal is respect for freedom of belief, freedom of thought and action, in all its diversity, for human rights. The world has experienced enough of the ideologies that have promised to remake man in some new and better image. We have seen the colossal tragedies and dashed hopes. We know now that freedom and democracy hold the answers: what men and nations want is the freedom to live by their own lights and a chance to prosper, in peace.
When I began today I spoke to you about peace-keeping. I want to speak to you now about peace-making. We must bring peace to the people who have never known its blessings. There is a painting that hangs on the wall of my office in the White House which pictures President Abraham Lincoln and his generals meeting near the end of a war that remains the bloodiest in the history of my country. Outside at that moment a battle rages, in this picture, and yet what we see in the distance is a rainbow, a symbol of hope, of the passing of the storm. That painting is called "The Peace-makers". For me, it is a constant reminder that our struggle, the struggle for peace, is a struggle blessed by hope.
I do remember sitting in this Hall, I remember the mutual respect among all of us proudly serving as representatives, yes, I remember the almost endless speeches - and I do not want this to be one of them - the Security Council sessions, the receptions, those long receiving lines, the formal meetings of the General Assembly, and the informal discussions in the delegates' lounge. And I remember something more, something beyond the frantic pace and sometimes frustrating experiences of daily life here: The heartbeat of the United Nations, the quiet conviction that we could make the world more peaceful, more free. What we sought then, all of us, now lies within our reach. I ask each of you here in this Hall:
Can we not bring a unity of purpose to the United Nations? Can we not make this new world of freedom the common destiny we seek? I believe we can. I know we must. My solemn wish today is that here, among the United Nations, that spirit will take hold, and that all men and all nations will make freedom's moment their own.
Thank you, God bless you, and may God bless the work of the United Nations.  
