Sir, first of all, please allow me to warmly congratulate you on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly of the United Nations at its forty-sixth session. I believe that, with your wisdom and experience, you will accomplish with distinction the noble task entrusted to you by the Assembly. Meanwhile I would like to express my appreciation and thanks to your predecessor, Mr. De Marco, for his positive contribution to the work of the last session.
Seven new Members have been admitted at the current session to the United Nations. This is a gratifying event. I wish to extend my sincere congratulations to the Democratic People"3 Republic of Korea, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic of Estonia, the Republic of Latvia and the Republic of Lithuania on their admission to membership in the United Nations.
It. is still fresh in people's memory that the forty-fifth session of the General Assembly was convened under the dark cloud of the ongoing Gulf crisis. As we gather here for the forty-sixth session, this dark cloud has already dispersed. Yet peace, security and development still face grave challenges in various regions and the world as a whole. And the people of all countries are anxious to see the establishment of a new international order which will make our world a better one to live in. Though the past year has seen some relaxation of tension in the international situation, more serious problems of instability and turbulence have emerged, with the sharpening of new conflicts and North-South contradictions. This has caused widespread concern on the part of the international community.
The tendency towards reduced tension and stability on the Korean peninsula accords with the aspirations of the Korean people and serves peace and security in Asia and the world at large. The simultaneous admission at the current session of North and South Korea an full Members of the United Nations is an important event conducive to the relaxation of tension on the Korean peninsula. We hope that both North and South Korea will continue to improve their relations through dialogue and consultations, expand their exchanges and cooperation and gradually remove antagonism and estrangement between them, looking towards the final independent and peaceful reunification of the nation.
The Cambodian Supreme National Council, under the presidency of Prince Norodom Sihanouk, has held several successful meetings, and, as the organ of supreme power in Cambodia, has sent its delegation to this session. Here we should like to express our warm welcome to the Cambodian delegation headed by Prince Sihanouk, Proceeding from their overall national interest, all the Cambodian parties are working to set aside their past mutual grievances and strengthen their unity and cooperation with a view to attaining soon a comprehensive political settlement of the Cambodian question on the basis of the United Nations framework document. They are making fruitful efforts to build an independent, peaceful, neutral and non-aligned Cambodia. For over 10 years the international community, the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council, the members of the Association of South-East Asian Nations and the other participants in the Paris International Conference on Cambodia have all made great efforts to achieve a political settlement of the Cambodian question. We wish to see an early resumption of the Paris conference and the official conclusion of an agreement on a comprehensive settlement of the Cambodian question. We believe that a settlement of the Cambodian question will bring about peace and stability in South-East Asia and will create a favourable environment for cooperation between, and the economic development, of, all countries in the region.
The situation in southern Africa continues to improve. After 16 years of civil war, the Angolan Government and UNITA have finally signed a peace accord. Following the independence of Namibia, the people of South Africa have also won significant victories in their struggle against apartheid, and progress is being made towards a political settlement of the South African question. We welcome the positive measures taken by the South African Government, and hope that Government, will continue its efforts to remove obstacles to constitutional negotiations and accelerate the process aimed at a political settlement, of the South African question.
We are pleased that the question of Western Sahara is moving towards a political solution. China sincerely hopes that, with the concerted efforts of the international community and the parties concerned, a proper resolution will soon be found.
We are deeply concerned about the exacerbation of ethnic, racial and religious contradictions in a number of countries, including several in Europe. The national independence and territorial integrity of some countries are under threat, while intense civil strife and political turmoil have caused serious damage to others. We are deeply disturbed by the grave situation confronting Yugoslavia today. We call on the Yugoslav people of different nationalities to solve their differences by peaceful means and to refrain from intensifying the conflict so as to enable their country to re-embark on the road of peaceful development.
It is reassuring that, following the Gulf war, the sovereignty, independence and legitimate Government of Kuwait have been restored. However, peace and stability in the Gulf region have not yet materialized, and the Middle East region remains fraught with contradictions. The achievement of peace and stability in the Middle East hinges on the early resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict. As a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council, China will join the rest of the international community in a continued effort to advance the Middle East peace process. We have always stood for a political settlement of the Middle East question on the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions, especially Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) end 338 (1973). The occupied Arab territories should be returned, the legitimate national rights of the Palestinian people restored, and the sovereignty and security of all the countries in the Middle East, region, including Israel, respected and guaranteed.
We believe that the convening of an international peace conference at an appropriate time under the auspices of the United Nations and with the participation of the five permanent members of the Security Council and all the parties concerned, including the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), would be the best means of achieving a final settlement of the Middle East question.
Pending the achievement of these targets, we support all the efforts of the parties concerned in that region that they deem appropriate and useful with a view to accelerating the Middle East peace process. To help move the peace process forward, we call upon all parties to undertake not to use force and to adopt effective measures to ease tension. The international community should endeavour to help to stop Israel's activities in establishing Jewish settlements in the occupied territories and suppressing the Palestinian inhabitants. Genuine and lasting peace can be achieved only through mutual recognition between the State of Palestine and the State of Israel for the purpose of facilitating the Middle East peace process, as well as peaceful coexistence of the Arab and the Jewish nations.
The discrepancies between North and South are aggravated by the widening economic gap and the increasing inequality between rich and poor. Such imbalance in development may lead to a more turbulent world situation. To make matters worse, more than a billion people around the world living in absolute poverty still do not have adequate food and clothing, and many are struggling against starvation and disease just to survive.
In the 1990s - the last decade of this century - the people of all countries are confronted with this increasingly acute question: where is our world going, and what kind of new international order should be established?
The establishment of a peaceful, stable, just and equitable new international order would accord with the will of the people and meet the needs of the times. It is the view of the Chinese Government that a new international order should conform to the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, as well as those principles that have proved practical and are widely accepted by the international community. Facts have proved that five principles - mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity; mutual non-aggression; non-interference in each other's internal affairs; equality and mutual benefit; and peaceful coexistence - comprise the most fundamental norms governing international relations. Those principles are in keeping with the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and reflect the characteristics essential to international relations of a new type. Therefore, we maintain that the new international order that is envisaged should be established on the basis of the five principles of peaceful coexistence.
For the purpose of exploring with all members of the Assembly the means of establishing a just and equitable new international order, I should like to set out, at this solemn forum, the position and opinions of the Chinese Government on the question of peace and security and on economic and social matters.
First, Having suffered from the scourge of two world wars this century, mankind has come to appreciate and cherish peace all the more deeply. The development of every country and the progress of mankind require a peaceful international environment. In our view, the following points are essential to the maintenance of world peace. All countries should respect each other's sovereignty, treat each other as an equal, put differences aside in the search for common ground, engage in friendly cooperation and live in harmony. No country should seek hegemony or try to manipulate international affairs, or pursue power politics on the basis of the law of the jungle. All States - large or small, strong or weak, rich or poor - should participate in the discussion and settlement of international affairs as equal members of the international community. Every State has the right to choose independently its own social, political and economic systems and its own path of development in the light of its own national conditions. No country - in particular, no big Power - should impose its own ideology, values or mode of development on other countries. All countries should observe the principle of mutual respect, for territorial integrity and the inviolability of national borders, and no country should be allowed to invade or annex the territory of other countries, under whatever pretext, Disputes between States should be settled in a reasonable manner by peaceful means, and the use or threat of force is not permissible in international relations.
Secondly, an important link in safeguarding the security of all States lies in an end to the arms race and in effective disarmament. This is an important means of easing international tension. All along, China has stood for the complete prohibition and total destruction of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, and for the banning of research into, and the development of, new weapons of mass destruction of any type. We are also for the comprehensive and balanced non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction through just, reasonable, necessary and appropriate measures. China pursues a policy of not advocating, encouraging or facilitating the development of nuclear weapons by other countries. To facilitate the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons, and to safeguard international peace, security and stability, China has announced its decision in principle to accede to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. In addition, China has always stood for the early conclusion of a convention banning chemical weapons and for greater effectiveness for the Convention on the Prohibition of Biological Weapons.
Not long ago the United States and the Soviet Union reached an agreement on the reduction of their strategic nuclear weapons. We welcome this development. Nevertheless, the signing of this treaty is just an initial step in the reduction of the huge strategic nuclear arsenals of the United States and the Soviet Union. Moreover, the treaty does not cover all types of nuclear weapons and does not prohibit continuing United States and Soviet efforts to improve the quality of their weapons and to create new weapons systems. Even after the prescribed reduction under this treaty, the two countries will still possess more than 90 per cent of the world's total nuclear weaponry and remain capable of destroying mankind several times over. The recent changes that occurred in the Soviet Union caused particular concern in the international community as to whether nuclear weapons can be strictly controlled. The United States and the Soviet Union, therefore, still have a long way to go in fulfilling their special responsibilities and obligations with regard to nuclear disarmament.
In principle, China is in favour of placing under fair, reasonable and effective control the trade in arms, including various sophisticated weapons. But this has to be decided by the international community through extensive consultations, with all countries on an equal footing, after full preparation.
We hold that military capabilities should be used only for the purpose of self-defence and that no country should seek a level of armament in excess of its reasonable defence needs. We support the proposal for a zone free from weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East and comprehensive and balanced arms control in the region through consultations and negotiations with the countries concerned on an equal footing. The views and opinions of the countries in that region should be fully heard and respected, and the possibility of a few countries monopolizing the affair and imposing their views on others should be guarded against. Arms control is only a means, and a just and lasting peace in the Middle East is the objective. Arms control in the Middle East, therefore, should be linked to the Middle East peace process. The United Nations should fully play its due role in this connection and, when necessary, a conference on arms control in the Middle East should be convened with the participation of all the countries concerned.
Outer space belongs to all mankind; it should be utilized only for peaceful purposes and for the benefit of mankind. No country should develop outer space weapons. The United States and the Soviet Union, first and foremost, should stop developing, testing and deploying such weapons and destroy all space weapons in their possession. The international community should start negotiations at an early date for the conclusion of an international agreement on the complete prohibition of outer space weapons with a view to stopping and preventing the arms race from extending into outer space.
An important characteristic of current international economic relations is the aggravation of North-South contradictions and the widening of their economic gap. The majority of the developing countries remain confronted with such difficulties as crushing debt burden, negative net flow of financial resources and worsening terms of trade.
To a large extent, the widening economic gap between the North and the South is the result of the existing inequitable and unfair international economic order. The present radical changes in the world situation have created new difficulties for the developing countries. To reverse the situation, it is necessary to establish step by step a new international economic order which should include the following elements:
Every country has the right to choose its own social system, economic model and road to development suited to its national conditions;
Every country has the right to exercise effective control over its own resources and their exploitation; All countries are entitled to participate in the handling of international economic affairs;
The developed countries should respect and accommodate the interests and needs of the developing countries and refrain from attaching political strings to their aid; and
Efforts should be made to strengthen North-South dialogue and cooperation with a view to necessary adjustment and reform in commodity, trade, funds, debt, monetary, financial and other important fields of international economy.
The economy of the world is an interrelated and interdependent whole. While the developing countries need funds and technology from the developed countries, the latter also need the raw materials and markets of the former. In essence, the question of development hinges on North-South relations. Without a fundamental improvement in North-South relations, it will be difficult to ensure world peace and stability, and the situation will benefit neither the poor nor the rich countries. To promote common development, all countries must help each other, like passengers in the same boat, and endeavour to narrow the gap between the North and the South and establish a fair and rational international economic order based on mutual benefit and cooperation.
The environment is another outstanding problem facing the international community today. Improving the environment and protecting the Earth have a vital bearing on the very conditions for the survival of mankind.
The question of environment does not exist by itself. It is closely linked to economic growth and social development. Owing to historical reasons and economic backwardness, a vast number of developing countries are constrained in their ability to participate effectively in the protection of the global environment. Yet without their participation, there can be no fundamental improvement in the environment. We appeal to the countries with comparatively abundant financial and technological resources to take the lead in moving to protect the global environment and help the developing countries enhance their ability in environmental protection.
China attaches great importance to environmental protection, which has become one of its basic state policies. We have taken an active part in international cooperation in this field. Last June, at the invitation of the Chinese Government, the ministers of 41 developing countries met in Beijing for the Ministerial Conference of the Developing Countries on Environment and Development and issued the Beijing Declaration, which sets forth the principled position and basic views of the developing countries on ways to resolve the questions of global environment and development and gives expression to the common will and aspiration of three quarters of mankind for environmental protection and development. This will no doubt exert a positive influence on the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development scheduled for 1992 in Brazil and the efforts for a rational solution to the problem of global environment.
The promotion of the universal attainment of human rights and fundamental freedoms is inextricably linked to the common interests of mankind. Over the past forty years or more, the international community has made positive contributions in safeguarding the purposes stated in the Charter of the United Nations pertaining to the promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms. Thanks to the concerted efforts of its Member States, the United Nations has formulated nearly 70 international conventions, declarations and instruments on human rights which have played a positive role in promoting United Nations activities in the field of human rights.
For a long time, however, the human rights forum of the United Nations has been used by certain countries as a place for waging cold war, with the result that the United Nations efforts for the promotion and protection of human rights are subjected to the influence of abnormal phenomena. For example, human rights has been used as a means of pushing power politics and interfering in affairs that are basically within the jurisdiction of other States; the concept of human rights has been fragmented and double standards have been followed; some have made efforts to glorify themselves and attack others on the question of human rights and set up their own likes and dislikes as criteria of human rights in disregard of the international conventions and the specific conditions of other countries. All this not only runs counter to the purposes and principles of the Charter but also seriously hampers normal international cooperation in the field of human rights and impedes the universal realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
The Chinese Government has consistently supported and respected the principles of protecting human rights contained in the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant international instruments, and has actively participated in a wide range of human rights activities in the United Nations.
We believe that in order effectively to guarantee and promote human rights and fundamental freedoms of all mankind, it is necessary to recognize the various countries' different features - their different political economic and social systems and their different historical, religious and cultural backgrounds. In this regard, all countries, based on the principles of respect for each other's sovereignty and non-interference in each other's internal affairs, should strive to achieve mutual understanding, seek common ground while putting aside differences and replace cold war with normal international cooperation.
In our view, racial discrimination, apartheid, colonialism, foreign aggression and occupation are gross violations of human rights that ought to be given full attention and halted by the international community. In the field of human rights equal importance should be attached to civil and political rights, as well as to economic, social, cultural and developmental rights. He must not emphasise some rights while belittling or even denying others. For the vast number of developing countries, the most fundamental human right is the right to subsistence and development.
As you all know, China is a developing country with a population of 1.15 billion. In spite of a successful family planning policy, our population still grows by 17 million every year. By feeding 22 per cent of the world's population with only 7 per cent of the world's arable land, China has made its utmost contribution to the protection of mankind's right to subsistence. The Chinese Government has also worked actively to safeguard and guarantee the lawful rights and interests of old and young, women and children and the disabled through legislation and other effective measures, and it has had marked success. Any unprejudiced person can readily see that China today enjoys political stability and economic growth and that its people are living in peace and contentment. China's stability and development are without doubt important factors contributing to peace and stability in Asia and in the world at large. Conversely, should China be plunged into turmoil, stability in Asia and the world would be seriously impaired. China needs stability, and the world needs a stable China.
China is advancing along the road of building socialism with Chinese characteristics. Over the past 10 years and more we have adhered to the policies of reform and opening to the outside world and have scored noticeable achievements in economic development. At present the Chinese people are implementing their Ten-Year Programme and their Eighth Five-Year Plan for National Economic and Social Development. We will unswervingly deepen the reform, open the country still wider and gradually establish a new structure of planned commodity economy with a view to quadrupling the 1980 gross national product by the end of this century. In order to reach this target, a great deal of work needs to be accomplished and a huge number of large-scale projects completed. While deepening economic reform, we will also further the policy of opening to the outside world and carry out political restructuring step by step.
This past summer some regions of China were hit by severe floods, which brought the people tremendous losses in lives and property as well as in industrial and agricultural production. In some areas the loss was very heavy. The Chinese Government has adopted effective measures, funnelling large amounts of financial and material resources to assisting the disaster-stricken areas and minimizing the losses. In those areas there has been no occurrence of famine or pestilence and no influx of refugees to cities. China has been victorious in its efforts to combat the floods. It is estimated that China's gross national product will continue to grow at a rate of 6 per cent. In fighting the floods and in the subsequent relief operations, we have received sympathy and assistance from the governments and people of other countries, relevant United Nations agencies, international organizations and various quarters of the international community, for which we wish to express our heartfelt thanks.
We are happy to note that, as the most important global organization in the present world, the United Nations has in the past year played a major role in maintaining world peace, promoting the political settlement of burning issues, enhancing development in various countries and strengthening international cooperation. Facts have proved that the mechanism of the United nations remains effective. Here. I would like to point out in particular that Secretary-General Perez de Cuellar has for many years made fruitful efforts in this respect.
In the present complex and volatile international situation people the world over all hope that, in keeping with the purposes and principles of its Charter, the United Nations will work tirelessly to bring about fair and reasonable solutions to such regional conflicts as the on? Prevailing in the Middle East, promote North-South dialogue and help developing countries overcome their economic difficulties and develop their economies. We sincerely hope that the United Nations will play a positive role in advancing disarmament and in addressing the major problems facing mankind, such as environmental protection and drug control.
In this diversified international community, the search for consensus and commonality is not only the original objective set for the United Nations at its inception but also the distinctive feature of this largest international Organization. Faced with the stupendous changes occurring in the current international situation, the international community has come to regard the establishment of a new international order as a common aspiration. We hope and believe that the United Nations will play a significant role in the establishment of a fair and reasonable new international order.
Twenty years have passed since the restoration of China's lawful seat the United Nations in 1971. Over these years China, as a permanent member of the Security Council, has played a positive role in maintaining peace and promoting economic development In the world. In the future, China will, as always, continue to abide strictly by the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter, to perform its duties conscientiously and to join the rest of the States Member of the United Nations in actively supporting the work of the Organisation, contributing its share to the promotion of world peace, security and development as well as to the establishment of a new international order,
﻿This session of the General Assembly is taking place in a world that has undergone fundamental change. The United Nations is the focal point of mankind's new hopes and expectations. This makes your office, Mr. President, one of special responsibility. I wish you luck and success and greet you as the representative of a country with which we, Germany, have long-standing close relations.
I welcome most heartily the Baltic States of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania as new Members of the United Nations. They had lost their freedom and independence in 1940 as a result of that criminal document, the Hitler-Stalin pact. All the greater, therefore, is the pleasure felt by us Germans at the fact that history has at long last justly rewarded these courageous peoples with the freedom they longed for.
I welcome the two Korean States. We hop« that the wish of the Korean people will be fulfilled, that they will be able, like the German people, to live in freedom and democracy in one sovereign and independent State. I also welcome the Marshall Islands and Micronesia to the family of nations.
Every year since 1974 I have addressed this Assembly on behalf of the Federal Republic of Germany. On each occasion I have expressed our intention to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German people could recover their unity in free self-determination. On 3 October 1990 that wish came true.
At this moment I commemorate all those who had to sacrifice their lives and their freedom in prisons and camps because they wanted to live in a European Germany of freedom, democracy and human rights. We pay a tribute to all those who, is what was then the German Democratic Republic, as everywhere in Central and Eastern Europe, took to the streets to gain freedom, democracy and unity by peaceful means.
Today I address the Assembly for the first time as the Foreign Minister of united Germany. Germany takes its place in the family of United Nations on the basis of the United Nations Charter.
As a European country, we are committed to the Charter of Paris. We Germans regard the greater weight of our people united in one State as a mandate to assume greater responsibility for freedom, democracy and human rights in a European Germany which has put behind it the nation-State thinking of the past. While the division of Germany made manifest the division of Europe, German unity today contributes to the unification of the whole European continent.
Europe stands at a crossroads in its history. We Germans want this Europe to develop in close transatlantic solidarity. The North Atlantic alliance and the involvement of the United States and Canada in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) process are a reflection of that solidarity. The European Community's transatlantic declaration underscores the will for ever closer European-North American cooperation.
The aims of the policy of united Germany are as follows:
First, we want the European Community, of which we are a founding member, to develop into a European Union and ultimately into the United States of Europe. We want this year to bring a final decision in favour of political union and economic and monetary union.
Second, we want all democratic States in Europe to be able to accede to this Community. For the new democracies in Eastern Europe which are introducing market economies the way must be opened, through association, to full membership.
Third, we want to bring the whole of Europe ever closer together on the basis of the Charter of Paris. We also want the peoples of the Soviet Union, who are adopting a new form of coexistence as sovereign republics, to take their place in this Europe.

Europe will find its new order in confederal structures; these will manifest themselves in different forms. They will take account of existing structures and will afford the regions new opportunities. With greater unity, Europe will at the same time acquire greater diversity.
It is the responsibility of the Western democracies also to establish the material conditions for European unity so that new boundaries do not divide Europe into haves and have-nots. Mew priorities will have to be fixed for material assistance as well. Germany is facing up to this task: as Europeans, we aim, together with other Europeans, to create one Europe by providing assistance for our Eastern neighbours. No one in the West will be permanently well off if those in the East are permanently badly off.
Fourth, as a country in the heart of Europe, we want to devote all our energy to achieving the unity of our continent. This is underscored by the unique link between Germany and France. Also important in this process is the close cooperation with our Eastern neighbours. I emphasised this in the Declaration of Weimar, signed on 29 August 1991 with my French colleague, Roland Dumas, and my Polish colleague. Professor Krzysztof Skubiszewski.
As the door to unity began to open for the German people in the autumn of 1989, I stated here before the United Nations on 27 September that year that we wanted Poland to know that the Polish people's

"... right to live within secure borders will not be called into question, not now or in the future, through territorial claims by us Germans". (A/44/PV.8. p. 18) That was a signal, not only to the Polish people but to all our neighbours. 
That statement was incorporated into the two-plus-four Treaty and the German-Polish Treaty, which is at present being debated by the parliaments of both countries. The German-Czechoslovak Treaty on good-neighbourly Relations and Friendly Cooperation is likewise about to be signed. These treaties, like the major treaty with the Soviet Union and the treaties with the other countries of Central and Eastern Europe still to come, manifest our intention to work towards one Europe. Our relationship with the Soviet Union has meanwhile assumed central importance for the whole of Europe.
The German people are emphasising their determination to draw the conclusions from the ill-fated chapters of our history in this century and to help build a Europe based on responsibility and not on the power politics of the past.
Fifth, we want the Western alliance to continue its efforts to ensure stability throughout Europe in a changing political environment. The contacts already established with the former members of the Warsaw Pact, including the Soviet Union, must be developed into a comprehensive partnership for security. Cooperative security structures must emerge. Our alliance, as Czechoslovak President Vaclav Havel confirmed in his address to the NATO Council on 21 March, 1991, was never a threat to others.
The ending of the East-West confrontation has opened the way for the radical reduction of excessively large military arsenals. We want conventional disarmament to be pursued consistently, in accordance with the first Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe. We want a global prohibition on chemical weapons. We want the removal of short-range nuclear missiles and of nuclear artillery ammunition - this is urgent: such weapons are increasingly destabilizing; the danger of their proliferation is growing they must disappear at long last. We expect the nuclear Powers to continue the reduction of strategic nuclear weapons.
Sixth, we want to make the CSCE capable of action. After the establishment of the Council of CSCE Foreign Ministers and of the CSCE emergency mechanism, I submitted specific proposals at the CSCE Conference on the Human Dimension, held in Moscow on 10 September this year, aimed at more effective protection for human rights, democracy and the rule of law. It must also be possible to afford such protection without the consent of the country concerned.
The right to self-determination and, directly linked with it, the rights of minorities, must be respected everywhere. Europe is heading towards more identity and more plurality. From this must not emerge neo-nationalism. European structures must absorb these developments. For all questions we must have a European response. That is a task for the European Community, and it is a task for the CSCE.
The crisis-management capability of the CSCE must be enhanced. The less necessary it becomes to protect oneself from threats from outside, the more we need a system in which all cooperate in guaranteeing common security. If we together learn to guarantee our security from one another, we in Europe will be on the way to a collective system of security.
Seventh, we Germans want the new Europe to exercise its global responsibility. It should not and will not be introspective. The trend towards a Euro-Atlantic area of cooperation stretching from Vancouver to Vladivostok opens up a historic opportunity for development for the countries of the South as well.
The world economic summit of the seven industrial nations - including Japan - faces its greatest test where global responsibilities are concerned. The triad of Worth America, Europe and Japan must prove its worth. The third world will not remain in the shadow of this development. It will benefit vitally from this new era.
The ending of the East-West conflict in Europe is at last releasing those energies tied up by the cold war which mankind now needs in order to solve the global challenges of the twenty-first century. The first fruits of this new development are already appearing. The East-West confrontation is no longer being staged in the third world. Freedom is emerging in Angola and in Cambodia, and in Afghanistan too there are signs of hope.
In the Middle East as well a historic opportunity for peace is opening up. We all hope that at the forthcoming peace conference all participants will at long last realize that there is no justifiable alternative to a genuine balance of interests that gives Israel security and peace and the Palestinians self-determination. With great commitment and unending patience. Secretary of State Baker has paved the way for such a balance. In this he has Germany's full support. The General Assembly resolution equating Zionism with racism must be repealed. We support the American initiative in that regard.
In South Africa, President De Klerk and Nelson Mandela have taken decisive steps toward creating a South Africa free from oppression and racial hatred. All citizens of that country must participate with equal rights in its political, economic and social life. This must be guaranteed by a new constitution. A democratic South Africa can and must become a locomotive of development and stability in a region still afflicted by poverty and conflicts.
The economic fruits of the new development in Europe are likewise discernible. As the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development has calculated, the single European market will mean a 7 per cent increase in the exports of developing countries to the European Community. That will boost their earnings by $10 billion. And if in a few years' time Central and Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union become regions of dynamic growth, they will also develop into important new markets for exports from the South. Above all, however, the end of the arms race between East and Heat will release tremendous energies which will benefit the third world above all.
Eighth, we Germans want the United Nations to become the main forum for action in the new world order. To that end, it is absolutely essential that Security Council resolutions be implemented, completely and unconditionally. Aggressors like Saddam Hussein must no longer be permitted to keep people in constant fear with aggression and means of mass destruction. We support President Bush in his resolve to counteract fresh provocations. Our world Organization must be able to meet the challenges of the new era. Conflict prevention, demographic policy and environmental protection must be improved.
The ending of the East-West conflict has freed the world Organization from its paralysis. This new freedom to act must now be used. Germany is prepared to play its part. The united Germany will assume all rights and meet a11 obligations of the United Nations Charter, including measures of collective security, also with our armed forces. For this purpose we intend to amend our constitution.
Ninth, in order to improve coordination of United Nations disaster relief measures, we advocate the appointment of a high-ranking representative exclusively responsible to the Secretary-General. This person would have to coordinate all international relief measures and have immediately available an emergency fund and national rescue and relief services.
We want to enhance the status of the Secretary-General himself. He has frequently spoken of this necessity, and rightly so. Now his tenure is coming to an end. The world has come to respect him as a guardian of peace, a champion of human rights, and an advocate of the poor. In an era of epochal change, he has, with clear vision and a firm hand, enhanced the reputation of the United Nations. For this the family of nations owes him a debt of gratitude and appreciation.
Tenth, we want to strengthen the instruments asserting the rule of law in the world. The experience of our history has committed us in a special way to freedom, the rule of law and human rights. We pursue these goals in Europe, and we intend to pursue them in the United Nations as well. He intend to pursue a policy which focuses on the individual, makes human rights and human dignity the measures of all human action and does not paralyze people's energy and enterprise.
The world today realizes that this is a precondition for prosperity, social progress and peace. It also realizes that despotism negates development and freedom. The alarming figure of 15 million refugees worldwide shows that the world is still far from ensuring adequate protection for human rights and the rights of minorities.
The violation of human rights must no longer be a domestic concern of individual States but a domestic concern of the community of nations as a whole. Today sovereignty must meet its limits in the responsibility of States for mankind as a whole and for the survival of Creation. When human rights are trampled under foot, the family of nations is not confined to the role of spectator. It can - it must - intervene.
We are witness to the persecution of the Kurdish people. Anyone who threatens peoples with genocide, anyone who deliberately destroys nature's already fragile equilibrium in an entire region, must be brought to account before an international tribunal. We call for an international court of justice of the United Nations where crimes against humanity, crimes against peace, genocide, war crimes and environmental criminality can be prosecuted and punished. We call for a court of justice to which anyone who feels that his human rights have been violated may appeal. We call for the proscription of torture and capital punishment.
We need an effective international environmental law regime with appropriate international controls. It must be possible to impose sanctions on countries that deliberately destroy the environment. We also have to effectively prevent environmental warfare. I ask the General Assembly to support the draft resolution on this important matter which Germany proposes to introduce.
We call upon all States to accede to the International Convention against the Taking of Hostages, and we call for sanctions against countries which tolerate hostage-taking. The World Conference on Human Rights, scheduled to take place in 1993, must deal with those questions that are of such vital importance for a new culture of international coexistence. We are looking forward to hosting the Conference in Berlin, that symbol of a new era of humanity and solidarity in Europe.
Eleventh, as in the case of civil human rights, we seek protection for economic and social human rights. The united Germany will continue to render a significant contribution to the development of the third world. In spite of the challenges presented by economic and ecological reconstruction in central and eastern Europe, the diversion of capital from South to East that had been feared has not taken place. This reflects the determination of the Western industrial nations to live up to their responsibility for development on a global scale.
Germany, in spite of the enormous domestic strain on its resources and the disproportionately high level of support for its eastern neighbours, has increased its official development assistance even more. Furthermore, the German people last year donated more than 1 billion Deutschmarks for humanitarian purposes in third-world countries. This is proof that their own country's problems and those of central and eastern Europe have not caused them to forget the plight of people in Asia, Africa and Latin America.
There is a growing appreciation in third-world countries that it is not enough simply to expect the donor countries to do their duty, but that they themselves are primarily responsible for putting their houses in order. In future the German Government will, more than previously, make its assistance
Conditional upon the extent to which recipients are prepared to create the right pluralistic, rule-of-law and free-market framework. Countries which are more concerned with strengthening their armies than seeing to the needs of their people can no longer count on our support. Considering the degree of hunger and poverty, annual military spending of close to $200 billion by the third world is irresponsible. The responsibility lies with the buyers and sellers of weapons alike. The mere freezing of this military expenditure would save about $15 billion a year - about one quarter of annual development assistance.
The restriction of arms exports requires, as a first step, greater transparency. Since 1980 I have been urging the world Organisation to establish a register in which transfers of weapons would be recorded. This proposal, which is now being advocated by the European Community as a whole, should, during this session of the General Assembly, at long last meet with broad support. We Germans will place even greater restrictions on the export of arms.
Heavy indebtedness remains for many countries one of the greatest obstacles to development. The debate on Africa has shown that we need a new arrangement particularly for the poorest countries. The amount of debt remission should correspond to the plight of the country concerned. The markets of the North must not remain closed. This situation is depriving the South of proceeds from foreign exchange amounting to an estimated $100 billion a year. That is about twice the total sum of development aid. This is why the outcome of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) negotiations is not a matter for the industrial countries among themselves. It affects above all the future of the developing countries.
Twelfth, we want the third-world countries to participate on an equal footing in the dialogue on mankind's future, in all respects - political, economic, ecological and cultural. As before, we regard the Non-Aligned Movement as an indispensable source of global stability. Mankind's new challenges, the greater interdependence and responsibility of the community of nations make new forms of dialogue based on partnership between East and Nest and between North and South imperative. The global trend towards a free society, pluralistic democracy and market economy has created new, favourable conditions for such a "dialogue of the one world". He must now use this opportunity.
While we are here debating the common future tasks of the world community, war is being waged in Europe. People are being killed, are bleeding to death. Fighting is going on in Croatia - but not only there. The President and the Prime Minister of Yugoslavia say that the army has placed itself beyond political control. They have appealed to the United Nations. The peoples of Yugoslavia have a right to peace. The Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE), the European Community and the Western European Union (WEU) are striving to bring about a cease-fire and a peace agreement. For this they require the support of the community of nations and the Security Council. He expect a binding weapons embargo. He expect the Security Council to adopt a clear, unequivocal position so that the fighting can be stopped. The use of force to achieve political ends must remain unlawful. We shall never recognize the acquisition of territory by force. Anyone aiming to alter Yugoslavia's internal and external borders by force is challenging the very foundations of human coexistence. Germany has in recent decades developed friendly relations with all peoples of Yugoslavia. We do not take sides against one people or another; we take the side of the women and mothers who do not want their husbands and sons to die in a senseless war. We take the aide of peace against war, of human rights, of the rights of minorities and the right to self-determination. We wish success to the peace conference that we together with France proposed to the arbitration commission and to the mediator. Lord Carrington. Within the framework of the European Community and the CSCE arbitration mechanism we shall make every effort to achieve a peace settlement in which the peoples of Yugoslavia alone will determine their future, as the CSCE Foreign Ministers decided under my chairmanship in Berlin on 19 June 1991.
On the threshold of the new millennium mankind faces a global challenge that overshadows all else: that of fighting poverty, reducing population growth and protecting the natural sources of life. What the twenty-first century will look like depends on the decisions we take in the next 10 years.
The concern with freedom in the past two years has changed the countenance of Europe, indeed of the world, at breathtaking speed. What could not be changed in that short period were the economic and social conditions of the people. If a billion people have to manage on less than one dollar a day, if 23 per cent of the world's population commands over 85 per cent of the world's income, then everybody's security is threatened. Mau is still waging war against creation.
We need a comprehensive peace pact between peoples, between nations, and between man and nature. These are the tasks for a new world domestic policy.
We need to realise that the social issue on a global scale is the great challenge of the new era. Only decent human conditions for all create freedom. It is only to this kind of freedom that the future will belong. In the last three and a half decades the population of the third world has almost doubled. In the next generation the developing countries will account for over 80 per cent of the world's population. Today already, more than one third of the world's population is undernourished. What will the situation be like a generation hence? This question in itself indicates the whole dimension of our responsibility. Our task is to meet the needs of the present and at the same time protect the Interests of future generations - and also to attempt to reconcile economy and ecology.
The accumulation of arms during the cold war has consumed astronomical sums. How it is a question of directing our combined efforts to the central task of the twenty-first century: solving the world's social, demographic and ecological problems and pursuing disarmament.
This is the spiritual and moral challenge confronting the nations of the world. New thinking is required from each one of us. The signs are there. When did the voice of freedom and democracy speak with such force as today? It is true: the world ha3 changed fundamentally. It has changed through the spirit of freedom. Everywhere human rights and human dignity are gaining ground. Hardly ever have we been more aware of this than on 21 August this year, when the Moscow coup against freedom failed. On exactly that day 23 years previously the Soviet army had brutally crushed the Prague Spring. This time the soldiers of the same army refused to shoot at the people who had gathered in Moscow's "Square of Free Russia" to defend freedom and democracy with their lives. There it became clear to the whole world:
Mikhail Gorbachev's courageous reformist policy has become irreversible. Today already he has taken his place in the annals of history.
The events of that day gave the lie to all those in the West who did not believe that the peoples of the Soviet Union had the will for freedom and democracy. Boris Yeltsin, Eduard Shevardnadze, Anatoly Sobchak, Gavril Popov and Alexander Yakovlev stood unshakably with many, many of their fellow-citizens for freedom and peace.
What Europe and the world was twice denied in this century our generation has the chance to fulfil: President Bush's vision of a new world order. It is the vision of a world community sharing responsibility on the basis of law, the self-determination of nations, international solidarity and respect for man and nature.
If this historic opportunity for new and lasting international solidarity is not to evaporate through economic want, then the West just not forsake the people who risked their lives for freedom. I said it in Davos in 1987 and I say it again today: this concerns Europe's, America's and Japan's joint responsibility for global peace. The chance to create a lastingly free and democratic new Soviet Union is a chance for the whole world.
The German American philosopher Hans Jonas said: "Hope derives from responsibility for the universe". Europe has reflected on its fundamental values and is building its common home. In spite of all the difficulties, this peaceful undertaking is a message of hope to the world.
The united Germany places itself for all time on the side of freedom and democracy, on the side of human rights and human dignity, on the side of the right of self-determination and of protection for minorities. The German people side once and for all with the inalienable values which alone permit a humane society to develop. That is the message of the united Germany to the community of nations to which I have the honour to speak here today for the first time as the representative of one Germany. As a European Germany we intend to face the global challenges. In this we regard every person on earth as our neighbour.
﻿
I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your election as President of the General Assembly. Apart from being a tribute to you personally, to your diplomatic talent and your sense of reason, your election honours the representative of a country whose prominent role and place in the Arab world and on the international scene are known to all.
May I also express our gratitude to the Secretary-General, Mr. Peres de Cuellar, whose indefatigable energy in the service of peace has given so many peoples grounds for hope, and which will have made its mark on our time.
The Organisation is welcoming seven new Members. This is a momentous event, one which is cause for celebration. Welcome to Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. Their return to our midst redresses an injustice that had no equal and effaces the criminal act committed against these peoples.
Welcome to the great Korean people, heir to an ancient and distinguished civilisation, who come to the Organization through the separate admission of two States. We hope that they will thus find occasion for friendly dialogue, which will enable them to recover the unity to which they aspire.
Welcome to the Marshall Islands and to Micronesia. These two States will bring to the Organization the benefits of the ancient wisdom of the Pacific Islands.
The years 1989 and 1990 rang with the sounds of liberation - moments of historic happiness rarely encountered - and 1991 has seen the movement continue and amplify.
History has suddenly accelerated. A real revolution has radically altered our points of reference and swept away old habits. A new world is emerging. It will be based, members can be sure, on freedom, solidarity, security and the rule of law. 
In the course of the past year, freedom has continued to gain ground. Let us rejoice, for freedom is the sun that shines on our peoples: freedom for Kuwait, which was reinstated to sovereignty and independence - admittedly at the price of the use of force - thanks to the new capacity of the United Nations to further the rule of law; burgeoning freedom in South Africa, where the barriers of apartheid have at last been dismantled - may this impetus not be slowed; and hope of freedom and peace in Cambodia. Speaking from this rostrum in 1988, the President of the French Republic proposed an international conference to help this martyred country regain unity and peace.
	It has taken three years for the realities of the situation to prevail, three years of patient negotiations, three years of persistence; for the inevitability of discord seemed to impinge on the slightest progress. The convening of a conference on Cambodia will at last set the seal on a peace agreement. I should like to pay a tribute to Prince Sihanouk, President of the Supreme National Council, who is sitting in our midst at the head of the Cambodian delegation. His patience and sense of dialogue have once again revealed his qualities as a Head of State capable of reuniting a people and reconciling it with itself. I should like to wish a happy future to the people of Cambodia, whose suffering I shared and whose aspirations I hope to share.
- Freedom of choice offered to the peoples of Western Sahara through a referendum organised by the United Nations in accordance with the wish of all the parties concerned.
- Hope in the Middle East. After so many years of conflict and absence of understanding, the prospect of the convening of a peace conference provides the opportunity for a settlement based on law and justice, a comprehensive peace settlement, it should be recalled, which should therefore enshrine the right of all to live in peace within secure and recognized borders, by giving the Palestinians a land and a state. Yes, freedom for the Palestinian people.
- Freedom for Lebanon, which is dressing its wounds and putting an end to its strife. Let it affirm its sovereignty over the whole of its national territory by the disarmament of militia forces, the withdrawal of foreign troops and the implementation of Security Council resolution 425 (1978), Let it boldly address its task of reconstruction and quickly return to the path of democracy by holding free elections. Those are France's wishes for Lebanon, which is so close to it in heart, in mind and in history.
- Freedom too for Moscow, where democratic forces have swept away factions which thought they could use violence to impose the return of an order that had been driven from the scene but remains present in our memories, an order that has been overturned and condemned. Let us pay a tribute to those who threw up the barricades of freedom and confronted the threat so that the will of the people could prevail. Hai1 to the defenders of the White House of Moscow.
In Kuwait, in the Soviet Union and in the Baltic countries, freedom is gaining ground everywhere and democracy is smiling on peoples. The points marked with a cross on the map of oppression and tutelage are gradually fading, and as they fade the old world order, with its compromises and deadlocks, is disappearing. This transformation is taking place before our very eyes. Let us look directly at it. Hope is replacing threat, dialogue is being set in train beyond all expectations, and the world rings with the sound of statues being toppled.
But new clouds are already appearing on the horizon. Will we see those who are gaining their freedom and independence take the path of blind nationalism and make anachronistic territorial claims? Will the clash of interests take the place of ideological confrontations? Roads and struggles of this kind lead nowhere, as experience and history have taught us. Dictatorship, poverty, exodus and war are their end result. To avoid these dangers, we must devise formulas and solutions appropriate for our times. Let us begin by building new solidarities, and use the opportunity to turn towards the future.
With regard to building new solidarities, let us first speak of Europe. It is experiencing on its own soil the world's last great phase of decolonisation. I wish to state here that France will be at one with all peoples which choose to make their voice heard on the international scene and which peacefully and democratically express their resolve to accede to independence. For self-determination is indivisible; and it cannot be an object of bargaining. Let us recall a few simple rules that may help these movements to mature in harmony:
First, every people that wants it has the right to self-determination and sovereignty. Secondly, this presupposes a clear definition of the rights of minorities; we should think about the role the United Nations could play in this respect. Thirdly, it is essential to ensure respect for international treaties, and hence recognition of borders. Fourthly, borders may be changed only through dialogue or, failing that, through arbitration. Lastly, good neighbourly relations can be governed by freely accepted agreements.
What France has proposed for Yugoslavia holds true in a general way for everyone.
Let us spare ourselves a return to empires and opportunistic alliances in the twenty-first century. Let us note our regional complementarities, derive advantage from them and give them a context.
Is this, after all, not the purpose of the Community construction in Europe so well described just a moment ago by my colleague Mr. Van Den Broek? Why have we spent 40 years building a European Community - first of six, then of nine, and now of 12? Because we were convinced that peace, prosperity and our identity would be established in a lasting manner only through the sharing of our national sovereignties. Those who had doubts must now bow to the evidence. The European Community has become a benchmark for some and for others a source of admiration. The European Community owes it to itself to continue to astonish the world by pursuing its integration, planned for the end of 1991. Strengthened by a Germany at last reunited, the European Economic Community will continue its progress towards unity.
The new democracies of central and eastern Europe have understood this necessity of union and cooperation and have turned eagerly and hopefully to the Community. Within the Twelve, France in turn understands this request, this expectation, which it hopes will be answered as soon as possible by preparations for these countries' admission to the European Economic Community. This will of course take time. That is all the more reason to get down to the task right away.
But are we to do nothing during this period, leaving these democracies, which are so close to us, uncertain as to their future? Of course not. Europe needs a new pact right now.
Aware of the danger that still threatens it, can our continent - our ancient continent - rally to preserve the gains of the past few years and go forward? This is the essence of the confederation France has proposed. Our aim is to go beyond the logic of aid, which out of necessity has been the reason for most actions so far, in order to arrive at a real political, economic and social community on the continent, in the spirit of the founding fathers of a free Europe in the immediate post-war period.
It would be a paradox if just as this Europe - which will become more and more confederal - was taking shape, a parallel but contrary movement towards dismemberment and break-up were to prevail elsewhere. That is why we hope that the republics of the USSR succeed in exercising their new responsibilities and organising their relations as they intend to do, and succeed in defining, at the international level, as reason and the course of events dictate, the expression of their common interests and resolve. We hope they can do so with due respect for the principles and norms of security and stability accepted in Europe.
Yugoslavia, which is being torn apart, represents the other example of a necessary transformation. May the legitimate aspirations for freedom which are being expressed there take into consideration the interests of all. May the rights of minorities be preserved and the advantages of a space shared by ill the peoples of Yugoslavia be maintained and guaranteed. That, it seems to me, is the road to peace and regained prosperity. But none of this will be possible so long as the fighting persists. The conflagration is building and threatens to spread. Time is running out. Yugoslavia is heading deeper into an impasse. France believes it is incumbent on the United Nations to bring the parties to their senses by demanding compliance with the cease-fire, by showing them the way to dialogue and to negotiation that has been mapped out with their consent by the European Community, by saying to all that peace has its requirements, theirs and others'. France, which is the current President of the Security Council, will leave no stone unturned to achieve this end.
Can I fail to refer to the solidarity between the North and the South? No. The planet is one. Who can believe in a future in which less than one quarter of the world's population enjoys the benefits of progress while the remaining three quarters are abandoned to despair?
In the course of the past five years, Africa's gross national product has grown less quickly than its population. Today's 500 million Africans will be 1.5 billion in the year 2025, while the sources of financing are drying up. Net capital input fell in real terms from 1986 to 1990. World Bank and International Monetary Fund transfers are currently negative, with African countries paying back far more than they receive.
Without wishing to sound like an oracle, France has consistently spoken of this intolerable and inevitable trend in order to seek a greater effort of solidarity from the rich. My country senses it is being better heeded now, and I hope that is true. It welcomes this especially as another danger is threatening the developing countries: the danger of a society exploding in response to excessive demands.
It is appropriate, certainly, to ensure that the assistance to developing countries is well employed. That is the best way to generate official and private resources and to promote regional integration, which is still in its early stages.
In this respect, the Treaty for the Constitution of the Common Market of the South - the MERCOSUR Treaty - signed in March 1991, which groups Argentina, Brazil, Uruguay and Paraguay in a common market, is a good example of what has to be done. It should not remain an isolated instance. I am thinking it particular of Africa, where plans to set up a large common agricultural market should be pursued. The franc zone, with its single currency, offers a favourable terrain for such a market.
France, together with its European Economic Community partners, intends to support these efforts. It does not intend to render them useless by imposing requirements that go beyond what is reasonable.
Lastly, one cannot speak of solidarity without mentioning the environment. The international community has already held debates on and carried out research into this important subject. It has launched significant concrete programs. France welcomes, for example, the success of the initiative on the decision to protect Antarctica, which it took in 1989 together with Australia, subsequently joined by Italy and Belgium. The Madrid protocol, which will be signed on 4 October 1991, declares Antarctica to be a "natural reserve devoted to peace and science". This responds to the wishes of all those who desire to safeguard our common heritage, our planet. It should inspire other actions.
I believe that everything I have said is of a conservative nature. Yet the exacerbation of risks and the emergence of new dangers require us to think on a new scale and give free rein to our ambition.
Thus, we warmly welcome the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, which is to be held at Rio de Janeiro in 1992 and to which France is lending its assistance and support. That Conference will be preceded by the meeting in Paris at the end of the year, called by the President of the French Republic, which will be attended by all the non-governmental organisations concerned.
The efforts to combat desertification, to preserve and harness the resources of the great forests and to protect the ozone layer, biological diversity and the seas and the oceans: these are subjects of pre-eminent interest to all mankind.
	
It. would be pointless to speak of the future of mankind without referring to security. The end of the cold war provides an exceptional opportunity, so let us seize it by pursuing disarmament world wide. In that sphere my country's policy is consistent with a number of principles that I would like to enumerate briefly.
The most important agreement on conventional arms reduction in Europe was signed at the Paris summit in 1990. Its ratification can wait no longer. Prance is committed to this and hopes that all the signatories will proceed to ratification, thus making it possible to move on to a new phase in these negotiations.
France duly welcomed the signing in Moscow of the strategic arms reduction Treaty - the START Treaty. The reduction of the strategic arsenals of the United States and the USSR, which will take several years, should be followed by new commitments now. France will join in the negotiations once those arsenals have been reduced to a level warranting our participation, under the terms set forth in this very Hall by the President of the French Republic in 1985.
For Europeans, the existence and availability of nuclear armaments raise specific problems which have emerged with the changes in the Soviet Union. France has asked that the four Powers concerned meet as early as possible to examine these problems together.
On a more general note, France is in favour of global disarmament. In June 1991 it made public its plan encompassing all aspects of security. It announced its decision to adhere to the nuclear non-proliferation Treaty. My country will submit the instruments of accession before the year's end.
Already, we are taking steps to exercise complete control over exports related to nuclear energy. France is in favour of finalising at an early date the convention on the final elimination of chemical weapons. It hopes that the convention will be signed next year. The treaty banning chemical weapons should be accompanied by appropriate means for monitoring compliance, without which its effectiveness will be compromised.  For while treaties prepare the way for security, it is confidence that creates it. There is no real confidence without control. The example of Iraq shows this only too well.
Strict compliance with accords and monitoring are the keystones of disarmament, and it is, in my view, for the United Nations to promote accession to these treaties, to monitor their implementation and impose penalties, where necessary, when agreements are violated. Let us, therefore, give the United Nations the means to carry out this task.
My concluding comments will concern strengthening the role of the United Nations. How can this be accomplished? Our Organisation, which is the universal expression of our solidarity, has done more in these past years than reflect our concerns. It has done more than it had done in past decades. With the backing of its Secretary-General and the determined support of the five permanent members of the Security Council, the United Nations has been a driving force. It has affirmed the law on numerous occasions and enforced compliance where necessary.
The United Nations perseverance on behalf of human rights prompted South Africa to move towards abolishing apartheid. The efforts to help restore democracy in Haiti, the part played in the peace process in El Salvador, the Secretary-General's peace plan of 21 May for Afghanistan are all initiatives that have marked for history the growing role of the United Nations.
But it is undoubtedly in regard to the Gulf crisis that the progress has been the most spectacular. The main point was to stop aggression and to lay the often innovative foundations for order through law.
The United Nations could not remain passive in the face of the tragedy which threatened the very existence of the Kurdish people. For the first time, through a Security Council resolution, the United Nations affirmed that the sufferings of a population justified immediate intervention. My country is proud to have proposed the adoption of resolution 688 (1991).
Yet, as members are aware, none of this could be taken for granted. Today the foundations of a new legal order, a new humanitarian order, have been laid. Why not adopt a code of conduct affirming the right to humanitarian assistance every time the integrity and survival of a people is threatened?
However, we must not lose sight of the fact that the progress that has been made is not sufficient to offset the reversals where these exist. If tomorrow, in the conflict between Israel and the Arab countries, the United Nations were to give up its efforts to require compliance with the principles which have earned it its success, it would quickly lose in credibility what it has earned in prestige. The Organization is too much a grande dame now to tolerate disrespect.
At a time when France holds the presidency of the Security Council, it is pleased and proud to contribute to the adoption of two important resolutions, which I hope will be adopted, on Yugoslavia and Cambodia.
More than ever before, the values which underlie the principles of our Organization are a benchmark. New States have joined us and others will follow. National minorities are claiming the right to preserve what constitutes their identity and cohesion. What are they doing? They look to the United Nations. Individuals are thirsting for justice. What do they do?
They invoke the United Nations moral jurisdiction. Never have democracy and human rights - the former thought by some to have been superseded and the latter considered by others the product of an impoverished mind - constituted such important guidelines for a world urgently seeking peace and prosperity.
Let us therefore prepare, clearly and with enthusiasm, for the great rendezvous of 1993s the World Conference on Human Rights, which will also be the rendezvous of democracy victorious.
It is there that, half a century after the cataclysm that shook the world, and the long night that deprived too many peoples of the light of freedom, our generation will finally be able to say: We have been worthy of mankind.
﻿Let me first congratulate you, Mr. Vice-President, and, through you, the President, on your appointments to the high offices you hold. He are very confident that throughout the proceedings of this session of the General Assembly you and the President will carry forward our deliberations with the customary good order and good sense, and we wish you well in this task.
Last year almost of all of us speaking from this rostrum spoke of the dramatic pace of international events. Perhaps we all expected that after those dramas there would be a return to the normal tenor of diplomatic life. But, in fact, during the last 12 months change has continued with a speed and intensity that no one could have foreseen. Some of this change has been beneficial, flowing from the end of the cold war, which we all welcomed. But other changes have reminded us how much hatred and bitterness can still shape the course of our world. This general debate is the right occasion for us to see if we can trace a pattern in all these events and draw the right lessons for the future of our Organisation.
First I would like to add my welcome to the seven new Members of the United Nations, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, the Republic of Korea and the Democratic Peoples' Republic of Korea, the Republic of the Marshall Islands and the Federated States of Micronesia. The presence of you all will enrich this Organisation. Mistrust between East and Meat kept Korea out of the United Nations for too long now the new approaches in international relations allow you to take the seats which should have been yours long ago.

It may be rash, but I believe that we are now watching the collapse of the principle of empire. By that, I mean the principle that people can be forced to work together under a central rule in which they do not themselves participate and which has no respect for their rights. In some places the end of this principle of empire is coming slowly. In others its collapse has been sudden. For example we are seeing beyond doubt the disintegration of the last of the great colonial empires of the last century, namely, that put together by the Russian Tsars. That system, which was transformed into a communist empire by Lenin and Stalin, is now smashed for good - and smashed not by its critics or competitors from outside but by the peoples whom it sought to imprison. That old system has gone; a new system is struggling to birth. The new system tries to accommodate the principle of national identity without following that principle into anarchy.
Nationalism is a legitimate expression of a people's aspirations; but we have all learned the hard way that nationalism is not enough. A new flag, an old flag revived, a new capital, a new parliament, new uniforms do not in themselves bring security and happiness. Nationalism can be sterile unless it respects the rights of individuals and minorities. Nationalism can be dangerous unless nation States work together for collective security and collective prosperity.
So consent within nations, cooperation between nations, must be the pattern at which we aim.
These or similar thoughts must have been in many of our minds as we watched the tragedy of Yugoslavia unfolding. I hope and believe that the Security Council, at its meeting this afternoon, can add its unique authority to the efforts already being made by the European Community and by the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) to help those among all the peoples of Yugoslavia who want to see an end to bloodshed and the beginning of a new pattern for their future. I share the emotions and anxieties expressed a few minutes ago here by Hans Dietrich Genscher, on behalf of Germany, and all of us in the European Community will work strenuously, continuously, to help the Yugoslavs find that new pattern for their future.
We cannot prescribe or dictate this pattern either for the peoples of the Soviet Union or for the peoples of Yugoslavia. We can show sympathy, understanding and help for the huge task of reform now under way. In the Soviet Union when people are hungry this winter we can help to feed them out of the surpluses of the West and, I hope, of central and eastern Europe. We can provide - we are providing - technical assistance, particularly to help bring the food from the farms to the shops. We can build up our relationships with the Republics of the Soviet Union as they gain in authority. He can continue the friendly pressure for human rights embodied in the Charter of Paris of the CSCE, signed last November. It is not in the interests of the International community that the Soviet Union should entirely disintegrate, leaving no central authority to deal with those matters where central decisions are needed. Dramatic progress has been made over arms control and disarmament. That progress should not be dissipated or put at risk by lack of adequate coherent authority in the Soviet Union. The Republics are making their own arrangements with the centre to influence the course of foreign policy, and we look forward to the outcome. But it would be a pity, from the point of view of the United Nations, if the cooperation which we have recently come to expect from the Soviet Union on, for example, the Middle East, the problems of the Gulf, the problems of Africa, were dissipated just when its usefulness is most apparent.
I mentioned South Africa. The situation there is entirely different, but there is one common thread. Here too we are watching the disappearance of a regime which was based on suppression and discrimination. No one can now suppose that apartheid can survive or can return. The courage shown by State President De Klerk, Mr. Nelson Mandela and other leaders of the South African people deserves to be recognized and encouraged. Here again, it is not for the outside world to decide on the constitutional pattern of the new South Africa, though I think we are entitled to urge forward those who are now beginning that task. It is for us, and particularly perhaps as far as we are concerned for the members of the Commonwealth at our forthcoming Heads of Government meeting in Harare, to consider how we can give practical help to the new South Africa. No one who studies the statistics of population growth in that country measured against economic production, no one who visits the townships outside Durban, Johannesburg and Cape Town can doubt either the need or the urgency of this help if the new South Africa is to make a good start and establish itself as a helpful, supportive neighbour to the other countries of southern Africa.
Against this background, against this pattern, how can we build up the performance of our United Nations? Nothing of course changes the elementary duty of the United Nations to do all it can to protect its Members by checking and reversing aggression. That is fundamental.
Iraq's invasion of Kuwait was an unusually clear example. Now that Iraq is out of Kuwait, the United Nations is insisting - for the first time - that a Member State forgo weapons of mass destruction and pay compensation to its victims. The United Nations is resolved to maintain sanctions until Iraq shows that it is playing a constructive part in regional stability, until Iraq observes the rules of international law. Iraq has to comply with the Security Council resolutions, which are mandatory. If it does not, it must face the consequences, and the consequences of persistent defiance would be grave indeed.
So we all share the responsibility to prevent the re-emergence of a danger such as the one we have experienced from Iraq. Everyone accepts that many States depend on arms imports to assure a reasonable level of security and the inherent right of self-defence, which is recognized in our Charter.
But the conflict in the Gulf showed how peace can be undermined when a country acquires an arsenal which goes way beyond the needs of self-defence, and in the United Nations have to make sure that that does not happen again. We believe that all States should observe and apply the three principles: transparency, consultation and action.
And that is why, as a significant step towards transparency, Britain has proposed a universal register of arms transfers under the auspices of the United Nations. Such a register would alert the International community to an attempt by a country to build up holdings of conventional weapons beyond a reasonable level. With the support of our partners in the European Community, and others, Britain is sponsoring a draft resolution at this session of the General Assembly which we hope will result in the prompt establishment of such a register.
The process of consultations on arms exports is well under way. It has been discussed at many international gatherings in recent months, and we have been encouraged by the willingness of arms exporters, large and small, to exchange information about arms sales which hitherto has been jealously guarded. After that, we have to harmonize as best we can the criteria - the tests - by which each arms exporter judges a possible sale.
Openness of this kind will encourage confidence. Confidence allows action. In Europe we agreed on the Treaty on Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) last November. The United States and the Soviet Union signed the START Treaty in July. The main Powers, the main arms suppliers are beginning to reduce the level of their own armaments; they are not simply asking other people to do so. The search for this lower level of armaments is never going to be easy in the real world, and I think we are justified in taking it step by step, provided that one step does in fact follow another. We are justified in being realistic, provided that realism is not an excuse for inaction. The British Government announced yesterday that henceforth we shall adopt a policy of full-scope safeguards as a condition of the supply of significant new nuclear supplies. This means that such goods will not be exported to any country, other than the nuclear-weapon States, where there are any un-safeguarded nuclear installations.
We believe there is another lesson which comes from our experiences in the Middle East in the last year. It is the need to handle emergencies better. Tragedy has touched not just the Middle East, but Bangladesh and Africa, and I should like to pay tribute to the international agencies for all the devotion and effort they have put into tackling these tragedies. But we have learned again that coordination, early response, effective delivery are crucial.
That is why we are proposing a new and, we hope, more effective structure for handling emergencies and disasters starting with an inventory of human and material resources available from donors and non-governmental organizations. At the apex - at the top of this structure - we would like to see one high-powered official immediately under the Secretary-General. There needs to be prompt decision-making and funding in the critical early weeks of an emergency. Preparation is the key to success and would, under our proposal, be the responsibility of one person. The United Nations is best placed to deal with the human consequences of natural disasters.
The United Nations, as has already been stressed, can do more to protect the global environment. Agreement on how we conserve the resources of our planet and use them for sustainable development is equally vital for the future of the world. We have to establish clear priorities soon for what next year's Conference on Environment and Development, in Bio, can achieve.
The United Nations can also help with another problem which is looming larger in our world. I refer to the increasing number of migrants around the world. Eighty per cent of refugees are in the third world. Developed countries face an unprecedented growth in the numbers seeking asylum. Some of these are refugees as defined by the United Nations in its 1951 Convention.
But most are not. We would not be able to continue to offer political asylum in the present way if the system were overwhelmed by economic migrants. Such migrants can deprive the countries they come from of youth and talent and, as we see in Hong Kong - and begin to see in Western Europe - economic migration above a certain level can also create serious political and social strains in the receiving country.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has a vital role within its sphere and its sphere expands all the time. But the international community as a whole has to be increasingly aware of the fundamental nature of this problem.
And so, resistance to aggression, search for disarmament, relief of suffering: these are all parts of the gigantic and I must say growing tasks laid on the United Nations. The Secretary-General has always laid a particular emphasis on preventive diplomacy, on trying to tackle a dispute or a danger before it explodes into violence and suffering. And we have learned to rely on his combination of skill, firmness and courtesy - a combination which he has made very much his own. El Salvador, Western Sahara, Angola: in all these the United Nations has been active either in seeking to prevent trouble or in steering a problem onto a new track away from the suffering which has already occurred. I welcome in particular, and most recently, the recognition by Guatemala of the independence of the State of Belize. This makes a big contribution to regional stability.
It is very good news also that in the last few days the remaining obstacles to a comprehensive political settlement on Cambodia have been overcome. This settlement now needs to be concluded with all speed. The United Nations will remain firmly engaged in carrying out the peace process and this will be an ambitious and, indeed, expensive, unprecedented undertaking. But the price here for Cambodia - for Indochina generally - is very great.
May I, on behalf of the country intimately involved in another of these problems - the affairs of Cyprus - wish the Secretary-General particular success in bringing that dispute to an agreed conclusion. He knows he has our full support in trying to persuade those closely concerned first into a negotiation and then into a settlement.
Through all these different events, these different problems - and many others I have not mentioned - we can see the same thrust. It is a thrust towards better government, more representative government, better cooperation between nations, greater concern for the individual and his or her rights. No one with any sense of history supposes that this current will run with the same strength and at the same time through all the countries and continents represented here. There will be bastions where authoritarian rule still meets only a faint challenge. There will be cruel and bloody quarrels resurrected from a past which we hoped was dead. There will be setbacks, occasions where hope is stimulated, then delayed or even reversed) and it would be patronizing for any one of us to suppose that there is only one model, only one type of institution which can reflect this trend. There is no Westminster model, no Paris model, no Washington model, certainly no Kremlin model which can be exported unchanged to Africa, Latin America, the Middle East or Asia. We all set about it in different ways.
In negotiations inside our European community, we are working hard for an important European step forward before the end of this year along the path of joint action by sovereign States. The peoples of the Soviet Union, as I have mentioned, faced with a quite different set of problems, will be working out their own answers. In Latin America, in Africa and Asia, the same trends are clearly visible. The age of alibis is over. The rhetoric of the 1950s and the 1960s - which as I remember used to echo rather wearily in this Hall - makes no sense any more. Imperialism can no longer, in 1991, be blamed for bad government. The capitalist system can no longer be blamed for lack of prosperity. The evidence, the facts, the experience of the last decade have proved the contrary. I believe that the United Nations, the Commonwealth to which we belong, the regional organizations can all help this realism to expand and deepen.
He are talking, are we not, about consent in place of command, freer trade, edging out protectionism, honest government replacing corruption, government based on elections rather than dictatorship, nations cooperating instead of seeking to dominate. These are the aims - clearly stated in our Charter, clearly stated in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Sometimes they have seemed far out of reach. I believe that, as a result of recent events and currents, they are no longer out of reach and we in Britain, the British Government, will work enthusiastically and energetically within the United Nations to bring them within the grasp of all.
﻿I have great pleasure in congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the General Assembly at its forty-sixth session. I am confident that your wise leadership will enable this session to deal successfully with the broad agenda before it. You may count on my delegation's cooperation in the discharge of your onerous responsibilities. I would like to record my appreciation for the energetic and imaginative presidency of your predecessor, Ambassador Guido de Marco of Malta.
The Secretary-General of the United Nations, His Excellency Mr. Perez de Cuellar, who has served the international community at a critical turning-point in modern history, deserves our deep gratitude and unstinting admiration. His indefatigable energy, dedication, diligence, imagination and resourcefulness have enabled the United Nations to play a pivotal role in the resolution of many crisis situations.
I am delighted to welcome in our midst the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the Republic- of Korea. India enjoys excellent relations with both and trusts that their admission to the United Nations will further contribute to dialogue and reconciliation in the Korean peninsula. This would also enable them to contribute more effectively to the strengthening of peace and security in the region and in the world at large. We are happy that the Baltic Republics - Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania - have taken their rightful place in the Organization. Similarly, I should like to congratulate the Federated States of Micronesia and the Republic of the Marshall Islands on their admission to the United Nations.
In the year that has elapsed since the forty-fifth session of the General Assembly, India and the world lost a distinguished statesman in the person of Mr. Rajiv Gandhi, the former Prime Minister of India. Rajiv Gandhi's commitment and dedication to the cause of peace and international understanding naturally made him an extremely ardent supporter of the United Nations. We firmly believed that the Organisation, where the entire international community is represented, offers an ideal forum to tackle the manifold problems facing mankind: eradication of poverty, disarmament, environmental conservation, elimination of the menace of drugs and so on. He was particularly concerned about the threat of total annihilation posed by nuclear arsenals, and he will long be remembered for the Action Plan for a nuclear-weapon-free and non-violent world that he presented to the special session on disarmament in 19BB.
The recent dramatic changes in the world have led to a restructuring of international relations. After decades of the cold war, there is a move towards dialogue to replace confrontation, trust to replace suspicion and, above all, peace and cooperation to replace strife and discord. Democracy is taking root in the Eastern European countries, which are, at the same time, making efforts to integrate into the world economy. The process of change in the Soviet Union, initiated by President Gorbachev's policies of perestroika and glasnost, has received further momentum recently. Elsewhere in the world, too, there is evidence of the successful assertion of the democratic aspirations of the people. In our own region, there are the shining examples of Bangladesh and Nepal. As the Secretary-General has aptly put it in his report on the work of the Organization:
"Today there are far more solid grounds for hope than there are reasons for frustration and fear." 
While welcoming these positive changes, we cannot but be aware of the formidable obstacles we still face in the creation of an equitable and just world order. Glaring inequalities continue to plague our planet. Disparities among countries and groups of countries have not only persisted, but have also widened. If the promise of a restructured framework for international relations is to be realised, it must address the interests of all and must be accepted by all.
India was among the first to speak out, several decades ago, against the division of the world into hostile camps. The policy of non-alignment, embraced by most of the newly independent nations, stressed the right of nations to determine their own destinies. The Non-Aligned Movement called upon the super-Powers not only to end their rivalry but also to work in cooperation for the benefit of the world. The present situation, marked by the disappearance of bloc rivalries and their replacement by increasing cooperation among major Powers, is a vindication of the Movement's basic plank. As the recent meeting of the Ministers of the non-aligned countries in Accra declared, the Movement will continue to be an important factor in international relations by pursuing the goal of establishing a society based on social, economic and political justice through dialogue and cooperation.
The relaxation of tensions in international relations has inevitably led to progress in the resolution of a number of crisis situations. In Central America, Nicaragua and El Salvador have ceased to be arenas of conflict and tension. Peace has dawned in Angola with the signing of an accord between the parties concerned. Cambodia is on the verge of a negotiated solution. Cyprus and Afghanistan also seem to be moving towards a peaceful settlement. In Western Sahara, a referendum sponsored by the United Nations is about to be held, ending decades of acrimony and conflict in the region.
The crucial role that the United Nations has started to play in these and other crisis situations is in keeping with its original mandate. The convergence of the objectives of the permanent members of the Security Council has led to a consensus among them on several issues, as envisaged in 1945. The United Nations, at the same time, needs to be strengthened and reformed in order to live up to the expectations placed in it.
In this connection, one of the challenges faced by the United Nations today is to make it truly representative of the interests and aspirations of all its Members and to make it an arena of cooperative action of all nations and peoples.
As the Non-Aligned Movement has recently reiterated, the current efforts at reform of the United Nations should include measures designed to make the decision-making process at the United Nations, particularly in the Security Council, more democratic and transparent. In this context, we should examine, as a matter of urgency, the proposals before us for an expansion of the Security Council to reflect the increased membership of the United Nations and to ensure a more equitable and balanced representation of the Members of the United Nations in the Council.
This year has seen the conclusion of the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START), an outstanding achievement in the field of nuclear disarmament. For the first time in history, there is going to be real reduction in the strategic nuclear forces of the United States and the Soviet Union. This has been long overdue, but there is no reason to be complacent. The process of reduction of nuclear weapons must continue. The START reductions are very limited and are confined to numbers, without any effect on the quality of these weapons. The reductions should now be deeper, quicker and should involve all the nuclear-weapon States. The Treaty should not lead to qualitative upgrading of the remaining arsenals, nor should the warheads released be reused in other systems.
Nuclear weapons have no place in today's world and with the end of the cold war the irrelevance of the doctrine of nuclear deterrence stands further exposed. Unfortunately, new theories of deterrence are being developed in order to legitimise the continued possession end Improvement of nuclear weapons. Deterrence is now being conceived either in the balance-of-power context or against the so-called delinquent powers among developing countries.
The action plan proposed by India at the third special session on disarmament in 1988 assumes increased relevance today. The present is the opportune moment to commence work for a new treaty to give legal effect to a binding commitment by the nuclear-weapon States to eliminate nuclear weapons within a time-bound framework, and by all non-nuclear-weapon States not to cross the nuclear threshold. The implementation of the action plan could also help in ending the unnatural division of the world into nuclear "haves" and "have-nots" and the need to erect all kinds of discriminatory ad hoc regimes to sustain such a division.
The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty symbolises this division. India has not accepted the Treaty because it does not impose reciprocal obligations on the nuclear-weapon States to eliminate nuclear weapons. Furthermore, the Treaty enforces inequitable full-scale safeguards on all the nuclear activities of the non-nuclear-weapon States without imposing commensurate obligations on the nuclear-weapon States.
Nevertheless, I should like to state that, even without having signed the Non-Proliferation Treaty, India has scrupulously adhered to a non-proliferation policy and has never helped any other nation in developing nuclear weapons. We shall continue to abide by such a policy.
We also have our best opportunity in the coming year to conclude a global convention banning chemical weapons. India is committed to working along with all those delegations that wish to complete the work on a draft chemical-weapons convention within the stipulated time frame. What remains to be done in the field of verification, compliance and consultative mechanism should be accomplished without further delay through common effort and understanding. He should all realise that the greater good of humanity is at stake in the abolition of chemical weapons and this good should not be compromised for lesser, short-term ends.
The Gulf crisis earlier this year underscored the inadmissibility of aggression by one country against another. Like the rest of the international community, we feel gratified that aggression has been reversed. We rejoice that Kuwait is once again a sovereign independent State. The Gulf region has long been a focal point of tension and instability. This region is our neighbour, and we are hopeful and confident that, following the recent crisis, there will be peace and stability in the region.
As a member of the Security Council since January of this year, India has tried to play a constructive role in the Council's effort to deal with the Gulf crisis. We lent support to all endeavours to secure the withdrawal of Iraq from Kuwait without resorting to war. Once the war started, we combined our efforts with those of like-minded countries to bring it to a speedy end and, in any case, to ensure that the destruction and devastation unleashed by the war remained limited. We also tried to assert the Security Council's role in guiding the course of the war and in calling for a cease-fire. Being conscious throughout of the humanitarian aspects of the crisis, we made a number of proposals in the Council to provide succour to the innocent civilian victims of the conflict.
The Gulf crisis and the ensuing war severely damaged the economies of many countries, including my own. Nevertheless, we remained in step with the international community in imposing comprehensive sanctions. The Gulf crisis demonstrated that in the present era of global economic interdependence, the imposition of sanctions in a region, particularly when that region happens to be a major source of the energy supply, is bound to have an adverse effect on the economies of a large number of other countries both within and outside the region.
Our experience of invoking Article 50 of the Charter to seek redress was, to say the least, both frustrating and disappointing. The consideration of our case took place after long delays and it resulted only in a call on Member States and United Nations specialised agencies to give attention to our problems. A lesson that we should draw from this experience is that, in future, a mechanism should be devised for the automatic commencement of action under Article 50 in the event of the imposition of sanctions. As the Secretary-General stated in his report on the work of the Organisation: "n today's conditions of economic interdependence, the effect of the imposition of comprehensive economic sanctions on third States that are economic partners of the offender State requires that Article 50 of the Charter be supplemented by appropriate arrangements creating obligations to assist concretely the disadvantaged third State or States". (A/46/1, p.6)
The Gulf region still suffers from the aftermath of war. The United Nations has the duty and responsibility to exert all its energies to remove the suffering, hunger and squalor left behind by the war. This is particularly true of the Iraqi civilian population, whose misery is not lightened by the continuation of economic and trade sanctions. We commend the humanitarian assistance provided to the people of the region by Member countries as well as United Nations agencies. At the same time, we believe that any outside intervention in a Member country on humanitarian grounds constitutes an abridgement of national sovereignty and is, therefore, fraught with serious implications.
We sincerely hope that the flexibility shown by all parties concerned will help to resolve the Middle East conflict, at the core of which is the Palestinian question. India applauds the assiduousness with which the United States has worked to get the various parties involved to the negotiating table. I trust that these efforts, along with those of the parties concerned, will mark a beginning in the resolution of the vexed Middle East problem. He believe that a just and comprehensive settlement of the Middle East question will be possible and durable only if it restores to the Palestinian people their fundamental rights, including their right to a homeland.
I mentioned Cambodia earlier. Events there are shaping towards what we hope will be a peaceful resolution of the conflict. We specially welcome the Cambodian delegation to the United Nations, led by His Royal Highness Prince Sihanouk, Chairman of the Supreme National Council of Cambodia, which has recently taken several initiatives in bringing Cambodia closer to an era of peace and restoration.
India appreciates the contribution made by the five permanent members of the Security Council and the Paris International Conference on Cambodia towards resolving this long-drawn-out problem. We are glad to be associated with this process as a member of the Paris International Conference. The Cambodian people, who have suffered so much in the past, deserve the continued support of the international community to complete the badly needed process of national reconciliation and reconstruction. We look forward to the emergence of Cambodia as a sovereign, independent, neutral and non-aligned nation in accordance with the wishes of its people.
I trust that the Secretary-General's five-point plan on Afghanistan will inspire the parties to the conflict to negotiate a framework for resolving this issue. We welcome the decision by the United States and the Soviet Union not to supply arms to the parties involved, but this step will be effective only if supplies from other sources also stop forthwith. The United States has a major role to play in this regard. We call for a comprehensive political settlement of the conflict in Afghanistan which would preserve the sovereign, non-aligned and independent status of Afghanistan.
Of late, further movement in dealing with the Cyprus issue is discernible. India supports peace efforts that ensure the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Cyprus, and in this light welcomes further negotiations under United Nations auspices. Myanmar remains deprived of the democratic rights its own people voted for over three years ago. India calls upon the Myanmar leadership to accept the people's verdict and work with them to restore democracy in the country.
The South African Government has recently undertaken a number of positive steps towards dismantling the apartheid regime. We welcome these changes. At the same time, we remain fully aware that a lot more needs to be done. The South African authorities must immediately take all necessary measures to start the process of negotiations. Equally important is curbing the continuing violence in certain parts of the country. The pressure that has been brought to bear on Pretoria by the application of sanctions has proved to be useful and must be sustained. The international community must remain vigilant until the complete eradication of apartheid and the transformation of South Africa into a non-racial, unitary democracy.
While apartheid is on the retreat in South Africa, an attempt is being made to institutionalize racism in Fiji. The interim government in Fiji has incorporated into a new constitution certain provisions which are in violation of the internationally accepted principles of democracy and human rights. By institutionalizing oppression and injustice, Fiji appears to be moving backwards in history to a darker age. The Suva regime should abandon such anachronistic policies and join the rest of the world in enlightened democratic governance.
In the economic field, there is an increasing trend of integration of the process of production, consumption and trade in the world economy, brought about mainly by the communications revolution. This has led to an unprecedented enhancement of the interdependence of nations and increasing competitiveness among major operators in the world economy. One of the very significant outcomes of this phenomenon has been the creation and strengthening of regional economic groupings, particularly among developed countries. Western Europe is moving towards an integrated market by the end of 1992. The former East and West Germanys have been united. In a few years Germany is expected to emerge as an even stronger economic Power. While these are significant economic changes, we do not see concomitant moves towards meaningfully addressing North-South development issues.
Responding to the changing realities, many developing countries are making strenuous efforts to carry out structural changes in order to meet the challenges. We in India have also introduced far-reaching changes in our industrial, trade and monetary and fiscal policies. Our aim is to remove unnecessary controls and regulations so as to release the creative forces in the economy and realise its full potential. As a consequence of these policy changes, we envisage sharply increased interlinkages with the world economy. We need the understanding and cooperation of our partners from developed countries to derive the full benefits from the measures we have adopted and as a cushion against the short-run pressures that may build up. We also need an international economic environment which is conducive to ensuring the success of such measures. In various multilateral organizations, it will be our endeavour to work towards establishing an international economic order which is truly multilateral and based on the principle of non-discrimination and the rule of law.
The overall external economic environment for developing countries remains unfavourable. Many of these countries are facing the problem of worsening terms of trade, increasing problems in finding access to advanced technology, and reductions in the resources available for development.
The overall debt situation for the developing countries has assumed alarming proportions and poses a serious threat to their economic viability. A solution to the developing countries' debt problem would need a comprehensive and integrated strategy encompassing all categories of affected countries and all forms of debt.
Against this backdrop, the Secretary-General's proposal for an international conference on the financing of development deserves support. As he further points out in his report on the work of the Organisation:
"A reinvigoration of the North-South dialogue has now become more urgent than ever. Fortunately, conditions exist now for advancing it constructively without a needless overlay of rhetoric or ideological controversy." (A/46/1, p. 12)
India attaches great importance to an early, successful and balanced outcome of the current Uruguay round of multilateral trade negotiations. He are a serious partner in these negotiations, which we approach with an open mind and a considerable degree of flexibility. But we have our own concerns to be met and interests to safeguard. That is why we have been insisting that the overall package that emerges from these negotiations must contain specific and time-bound commitments on issues of concern to developing countries.
The developments of recent years have further validated the disarmament and development linkage and made it a reality. National budgetary policies of some of the major military Powers already provide for the channelling of resources now locked into the arms race into economic growth. The peace dividend now needs to be realized at the international level. The International Conference on Disarmament and Development envisaged mechanisms in this regard which should be put into effect. We notice another disturbing trend in the economic field. Attempts are being made to factor into the calculus of international and bilateral economic cooperation, non-economic considerations such as good governance, observance of human rights, environment, military expenditure, and so on. The Indian polity is firmly anchored on political pluralism and individual freedom. We attach high priority to the preservation of the environment and would very much like to reduce our military budget. But these laudable goals should apply to all countries, developed and developing. What is questionable is the linkage of these issues with development assistance of which only the developing countries are the recipients.
Environmental concerns are fast moving to the top of the world agenda and are rightly at the forefront of international concern and attention. We are convinced that environmental problems cannot be isolated from the general issue of development and must be viewed as an integral part of development efforts. For global environmental problems to be dealt with effectively, we need to forge global partnership which seeks to protect the environment while simultaneously addressing the development requirements of the developing countries.
It is well recognized that the principal sources of pollutants in the environment lie in the developed countries and these countries accordingly bear the main responsibility for combating such pollution. Furthermore, if financial, technical and other capabilities are also taken into account, then it becomes quite clear that the responsibility for undertaking corrective action devolves on the developed countries. Without the provision of adequate, new and additional financial resources and environmentally benign technologies on preferential and non-commercial terms, it would be difficult for the developing countries to adopt environmentally safe and desirable technologies, much as they would like to do so. Such technologies should not become simply another source of commercial profit for the developed world.
India will continue its constructive contribution to the preparations for the 1992 United Nations Conference on Environment and Development. We hope that at the Conference the twin issues of environment and development will be addressed in a balanced way and in their totality.
India is glad to see changes around the world that serve to strengthen fundamental human rights. India's own deep commitment to human rights, true to its democratic traditions and practices, is well known. India's parliamentary institutions, independent judiciary, free press and public opinion provide the necessary checks and balances to safeguard individual as well as collective human rights. I would, however, urge caution in projecting the promotion of human rights in an intrusive manner that militates against national sovereignty. Contexts and situations differ from country to country, and international concern for human rights preservation should not detract from the efforts in the same direction made by the country concerned.
In recent years, terrorism has emerged as one of the most dangerous and pernicious threats to the enjoyment of human rights, peace and stability in many parts of the world. Through killings, kidnappings, extortion and other such means, terrorists and their organisations have effectively usurped the basic human rights of innocent civilians. In a number of cases, they are using brutality and fear to undermine the free functioning of democratic institutions, including the legislative, executive and judiciary branches of government, as well as the press. Such terrorism assumes a particularly pernicious form when it is aided, abetted and sponsored from abroad. Sponsorship of terrorism in another country constitutes a violation of the principles governing relations among States which have been enshrined in the United Nations Charter. This deserves the condemnation of the international community.
Drug abuse control has gained a commendable measure of global co-operation. Drug abuse is a menace calling for concerted and strong action. India welcomes the establishment of the United Nations Global Programme of Action for international drug control. He would stress the need for additional financial resources and technical assistance for crop substitution and other measures to combat drug trafficking and abuse. In conclusion, let me say that we in India wish the recent epochal changes worldwide to be the harbingers of peace, prosperity and an equitable and just world order. The logic of progress in on the side of those who think and act progressively, not of those who wish to remain frozen in an unresponsive status quo. India looks forward to cooperating with other nations in the noble endeavour of strengthening world peace and cooperation.
﻿Let me begin by congratulating Ambassador Shihabi on his election to the office of President of the forty-sixth session of the General Assembly, which I hope will be crowned with success. I also take this opportunity to congratulate the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Peres de Cuellar, on his endeavours and his valuable contribution to the promotion of world peace and understanding among nations.
In this era of heightened expectations of freedom and of peace among nations, the threat of despotism has not yet disappeared from the world. This Assembly convenes in the aftermath of two crises that threatened human freedoms and that aroused profound concern throughout the enlightened international community. Future historians will undoubtedly cast more light on these two grim chapters in the closing years of this century from an appropriate perspective. But we, representatives of Governments, do not have the time to indulge in the luxury of observing events passively, as historians can do.
We are making history, not writing it, making history here and now. It is incumbent upon us as representatives of responsible Governments to mould current events in a spirit of respect for the values our democratic regimes represent, and aspiring to a world order based on universal freedoms.
We must draw the correct conclusions and apply the lessons of the crises of the past year and bequeath to all mankind a code of conduct, thus ensuring that our world will no longer be exposed to insane outbursts of tyranny. Our lesson from the two recent crises is that there is an unequivocal link between the nature of political regimes and the peace and stability of the world.
Democratic government is based on the recognition of civil liberties and on respect for the sovereignty of other nations. Democracy is the natural condition of a healthy society. It would be the preferred system for all mankind, were it free to choose. Man was born to freedom; it is part of his intrinsic nature. He was born to live, not to fight wars; to create, not to destroy. The spirit of freedom is embedded in the human intellect and the law of the jungle is alien to it. Therein lies the superiority of man over creatures that are devoid of the power of choice. "Live and let live" is the voice of human reason. "When one saves a human life it is as if one has saved all of humanity," runs an ancient Jewish saying.
These basic truisms have thrust themselves to the fore during recent years, when a new dawn has broken in the Soviet Union and in the countries of Eastern Europe. Seventy years of an oppressive regime could not suppress man's spirit of freedom. That spirit has arisen anew and broken its chains after three generations of independence denied. Now that the wind of freedom has been liberated no power on Earth can ever return it to captivity.
We saw this with our own eyes in the 70 hours of the abortive coup in the Soviet Union. We could have anticipated the end of that coup from the moment a small group of citizens first appeared in the streets of Moscow to face the approaching tanks. They stood against them unarmed, like a human banner, and the soldiers did not shoot. The army held its fire, faced as it was with the spirit of freedom that had taken root even among its own ranks. When the muse of freedom sang, the guns fell silent.
That is the lesson the world has drawn from the crisis of August 1991. Yet it learned another bitter and rapid lesson from the Persian Gulf crisis of August 1990. It learned how short-sighted it had been in supplying, over the years and without any controls, vast quantities of weapons to a dictatorial regime. It has learned just how terrifying can be the combination of military power and a lack of inhibition regarding its use. The chameleon that had bemused the entire enlightened world turned into a lethal python that wound itself around mankind's neck.
The billows of black smoke that rose from hundreds of oil wells across the Kuwaiti desert are a living and tangible illustration of the evil genie that had escaped from its bottle, throwing a huge pall over entire continents. Tyranny - and the tyrant - displayed an undreamed-of vitality.
Saddam Hussein has not been removed from the world scene. His defeated people have not rejected him. The Kurdish revolt has been brutally suppressed, leaving in its wake hundreds of thousands of homeless refugees. The scale of military strength that Saddam Hussein has retained is now revealed as a renewed and genuine threat to the region.
The Iraqi tyrant continues to scheme against and deceive the rest of the world. The United Nations inspection commissions have, one after the other, uncovered his lies and discovered the hidden stocks of non-conventional weapons he sought to conceal. Saddam Hussein is attempting to keep the world in ignorance of his revived military power, but the world, under the determined leadership of the United States, is not turning a blind eye to the facts, and will not permit the tyranny of Saddam Hussein to survive.
Last September, from this rostrum, I warned that Israel was about to become the target of attacks by Saddam Hussein in a war in which it was not involved, and to which it was not a party. And indeed Israel came under missile attack. It clenched its fists and gritted its teeth in refraining from any counter-attack, so as not to upset the international coalition. The international community has come to understand Israel's position as the bastion of genuine democracy in a dangerous and violent region. The events of the past year have made enlightened States world-wide re-evaluate the character of the Israeli-Arab conflict in the light of this correct political and historical perspective. Many countries realise today that the root causes of this bitter conflict, which has lasted decades, lie in the refusal of the Arab States - excluding Egypt - to recognise the existence of Israel and to accept its independence and sovereignty. It is this intransigence that has been the source of the wars imposed on Israel.
It has been clearly established that Israel is the only country in the world under a permanent tangible, physical threat to its very existence - a threat that has brought upon it six wars in the four decades of its existence. States that were themselves involved in the Gulf crisis have now come to understand, perhaps for the first time, the logic of Israel's insistence on a peace ensuring its security and the well-being of its inhabitants.
In January 1991 we presented a consolidated formula of five principles designed to promote the peace process: first, an end to the state of war between the Arab States and Israel, with a view to the signing of a peace treaty; secondly, reduction and control of the arms race; thirdly, direct negotiations, without preconditions, between Israel and its neighbours, with a view to the signing of peace agreements between Israel and each of the Arab States; fourthly, the simultaneous start of a resolution of the Palestinian problem, to be carried out in stages by us and the residents of Judea, Samaria and Gaza, in a joint framework with Jordan; and, fifthly, the drafting of joint programmes for regional development, with international aid, in areas such as water, the environment, electricity, solar energy, agriculture, health, transportation and the infrastructure. These principles have strengthened the foundations of the peace process in which we have been engaged since the cease-fire in the Gulf.
Since its establishment Israel has tirelessly sought to talk peace with its neighbours. In the aftermath of each of the ware that was forced upon us Israel has appealed to the Arab States to conduct direct talks with it, with no prior conditions, to attain a true and lasting peace. It seems that this appeal will now at last be answered. In a few weeks we shall, I hope, meet in face-to-face discussions with our neighbours in order to lay the foundations of a better future for our peoples and our coming generations. Israel is convinced that the sufferings of our war-torn region will be brought to an end, not as a result of any balance of terror, but of the benefits that peace will bring.
The bitter arms race in the Gulf and the Middle East has brought many tragedies to the peoples of the region. It is responsible for the poverty and misery of millions of human beings and for the wars which have broken out in our region over and over again in the latter half of this century. The arms race has drained the resources of the different States to the detriment of the welfare of their citizens. The potential means of destruction amassed by cruel dictators with limitless ambitions is a proven recipe for the outbreak of wars.
Our region has also known the use of chemical weapons, which Saddam Hussein used against his own people as well as against his Iranian enemy. The elimination of chemical weapons everywhere, and especially in the Middle East, is of supreme importance. This is why Israel has agreed to become a party to the convention to eliminate chemical weapons, while maintaining the principle of universality. For the convention to be effective all States of the region must become party to it.
The term "weapons of mass destruction" is no mere technical phrase. Every type of weapon - including conventional - that entails a threat of the indiscriminate destruction of large numbers of people falls, in our view, into the category of "weapons of mass destruction". Arms control must therefore include conventional weaponry as well.
On the eve of the convening of a regional peace conference, I appeal from this rostrum to the leaders of the Arab States. I say "Stop the insane arms race in weapons of extermination. Abandon all destructive impulses. Put an end to blind hatred. Do not waste your resources. Do not give up the opportunity for progress and well-being for your own countries for the illusory dream of destroying Israel.
"Israel draws its strength from its historic and moral right to a safe existence in its own country. Set out with us on the path of peace. Think of your children, as we think of ours. For they were born not for war, to be killed, but to live."
The far-reaching changes that have occurred in the struggle between blocs in the world have also been accompanied by positive changes in Africa. Some internal wars have ended, and others we hope are about to end. The process of African States' attaining their independence has been completed. The apartheid regime in South Africa is nearing its end. A wind of democracy has blown through many African States, inspiring a progressive evolution.
But in many States of the third world, especially in Africa, hunger, disease and misery are still on the rise. The growing birth rate has led to a population explosion and has aggravated the shortage of essential foodstuffs. In extensive areas the desert has reclaimed arable land and pasture land. Hundreds of thousands of people are falling victim to starvation and epidemics. All this is happening at the end of the twentieth century, a century that has seen unprecedented scientific, technological and medical achievements. In an era in which borderlines between East and West are becoming blurred, the developed countries must seek to bridge the huge gaps between the living standards of the northern and southern hemispheres. We must lend an attentive ear, especially to the heart-rending appeals for help from the African continent.
Israel is a small country, poor in natural resources and material riches, but it has its faith. It faces the tremendous challenge of absorbing every year hundreds of thousands of new immigrants, who flock to it from many countries. 
However, in the process of building a new society and developing its economy, Israel has, over the past 40 years, accumulated considerable knowledge and experience in agriculture, technology, medicine and science, as well as in organisation and management. Israel has for many years placed its knowledge at the disposal of developing countries. The result of this mission which we have taken upon ourselves has been decades of cooperation and assistance to 96 countries.
In Israel, for several generations we have witnessed a revival in the life of a nation which has brought to the world values of peace, liberty and justice. These principles are the essence of the law of the Jewish people and of its universal message.
The Jewish people is the only people ever to have been exiled again and again, with its faith in its return to its homeland remaining unshaken. Bach time, mankind has benefited from the spiritual assets and values of justice which have accompanied the revival of the Jewish people in its ancestral land. The return to Zion in our own times, which has been the objective of the Zionist movement, has resulted in a gathering in Israel of the Jewish people from all over the world. Wherever tyranny has raged and our people have been persecuted, assistance came from Israel, bringing them back to their national homeland in freedom and security. In the aftermath of the Second World War, Israel took in hundreds of thousands of our brethren who had survived in Europe as well as hundreds of thousands from Arab countries and elsewhere, escaping discrimination and persecution.
These very days we are witnessing a phenomenon stirring in its enormity - that of the return of Jews from the Soviet Union and from Ethiopia to their ancestral homeland. The Zionist movement is colour-blind. The distinction between colours is alien to Zionism. That is why it has been proven that Zionism is tolerant and liberal par excellence.
Last week, President Bush appealed to this Assembly to abrogate the cynical and deplorable resolution which equates Zionism with racism. The President aptly described the unique character of the Zionist movement and its spiritual and humanitarian values. More and more representatives of nations are joining his appeal, guided by this great historical truth. This appeal will continue to reverberate both within this Hall and outside it until the repeal, in the near future, of that resolution, which constitutes a calumny on this Organisation and a disgrace to it.
This session stands on the threshold of a new hope. People the world over aspire for an end to hardship and suffering and for the beginning, at last, of an era full of promise and hope. For us, the Jewish people, it is also the beginning of a new year, when we exchange the traditional blessing: "May the outgoing year sweep away its maledictions, and may the new year bring with it blessings for all mankind."
﻿Mr. President, on behalf of the Government and the people of New Zealand let me first congratulate you on your election. It has certainly been a momentous year both for you and for the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
I should like also to pay tribute to the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Peres de Cuellar, who has worked tirelessly over the past 10 years towards the reduction of tension throughout the world. As he comes to the end of a decade of service I offer to the Secretary-General my congratulations, and those of the Government and the people of New Zealand on his personal contribution to the cause of peace.
I am delighted to join you, Sir, in welcoming new Members to this forty-sixth session of the General Assembly of the United Nations. In particular I want to welcome the Federated States of Micronesia - a new member of this body, but a familiar friend to my country as host of the most recent meeting of South Pacific Forum nations. I am delighted that they and their close neighbours, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, are joining us at this time.
It is a source of immense satisfaction that we see here today for the first time the legitimate representatives of Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia. I pay tribute to the courage and determination of these three European nations that have struggled against totalitarian rule for so long. Their international recognition as independent sovereign States brings to an end a chapter in their history when they were forcibly incorporated into the Soviet Union in 1940.
Their independence and membership of this Organisation coupled with the membership of the Republic of Korea, which I warmly welcome, and the membership of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea signal the end of an era, or more importantly the beginning of a new era, in international relations.
New opportunities in politics and trade command our attention. New problems constantly challenge our capabilities. In Yugoslavia, we see a situation that cries out for peaceful resolution. Mediation has been tried. It must be tried again. It will never be successful unless and until the parties to the conflict are prepared to commit themselves fully to the process. So my Government appeals to all other members of the international community that might have some influence - direct or indirect - to use that Influence to persuade the parties to the conflict to commit themselves to mediation if they cannot resolve their differences peacefully on their own.
Today the problems may look intractable but difficult issues can be solved. Already the change in global politics has been rewarded by significant progress in the field of disarmament. The super-Powers have committed themselves to substantial reductions in their arsenals of nuclear weapons. While the world warmly welcomes each new step in the reduction of nuclear weapons agreed to by the super-Powers, this progress is undermined by the actual or potential proliferation of nuclear weapons to other nations. Therefore on arms control nothing is more important than moves to halt the proliferation of nuclear weapons.
New Zealand, as one of the first nations to sign and ratify the United Nations Non-Proliferation Treaty, firmly believes that attempts to halt the proliferation of nuclear weapons must be an agenda item of the highest priority for the Organisation. The dangers from nuclear weapons are such that a failure to halt their proliferation would seriously diminish the recent success in strategic arms reductions.
We welcome the decisions of France and the people's Republic of China to join the Non-Proliferation Treaty. Now that the Treaty will cover all the current nuclear Powers of the world. New Zealand urges all parties to agree to its indefinite extension in 1995.
In singling out nuclear weapons for particular attention, I do not in any way diminish the work needed to control other weapons of mass destruction, such as those using chemical or biological agents.
The importance of the task of stopping the proliferation of all weapons of mass destruction should be firmly embedded in the minds of thinking people everywhere following the fearful possibility that Saddam Hussein would use such weapons during his illegal take-over of the State of Kuwait. That act of aggression tested the strength and commitment of this world body.

We can all take pride in the fact that the leadership shown by the United Nations in the exercise of its undoubted moral authority was successful in facilitating the coming together of a great coalition of nations who were determined that the might of Saddam Hussein would not succeed and that Kuwait would be restored to its independent sovereign status. During the dangerous weeks of the Gulf crisis the United Nations, with strong leadership from the Security Council, showed firmness of judgment and a commitment to the ideals of the United Nations that has reinforced the status and authority of this Organisation. The Security Council was able to reflect accurately the mood of the General Assembly because of its broad representation aerobe regional lines and its inclusion of the small and vulnerable as well as the large and powerful.
I want to pay a warm tribute to Kuwait's Arab neighbours, who were resolute in their support of the rights of a small independent nation and refused to back down to intimidation or threats. Their steadfastness in the early stages of the crisis was a major reason why Kuwait was eventually liberated.
The role of the United States in bringing together the coalition of nations who worked in concert to liberate Kuwait was an impressive display of international diplomacy. United States forces, with their British, French and Arab counterparts, gave an equally impressive display on the ground and in the air. But overriding the achievements of the individual nations was the commitment given by nations, large and small, to the military task force that gathered to halt aggression and to guarantee the independent sovereign rights of the small nation, Kuwait. I am proud that my country played a small part in that coalition and has been able to contribute to the post-war United Nations commissions, such as that on the disposal of weapons of mass destruction.
As a small country in the south-west Pacific, we do not threaten anyone, nor do we peek to impose our will on other countries. But in joining the coalition we honoured a New Zealand tradition to oppose tyranny and support freedom. Luckier than a number, all our military personnel came home safely on this occasion, but many of their forebears in pursuit of the same goals rest alongside the battlefields of the modern world. We have never shirked our responsibilities.
As we opposed a dictator in the Gulf, freedom-loving people around the world have rejoiced as we have witnessed, too, the collapse of totalitarian communism in Europe. That system was defeated not by force of arms but by ordinary people, in their hundreds of thousands, reaching in the streets to reclaim their God-given right to freedom of thought, expression and assembly and their right to democratic government. It has been a glorious victory for the indomitable spirit of the human person.
But let me sound a note of warning: this impressive victory could turn to bitterness, and hope to despair, unless all nations show equal courage in addressing an equally unprecedented economic challenge. The helping hand that both the emerging democracies of Europe and the developing countries of the world need most is the hand of trade. So, today, the barricades we must pull down are not those erected to prevent tanks but those erected to hinder trade.
To sustain and secure the dramatic political changes that have occurred, to deny dictators the excuse for coveting others' territory, to ease the
crushing debt burdens that too many countries face, to provide an economic alternative to the destruction of our environment - to do all these things, and more, we have to realise that a change in the international trading system is essential. Without change, how can the new democracies in Europe do what they want to do for their people if their exports face restrictions in foreign markets? How can debt-ridden developing nations ever pay their way if they face not only similar restrictions but subsidised competition too?
This is not a debate that can be drawn wholly across North-South lines, because trade restrictions occur on both sides, as does subsidisation. This is a debate about giving meaning to the many fine words, about helping those who are struggling to escape poverty, and about securing the democratic freedoms so recently won. This is a debate about complementing aid with trade.
The Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations began nearly five years ago. It was, and remains, the moat ambitious of all the trade negotiating rounds. Yet it is in real danger of faltering if the political commitments that were given in 1986, and have been repeated since then - moat recently at the G-7 meeting this year - are not translated into the substantive decisions that are already overdue.
A country like mine, dependent on trade for its very livelihood, finds it incredible that political and economic leaders who are responsible in so many things, who are participating in, and encouraging, the dawn of a new political era, have not yet broken the log-jam in the negotiations. Certainly the G-7 group of industrialised countries, under the chairmanship of the British Prime Minister, gave us cause for new hope. Certainly the United States has been, and remains, a strong proponent of a liberalised international trading system. Thoughtful leaders In the European Community, and many leaders in the developing world, have all called for greater progress.
But it seems to be a case of words, words and more words, but little action. If we are to succeed, action must now take the place of words. Time is running out. The alternative to a successful and substantive conclusion to the Uruguay Round is often said to be a series of trade blocs - groups of countries turning in on themselves, failing to realise their full competitive advantage) surviving, perhaps, but at a lower and more unstable level than would be possible in a liberal world trading system.
All this is quite possible, but I suggest that it is not the worst-case scenario. The worst-case scenario is those countries that have found new freedoms having those freedoms taken away by regimes who use the excuse of the need for economic control of disintegrating economies as a cover for political oppression; it is having stable countries being made less stable because they cannot earn the foreign exchange necessary to provide for the legitimate aspirations of their people; it is turning the clock back rather than forward.
With a view to avoiding that - and avoid it we must - I make a plea from this rostrum that the barricades that prevent fair trade be taken down. And if the powerful will not do it to help the weak, then they should do it for the selfish reason that it is the only way the world will secure a lasting peace. Trade between nations is what breaks down fear, and the sharing of resources by trade is what prevents ware of acquisition. If the selfish win, if the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade fails, then today's leaders will have planted the seed of future conflicts. That is a strong message, but it is no more so than the seriousness of the situation warrants. 
Let us achieve a milestone in the progress of international trade this year, so that we can move forward with confidence to the United Nations Conference on Environment, and Development next year. A free and fair trade system is central to our efforts to conserve and enhance the environment. We have already made progress on issues such as driftnet fishing and with the Montreal Osona Protocol) but we need to maximise these gains by ensuring that States fully observe the measures that have been adopted in such fields. Next year's United Nations Conference in Brazil will be the real test of our ability to cooperate in the endeavour to find the proper balance between development and environmental protection. My country is the first anywhere to enshrine the concept of sustainable development in legislation on natural resources.
Just before I departed from New Zealand seven students from seven continents of the world lit a candle for peace in front of Maori tukutuku panels symbolising the seeking of knowledge. They were greeting the dawning of this new session of the United Nations General Assembly. The students participated in this ceremony in New Zealand because ours is one of the first countries to see the sun rise, and a ceremony at dawn is the traditional Maori way to acknowledge a new beginning.
We in this Assembly can all rejoice in that we are seeing new beginnings in many parts of the world: in Europe, in Cambodia, in South Africa. We must not let this moment in history pass; we must now replace an understanding of how to destroy each other with a new understanding of how to live and trade with each other. It is my most fervent hope and prayer that this great assembly of nations has the moral courage to do not only what is necessary but what is right.
















﻿Mingling with the other people taking part in this General Assembly debate and looking to their faces makes one almost physically aware of fact that, today, the representatives of the Soviet Union, which is transforming itself into a union of sovereign States, are viewed - and rightly so - as envoys of a new nation. It is a nation on the threshold of an entirely new era in its centuries-old political, philosophical, international, legal and day-to-day history.
We have just experienced a purifying storm - the defeat of a criminal coup, and everything that took place in connection with the recent Congress of People's Deputies. Today I extend the words of deep gratitude to all those who associated themselves with our resistance to the coup. Those days in August have convinced us finally of one thing - that the quest for freedom has become the main thrust in our own development and in the development of the entire world community. Only a society that gives full protection to individual freedoms and rights can be prosperous and dynamic.
The longing for freedom and democracy has always been present in the minds and hearts of our people. It has survived despite decades of despotism and lawlessness, and the years of perestroika brought it to life with renewed vigour and translated it into concrete deeds. The courage of unarmed people stemming the advance of political monsters who opposed the new thinking proved that the peoples of our country will no longer bow the knee to diktat. In essence, the defeat of a coup aimed at restoring totalitarian rule led to a revolution that changed the face of the nation, sweeping away the last remaining pillars of a bankrupt regime.
The failure of the coup was also a world-wide victory for the forces of good. Together, we managed to avert the threat of a return to the cold war. To remove the obstacles to progress towards a new state of interaction and partnership, towards democracy and a new era of peace-making.
	The political developments of the first half of this year created the major prerequisites for this change. There have been breakthroughs in two central areas of disarmament - conventional arms in Europe, and strategic nuclear arms. Armaments are being reduced, although only recently it was held that an arms build-up was precisely what guarantees national security. As President Bush pointed out in his address to the General Assembly yesterday, this proves that relations between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States, between East and West, are no longer relations between adversaries. Such drastic cuts are possible only between partners who have recognized that they have shared, rather than conflicting, security interests.
	A decisive step towards the end of the cold war has been taken in an area that is most resistant to new trends - the economy. The London meeting between the Soviet President and the G-7 leaders and subsequent contacts between the Seven and the leaders of our Union and its republics sec the stags for overcoming the economic division of the world and restoring its integrity, its economic interdependence and its market and financial fabric.
	Iraq's aggression against Kuwait put the nascent global unity to a serious test. The world community's concerted efforts to resist the aggressor, including the efforts of the five permanent members of the Security Council, were truly unprecedented. The consensus that emerged in the United Nations around the central idea that breaches of the peace are inadmissible remained intact even after the crisis in the Gulf was over. Indeed, this consensus led to practical steps to resolve other burning issues, including the formidable challenge of the search for a Middle East settlement, and the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems. Today, there remains hardly a single regional conflict where there is not a glimmer of light, at the end of the tunnel.
Europe - once the epicentre of two world wars and an arena of confrontation - is becoming n laboratory for new forms of interaction. In fact, the process of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe already transcends regional frontiers. A new transcontinental community is coming into being - a "belt" of trust, cooperation and security that spans the countries of these parts of the world: the entire northern hemisphere.
Political dialogue is getting under way in Asia and the Pacific, as nations and international associations in that region join in a search for mechanism for the discussion and collective solution of common problems. Latin America as a community of mutually tolerant and democratic nations is becoming a political reality. On the African continent, negotiations are replacing hostilities and, at times, barbaric methods of force.
This global change is inextricably linked with perestroika in the Soviet Union. Before the events of August the progress of perestroika inside the country lagged far behind its international impact. Now that that gap has been closed, internal and external activities can proceed at a single and accelerating pace. The steadfastness of the President of the USSR, Mr. Gorbachev, the courage and initiative of Mr. Yeltsin, the Russian President, the vigorous popular movement and the overwhelming solidarity of the rest of the world enabled us not only to defeat the coup but also to dismantle the braking mechanisms that hindered the country's progress towards the rule of law and a civic society.
To a certain extent the coup and all the risks involved are precisely what brought about a strong centrifugal trend in our country as, between 22 August and 9 September, eight republics declared themselves independent from the union. That is how they reacted to the threat posed by the putsch, the aim of which was the restoration of a totalitarian society.
The extraordinary Congress of People's Deputies at the beginning of September met the challenge of the time, establishing for a period of transition a structure whereby the republics - to use the words of the President of Russia - would obtain as much sovereignty as they could take. Now that the element of coercion is behind us and the sovereign republics are able to take stock of the situation, there has developed a centripetal trend, which is gaining momentum.
This is evidenced by the intensive activity of the State Council, chaired by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, and comprising the leaders of the Republics. The first decision of this body was the recognition of the independence of the three Baltic States. At the second session of the Council the basic forms of an economic union - which will be open for participation by any Republic, including the Baltic States, should they so desire - were addressed and endorsed.
The State Council is working on measures to overcome the rather critical problems - to say the least - of food and medical supplies in the coming winter and spring months. The Inter-Republican Economic Committee has been very active in this regard.
All-union government agencies constituted by the Congress continue to function in the four key areas: foreign policy, defence, law enforcement and security. Profound military reforms are taking place, these will lead to a radical cut in military expenditures, which for many years have placed such a heavy burden on the budget of our State.
The Extraordinary Congress of People's Deputies, the State Council and the President of the USSR have thus answered the questions that had been causing world-wide concern. It can now be seen that the answers were constructive and sent a positive signal to the world community. As a dynamic, although still fragile, balance emerges between the centre and the Republics, we can see that we are now on the right course - despite the deviations or set-backs that may occur - and we look with renewed expectations to the international community for all the support it can lend us in making a rapid transition and taking a respected place in the family of nations. By stating this publicly I am fulfilling one of my important tasks at this session of the General Assembly,
The new Union, at this decisive stage of its formation, needs the support of the world community, but it is precisely the world community that has an interest in the success of our efforts, since the prospects for creating a stable, democratic and civilised world order on our planet. Earth - which may be the only one in the universe - depend on this.
The President of the USSR and the leaders of all sovereign States and Soviet Republics are aware of their responsibilities under the Soviet Union's existing international agreements and obligations. I should like to reaffirm that the union of sovereign States will be the direct successor of all such commitments, including those we have assumed as a nuclear Power. Our country's nuclear weapons remain under effective centralised control.
"New challenges" is a favourite subject of political scientists. Not so long ago this term came to denote such things as international terrorism, international drug and arms trafficking, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), degradation of the environment, and the problems of human psychological adaptation to new parameters of progress. The depth and danger of these new risks have forced the world community - and did so even back in the days of the cold war - to begin formulating adequate responses to these transnational challenges. And although the bulk of the work still lies ahead, negotiating mechanisms are already emerging and international legal instruments are being put into place.
However, let us admit, both to ourselves and to the whole of mankind, that virtually none of us was prepared to face the risks of the new, historic period. Cleansing storms have thundered over the expanses of eastern and central Europe, bringing with them all the promise that freedom holds out, bringing back the sense of dignity, self-esteem and faith in man's lofty mission on Earth. And it is not freedom's fault if the flames of ethnic strife have suddenly engulfed the world like the outbreak of a long-forgotten disease. Age-old and seemingly subdued instincts have come alive - instincts which have no place in the new environment. And all this is accompanied by the threat of economic chaos, flaring social contradictions, refugees and disease.
Europe, which had seemed the least vulnerable of all the continents, has suddenly shown its susceptibility to the virus of nationalism. After the division of Europe had been overcome without confrontation or instability and Germany had been peacefully and democratically reunited, Yugoslavia faced a crisis and is now on the brink of civil war.
Why this un-preparedness for new risks? We were too busy eliminating the deformations of the cold-war era to formulate in good time a positive agenda that would meet national aspirations. Regrettably, the energy released as a result of East-West reconciliation has not only served constructive purposes but also fuelled a resurgence of national egotism. Nationalism is becoming the main breeding ground for terrorism. The mortar attack on Downing Street, the villainous assassination of Rajiv Ghandi, the bloodshed which is still going on in Nagorny Karabakh, and elsewhere, are convincing evidence of that.
There is a danger that the ideological division of the world may be replaced by attempts to divide and antagonize countries, peoples and nations on national, ethnic or religious grounds. The result may be the nineteenth century revisited, albeit it with significant new features, such as global interdependence and weapons of mass destruction.
The problem is how to make the growing national self-awareness serve the cause of progress, freedom and the prosperity of people; to keep national identity slogans from becoming vehicles of separatist policies leading away from the mainstream of world integration to absurd autarchy in either economic or cultural life.
Whenever national egotism spills over State borders as was the case with Iraq's aggression against Kuwait, the international community must remain true to its position of principle and take the necessary steps, including enforcement measures, in keeping with the United Nations Charter. Of course, military force - or using it in appropriate measure - should be the last resort. Using it even to maintain international law and order necessarily means a set-back for the new thinking, a reversal of the trend towards establishing a new type of international relations. Today, the international community and the United Nations have sufficient capabilities to curb an aggressor, whoever he may be, and to restore justice without the use of military force - or using it in appropriate measure and on a collective basis.
There is also a certain degree of understanding with regard to ethnic conflicts of a purely domestic nature. The golden rule in this respect is to do no harm.
Problems arise also in the grey zone between internal jurisdiction and international responsibility. Basically, it is a question of the further development of the sovereignty principle in international law, as applied to the new realities and risks and to the need for universal interaction between States.
Consensus must be achieved on a set of basic rules, criteria and principles for international response by the world community to emergency situations, a kind of code of responsible conduct for States, in an era of an interrelated and integral world. Such a consensus should combine the principles of sovereignty, self-determination and non-interference in the internal affairs of States with the need for States to fulfil their obligations under the United Nations Charter and other international legal instruments, and for the United Nations to pursue its goals in all the spheres prescribed by its Charter.
The principal objective hare is to harmonise national, regional and global interests, to assert a single universal scale of democratic values providing for freedom of choice, a variety of forms of social development, economic and political pluralism and the supremacy of international law and human rights.
The problem of individual freedom in all its dimensions is becoming central in world politics today. Providing for all basic human rights has become an imperative both of national development and international relations.
The gravest challenges arise in the world economy. Imbalances and deformations are the inevitable companions of economic progress. On the one hand, the end of the cold war has put an end to bloc rivalry in dealing with the third world. Against the background of interdependence, development ceases to be a one-dimensional notion and assumes a universal character. This is the key to a balanced world economy and to providing a solid basis for resolving global issues. On the other hand, there are growing fears that the new East-West relationship will leave many developing nations on the periphery of the world economy. At the same time, the third world is becoming increasingly polarized. Economic success in a number of countries is accompanied by worsening crises, poverty and hunger in the poorest nations. To prevent accumulated contradictions from exploding is a priority task. Moving away from ideologically motivated assistance should not mean forgetting those who simply cannot survive without outside help.
The same applies to the factors which hamper progress towards environmental security. Chernobyl became a world-wide disaster. Yet, it is also a symbol of international solidarity in a struggle for survival and the triumph of humanism in relations between States. The United Nations Chernobyl Pledging Conference, which was held here recently, demonstrated this once again.
One of the lessons to be learned from Chernobyl and other environmental catastrophes is that there can be no effective way of avoiding disaster without overcoming the inertia of old industrial practices. The objective is to readjust the whole structure of the world economy to make it environmentally safe. This can only be achieved through concerted efforts.
New international relations should be universal. Within generally recognised norms of civilised behaviour, a11 nations, regardless of their ideological or political preferences and dislikes, should maintain normal and proper relations. Lingering hostility, let alone the lack of elementary dialogue between a number of States, objectively generates tension within the very fabric of international relations.
The USSR is paying its last diplomatic debts inherited from the cold war. We have normalised our relations with the Republic of Korea and launched a comprehensive process of restoring normal relations with Israel.
The new world realities of today require institutionalised security and cooperation structures, the modernization of existing mechanisms and the creation of new ones where necessary. At the same time, we should not hesitate to abandon certain previously established structures which are inherently incapable of evolution. The Co-ordinating Committee for East-West Trade Policy (COCOM) is at the top of that list.
The activities of newly established as well as restructured international organizations should be integrated in order to add stability to the pillars of comprehensive security.
The general outlines of this process were defined by the international community in a resolution adopted at the forty-fourth session of the General Assembly on enhancing international peace, security and International cooperation in all its aspects in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. It was at that time - two years ago - that conceptual agreement was reached to begin drafting the fundamental principles of civilised international communication at the current stage of history - sometimes referred to as the new world order.
Members may recall that that resolution was the joint initiative of the USSR and the United States. When I met President Bush today, we reiterated the commitment of our two countries to broader cooperation in strengthening the United Nations as well as in all other areas. This commitment rests on a new foundation in the Soviet-United States relationship - no longer one of confrontation or even rivalry, but cooperation and friendship for the good of the world community as a whole.
The philosophy of new international solidarity, which is finding its way into practice, signifies a de-ideologization of the United Nations. In renewing our Organisation we should once and for all leave behind us the legacy of the ice age - like the obnoxious resolution equating Zionism with racism.
A transition to partnership and collective action bears the promise of United Nations universality, both in terms of its membership and in terms of its areas of activity. The process has already been set in motion. At this session of the General Assembly new Members have joined the ranks of the Organization. These include States of differing size and population. Our support for their admission to the United Nations mirrors the overall Soviet foreign policy of developing relations with all States, including small and medium-sized States.
It is with a special feeling that I wish to congratulate our colleagues, the plenipotentiary representatives of new sovereign and independent States - the Latvian Republic, the Lithuanian Republic and the Estonian Republic.
I see special symbolism in the fact that one of the first foreign policy steps of the country which began its new political calendar recently was to recognize the full independence of the Baltic Republics and provide immediate support for their joining the United Nations end associating themselves with the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) process. That took place in Moscow at the beginning of the Conference on the Human Dimension. At the present time the process of establishing diplomatic relations and exchanging embassies between the USSR and the Baltic States has started. We are going to hold large-scale talks on vital issues affecting the destinies of millions of people.
Adapting the entire United Nations system to the new realities of international life is an item on our agenda. Progress has already been achieved in such adaptation and great credit for this goes to the Secretary-General. Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, who is a confident leader of the Organization at this juncture which is perhaps most decisive. We hope that the line he so strongly supports will be duly continued.
There is a wealth of promising ideas on this subject. It would appear to make sense to agree upon launching practical exploration of approaches to reforming the United Nations. We are open to any fruitful ideas; we are also working on our own proposals. A concerted and essentially collective regulation of international relations in the areas of security and disarmament crucial for the destiny of the world has become a priority in the activities of the United Nations end the world community.
Supremacy of law is the main point of reference on the way to shaping a new model of international security. A system of political and legal deterrence should be its cornerstone - a system based not on mutual deterrence but rather on confidence that mutual threat does not exist and also on a high level of trust and openness in the military and other spheres. To achieve thin, it is important to establish, with active United Nations involvement, an atmosphere of general aversion to aggression throughout the world community. Any act of aggression must, from the very start, be regarded as doomed, not only militarily but also politically, economically and morally. An international boycott is the first step to deter and warn the aggressor.
Next in line is a joint elaboration and implementation of the concept of the next stage of disarmament to absorb the experience gained and make the disarmament processes stable, comprehensive and universal.
Priority tasks include making military potentials exclusively defence-oriented and working out the guidelines States could follow while restructuring their armed forces in conformity with the doctrine of reasonable sufficiency. That now is taking place in the Soviet Union.
The General Assembly could recommend initiating, as an intermediate stage, consultations to work on specific quantitative and qualitative parameters for minimum nuclear deterrence in all its aspects. It is becoming an urgent task to conduct negotiations on the total elimination of tactical nuclear weapons in as short as time as possible. 
A reduction in the number of nuclear tests, with a view to phasing them out altogether as soon as possible, is one means of halting the nuclear arms race. A broad movement in support of this idea has materialized in the political and scientific communities and among the public in various countries of the world. The time has come to establish a United Nations register of conventional arms sales and supplies and to identify jointly its technical parameters with a view to arriving at agreed principles of restraint in arms sales.
The development of a long-term concept of the use of United Nations forces in accordance with the Charter of the Organization, including the refinement of rapid response mechanisms for countering threats to international peace, legally codified procedures for deterring a potential aggressor and optimal strategies for defusing conflicts, would facilitate more comprehensive utilization of United Nations capacities. Major tasks in this area include efforts to make United Nations peace-keeping operations more effective and institutionalized, broader use of the preventive capacities of the United Nations and efforts to find ways to correlate global and regional security structures. There is proof that conflicts can indeed be settled through national reconciliation, a balance of interests and responsibility among all the parties involved and the expression of the will of the people in democratic free elections. I am particularly pleased to note the important role that is to be played by the United Nations in implementing the settlement in Cambodia as a truly unique instrument for maintaining international peace.
Today a unique chance is at hand to set in motion the process of a Middle East settlement. It is essential to lock in the significant pi ogress that has been made in solving the Afghan problem. This session must take action to support efforts in these areas.
The ultimate beneficiary of the movement towards stable peace with maximum guarantees is the human being. The domestic policies of States and the practice of international communication should rest on uniform rules applied across the entire range of human rights as an inseparable set of equal categories of a political, civil, social, economic and cultural nature defining the status of the individual and his relations with the State and society. Substantive discussion of specific human rights issues and matters of compliance with international commitments in this area can no longer be dismissed under the artificial pretext of interference in internal affairs. By signing appropriate international instruments, every State, as it were, delegates a fraction of its sovereignty to the international community. The criterion is the primacy of human rights over the rights of nations and other bodies.
At the Moscow meeting of the CSCE conference on the human dimension, we focused on the problem of strengthening not only the national, but also the international basis of guarantees for democracy, political pluralism, the supremacy of law and human rights.
We might provide for far-reaching collective procedures that would ultimately include binding and mandatory elements. Non-governmental and human rights organisations should be actively encouraged to participate in their verification. In other words, after the Moscow conference, the concept of confidence-building measures, which has been put to work so successfully in the political and military fields since the conferences held in Madrid and Stockholm should, we firmly believe, become the cornerstone and driving force of the new turn to human rights within the all-European and the global context.
	Much has been done in the United Nations, but there are still greater tasks ahead, reflecting the risks and challenges that face the international community today. Our common and inseparable destinies largely, if not decisively, depend on whether the United Nations will be able to succeed in renovating itself and become a true multilateral guarantor of peace and security.
Today all of us, politicians and diplomats alike, constantly find ourselves with the word "space" on our tongues. We speak of a single economic, legal and ecological space. This has become an extremely up-to-date and fashionable expression. Yet, half a century ago, in the heyday of Stalin's tyranny, the great Russian poet, Boris Pasternak, used it to describe an artist's calling!
"We have to live without vainglory Live in such a way that after all A love that space bestows upon us Would let us hear the future's call."
The call of the future! The author of Doctor Zhivago and the winner of the Nobel Prize heeded this call. Let us also heed it.
﻿I am honoured to speak with you as you open the forty-sixth session of the General Assembly. I should first like to congratulate the outgoing President, Guido de Marco of Malta, and salute our incoming President, Samir Al-Shihabi of Saudi Arabia.
I also want to salute especially Secretary-General Javier Peres de Cuellar, who will step down in just over three months. But let me say, Secretary-General Peres de Cuellar has served with great distinction during a period of unprecedented change and turmoil, and for almost 10 years we have enjoyed the leadership of this man of peace, a man that I, along with many Members, feel proud to call friend, and so today let us congratulate our friend and praise his spectacular service to the United Nations and to the people of the world, the Secretary-General.
Let me also welcome new Members in this Hall, two delegations representing Korea, particularly our democratic friends, the Republic of Korea, the Republics of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, and new missions from the Marshall Islands and Micronesia. Twenty years ago, when I was the Permanent Representative here for the United States, there were 132 United Nations Members. Just one week ago, 159 nations enjoyed membership in the United Nations, and today the number stands at 166. The presence of these new Members alone provides reason for us to celebrate. 
My statement today will not sound like any you have heard from a President of the United States. I am not going to dwell on the super-Power competition that defined international politics for half a century. Instead, I will discuss the challenges of building peace and prosperity in a world leavened by the cold war's end and the resumption of history.
Communism held history captive for years. It suspended ancient disputes; and it suppressed ethnic rivalries, nationalist aspirations and old prejudices. As it has dissolved, suspended hatreds have sprung to life. People who for years have been denied their pasts, have begun searching for their own identities, often through peaceful and constructive means, occasionally through factionalism and bloodshed.
This revival of history ushers in a new era teeming with opportunities and perils. Let us begin by discussing the opportunities. First, history's renewal enables people to pursue their natural instincts for enterprise. Communism froze that progress until its failures became too much for even its defenders to bear, and now citizens throughout the world have chosen enterprise over envy, personal responsibility over the enticements of the State, prosperity over the poverty of central planning.
The United Nations Charter encourages this adventure by pledging to employ international machinery for the promotion of the economic and social advancement of all peoples, and I can think of no better way to fulfil this Mission than to promote the free flow of goods and Ideas, frankly, ideas and goods will travel around the globe with or without our help. The information revolution has destroyed the weapons of enforced isolation and ignorance. In many parts of the world technology has overwhelmed tyranny, proving that the age of Information can become the age of liberation, if we limit State power wisely and free our people to make the best use of new ideas, inventions and insights. By the same token, the world has learned that free markets provide levels of prosperity, growth and happiness that centrally planned economies can never offer.
Even the most charitable estimates indicate that in recent years the free world's economies have grown at twice the rate of the former communist world. Growth does more than fill shelves; it permits every person to gain, not at the expense of others but to the benefit of others. Prosperity encourages people to live as neighbours, not as predators. Economic growth can aid international relations in exactly the same way.
Many nations represented here are parties to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). The Uruguay Round, the latest in the post-war series of trade negotiations, offers hope to developing nations, many of which have been cruelly divided, cruelly deceived, by the false promises of totalitarianism. Here in this Hall, we hear about North-South problems. But free and open trade, including unfettered access to markets and credit, offers developing countries means of self-sufficiency and economic dignity.
If the Uruguay Round should fail, a new wave of protectionism could destroy our hopes for a better future. History shows all too clearly that protectionism can destroy wealth within countries and poison relations between them. Therefore, I call upon all members of GATT to redouble their efforts to reach a successful conclusion for the Uruguay Round. I pledge that the United States will do its part.
I cannot stress this enough: Economic progress will play a vital role In the new world. It supplies the soil in which democracy grows best. People everywhere seek government of and by the people, and they want to enjoy their inalienable rights to freedom and property and person. Challenges to democracy have failed. Just last month, coup plotters in the Soviet Union tried to derail the forces of liberty and reform, but Soviet citizens refused to follow. Most of the nations in this Hall stood with the forces of reform led by Mikhail Gorbachev and Boris Yeltsin, and against the coup plotters.
The challenge facing the Soviet peoples now, that of building political systems based upon individual liberty, minority rights, democracy and free markets, mirrors every nation's responsibility for encouraging peaceful, democratic reform, but it also testifies to the extraordinary power of the democratic ideal. As democracy flourishes, so does the opportunity (or a third historical breakthrough, international cooperation. A year ago, the Soviet Union joined the United States and a host of other nations in defending a tiny country against aggression and opposing Saddam Hussein. For the very first time on a matter of major importance super-Power competition was replaced with international cooperation. The United Nations, in one of its finest moments, constructed a measured, principled, deliberate and courageous response to Saddam Hussein. It stood up to an outlaw who invaded Kuwait, who threatened many States within the region, who sought to set a menacing precedent for the post-cold-war world.
The coalition effort established a model for the collective settlement of disputes. Members sat the goal - the liberation of Kuwait - and devised a courageous, unified means of achieving that goal. Mow, for the first time, we have a real chance to fulfil the United Nations Charter's ambition of working "to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war ... to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men and women and of nations large and small ... to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom". Those are the words of the Charter.
He will not revive these ideals if we fail to acknowledge the challenge that the renewal of history presents. In Europe and Asia, nationalist passions have flared anew, challenging borders, straining the fabric of international society. At the same time, around the world many age-old conflicts still fester. We see signs of this tumult right here. The United Nations has mounted more peace-keeping missions in the last 36 months than during its first 43 years, and although we now seem mercifully liberated from the fear of nuclear holocaust, these smaller, virulent conflicts should trouble us all.
We must face this challenge squarely - first, by pursuing the peaceful resolution of disputes now in progress; secondly, and more importantly, by trying to prevent others from erupting. No one hare can promise that today's borders will remain fixed for all time, but we must strive to ensure the peaceful, negotiated settlement of border disputes.
We must also promote the cause of international harmony by addressing old feuds. We should take seriously the Charter's pledge to practise tolerance and live together in peace with one another as good neighbours. United Nations General Assembly resolution 3379 (XXX), the so-called "Zionism is racism" resolution, mocks this pledge and the principles upon which the United Nations was founded, and I call now for its repeal. Zionism is not a policy; it is the idea that led to the creation of a home for the Jewish people, to the State of Israel, and to equate Zionism with the intolerable sin of racism is to twist history and forget the terrible plight of Jews in the Second World War - and indeed throughout history. To equate Zionism with racism is to reject Israel itself, a Member in good standing of the United Nations. This body cannot claim to seek peace and at the same time challenge Israel's right to exist. By repealing this resolution unconditionally the United Nations will enhance its credibility and serve the cause of peace.
As we work to meet the challenge posed by the resumption of history, we also must defend the Charter's emphasis on inalienable human rights. Government has failed if citizens cannot speak their mind, if they cannot form political parties freely and elect governments without coercion, it they cannot practice their religion freely, if they cannot raise their families in peace, if they cannot enjoy a just return from their labour, if they cannot live fruitful lives and at the end of their days look upon their achievements and their society's, progress with pride. Politicians who talk about democracy and freedom but provide neither eventually will feel the sting of public disapproval and the power of peoples yearning to live free.
Some nations still deny their basic rights to the people, and too many voices cry out for freedom. For example, the people of Cuba suffer oppression at the hands of a dictator who has not got the word, the lone hold-out in an otherwise democratic hemisphere, a man who has not adapted to a world that has no use for totalitarian tyranny. Elsewhere, despots ignore the heartening fact that the rest of the world is embarked upon a new age of liberty.
The renewal of history also imposes an obligation to remain vigilant about new threats and old. He must expand our efforts to control nuclear proliferation. We must work to prevent the spread of chemical and biological weapons and the missiles to deliver them.
It is for this reason that I put forward my Middle East arms initiative, a comprehensive approach to stop and, where possible, reverse the accumulation of arms in that part of the world moat prone to violence. We must remember that self-interest will tug nations in different directions, and that struggles over perceived interests will flare sometimes into violence. We can never say with confidence where the next conflict may arise. And we cannot promise eternal peace - not while demagogue peddle false promises to people hungry with hope; not while terrorists use our citizens as pawns and drug dealers destroy our peoples. He, as a result, must band together to overwhelm affronts to basic human dignity. It is no longer acceptable to shrug and say that one man's terrorist is another man's freedom fighter. Let us put the law above the crude and cowardly practice of hostage-holding.
In a world defined by change, we must be as firm in principle as we are flexible in our response to changing international conditions. That is especially true today of Iraq. Six months after the adoption of Security Council resolutions 687 (1991) and 688 (1991), Saddam continues to rebuild his weapons of mass destruction and to subject the Iraqi people to brutal repression. Saddam's contempt for United Nations resolutions was first demonstrated back in August 1990, and it continues even as I am speaking. His Government refuses to permit unconditional helicopter inspections, and right now is refusing to allow United Nations inspectors to leave inspected premises with documents relating to an Iraqi nuclear weapons programme. It is the view of the United States that we must keep the United Nations sanctions in place as long as he remains in power. This also shows that we cannot compromise for a moment in seeing that Iraq destroys all of its weapons of mass destruction and the means to deliver them. And we will not compromise.
This is not to say - let me be clear on this point - that we should punish the Iraqi people. Let me repeat: our argument has never been with the people of Iraq. It was, and is, with a brutal dictator whose arrogance dishonours the Iraqi people. Security Council resolution 706 (1991) created a responsible mechanism for sending humanitarian relief to innocent Iraqi citizens. He must put that mechanism to work. Ma must not abandon our principled stand against Saddam's aggression. This cooperative effort has liberated Kuwait. Now it can lead to a just government in Iraq. And when it does - when it does - the Iraqi people can look forward to better lives, free at home, free to engage in a world beyond their borders.
The resumption of history also permits the United Nations to resume the important business of promoting the values that I have discussed today. This body can serve as a vehicle through which willing parties can settle old disputes. In the months to come, I look forward to working with Secretary-General Peres de Cuellar and his successor as we pursue peace in such diverse and divided lands as Afghanistan, Cambodia, Cyprus, El Salvador, and Western Sahara. The United Nations can encourage free market development through its international lending and aid institutions. However, it should not dictate the particular forms of government that nations should adopt. It can, and should, encourage the values upon which the Organization was founded. Together, we should insist that nations seeking our acceptance meet standards of human decency.
Where institutions of freedom have lain dormant, the United Nations can offer them new life. These institutions play a crucial role in our quest for a new world order, an order in which no nation must surrender one iota of its own sovereignty, an order characterized by the rule of law rather than the resort to force, the cooperative development of disputes rather than anarchy and bloodshed, and an unstinting belief in human rights.
Finally, you may wonder about America's role the new world I have described. Let me assure you, the United States has no intention of striving for a pax americana. However, we will remain engaged. We will not retreat and pull back into isolationism. We will offer friendship and leadership. In short, we seek a pax universalis, built upon shared responsibilities and aspirations.
To all assembled: We have an opportunity to spare our sons and daughters the sins and errors of the past. We can build a future more satisfying than any our world has ever known. The future lies undefined before us, full of promise, littered with peril. We can choose the kind of world we want: one blistered by the fires of war and subjected to the winds of coercion and chance, or one made more peaceful by reflection and choice. Take this challenge seriously. Inspire future generations to praise and venerate you, to say, "On the ruins of conflict, these brave men and women built an era of peace and understanding. They inaugurated a new world order, an order worth preserving for the ages."
Good luck to each and every one of you.






﻿Sir, first of all, please allow me to warmly congratulate you on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly of the United Nations at its forty-sixth session. I believe that, with your wisdom and experience, you will accomplish with distinction the noble task entrusted to you by the Assembly. Meanwhile I would like to express my appreciation and thanks to your predecessor, Mr. De Marco, for his positive contribution to the work of the last session.
Seven new Members have been admitted at the current session to the United Nations. This is a gratifying event. I wish to extend my sincere congratulations to the Democratic People"3 Republic of Korea, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic of Estonia, the Republic of Latvia and the Republic of Lithuania on their admission to membership in the United Nations.
It. is still fresh in people's memory that the forty-fifth session of the General Assembly was convened under the dark cloud of the ongoing Gulf crisis. As we gather here for the forty-sixth session, this dark cloud has already dispersed. Yet peace, security and development still face grave challenges in various regions and the world as a whole. And the people of all countries are anxious to see the establishment of a new international order which will make our world a better one to live in. Though the past year has seen some relaxation of tension in the international situation, more serious problems of instability and turbulence have emerged, with the sharpening of new conflicts and North-South contradictions. This has caused widespread concern on the part of the international community.
The tendency towards reduced tension and stability on the Korean peninsula accords with the aspirations of the Korean people and serves peace and security in Asia and the world at large. The simultaneous admission at the current session of North and South Korea an full Members of the United Nations is an important event conducive to the relaxation of tension on the Korean peninsula. We hope that both North and South Korea will continue to improve their relations through dialogue and consultations, expand their exchanges and cooperation and gradually remove antagonism and estrangement between them, looking towards the final independent and peaceful reunification of the nation.
The Cambodian Supreme National Council, under the presidency of Prince Norodom Sihanouk, has held several successful meetings, and, as the organ of supreme power in Cambodia, has sent its delegation to this session. Here we should like to express our warm welcome to the Cambodian delegation headed by Prince Sihanouk, Proceeding from their overall national interest, all the Cambodian parties are working to set aside their past mutual grievances and strengthen their unity and cooperation with a view to attaining soon a comprehensive political settlement of the Cambodian question on the basis of the United Nations framework document. They are making fruitful efforts to build an independent, peaceful, neutral and non-aligned Cambodia. For over 10 years the international community, the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council, the members of the Association of South-East Asian Nations and the other participants in the Paris International Conference on Cambodia have all made great efforts to achieve a political settlement of the Cambodian question. We wish to see an early resumption of the Paris conference and the official conclusion of an agreement on a comprehensive settlement of the Cambodian question. We believe that a settlement of the Cambodian question will bring about peace and stability in South-East Asia and will create a favourable environment for cooperation between, and the economic development, of, all countries in the region.
The situation in southern Africa continues to improve. After 16 years of civil war, the Angolan Government and UNITA have finally signed a peace accord. Following the independence of Namibia, the people of South Africa have also won significant victories in their struggle against apartheid, and progress is being made towards a political settlement of the South African question. We welcome the positive measures taken by the South African Government, and hope that Government, will continue its efforts to remove obstacles to constitutional negotiations and accelerate the process aimed at a political settlement, of the South African question.
We are pleased that the question of Western Sahara is moving towards a political solution. China sincerely hopes that, with the concerted efforts of the international community and the parties concerned, a proper resolution will soon be found.
We are deeply concerned about the exacerbation of ethnic, racial and religious contradictions in a number of countries, including several in Europe. The national independence and territorial integrity of some countries are under threat, while intense civil strife and political turmoil have caused serious damage to others. We are deeply disturbed by the grave situation confronting Yugoslavia today. We call on the Yugoslav people of different nationalities to solve their differences by peaceful means and to refrain from intensifying the conflict so as to enable their country to re-embark on the road of peaceful development.
It is reassuring that, following the Gulf war, the sovereignty, independence and legitimate Government of Kuwait have been restored. However, peace and stability in the Gulf region have not yet materialized, and the Middle East region remains fraught with contradictions. The achievement of peace and stability in the Middle East hinges on the early resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict. As a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council, China will join the rest of the international community in a continued effort to advance the Middle East peace process. We have always stood for a political settlement of the Middle East question on the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions, especially Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) end 338 (1973). The occupied Arab territories should be returned, the legitimate national rights of the Palestinian people restored, and the sovereignty and security of all the countries in the Middle East, region, including Israel, respected and guaranteed.
We believe that the convening of an international peace conference at an appropriate time under the auspices of the United Nations and with the participation of the five permanent members of the Security Council and all the parties concerned, including the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), would be the best means of achieving a final settlement of the Middle East question.
Pending the achievement of these targets, we support all the efforts of the parties concerned in that region that they deem appropriate and useful with a view to accelerating the Middle East peace process. To help move the peace process forward, we call upon all parties to undertake not to use force and to adopt effective measures to ease tension. The international community should endeavour to help to stop Israel's activities in establishing Jewish settlements in the occupied territories and suppressing the Palestinian inhabitants. Genuine and lasting peace can be achieved only through mutual recognition between the State of Palestine and the State of Israel for the purpose of facilitating the Middle East peace process, as well as peaceful coexistence of the Arab and the Jewish nations.
The discrepancies between North and South are aggravated by the widening economic gap and the increasing inequality between rich and poor. Such imbalance in development may lead to a more turbulent world situation. To make matters worse, more than a billion people around the world living in absolute poverty still do not have adequate food and clothing, and many are struggling against starvation and disease just to survive.
In the 1990s - the last decade of this century - the people of all countries are confronted with this increasingly acute question: where is our world going, and what kind of new international order should be established?
The establishment of a peaceful, stable, just and equitable new international order would accord with the will of the people and meet the needs of the times. It is the view of the Chinese Government that a new international order should conform to the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, as well as those principles that have proved practical and are widely accepted by the international community. Facts have proved that five principles - mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity; mutual non-aggression; non-interference in each other's internal affairs; equality and mutual benefit; and peaceful coexistence - comprise the most fundamental norms governing international relations. Those principles are in keeping with the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and reflect the characteristics essential to international relations of a new type. Therefore, we maintain that the new international order that is envisaged should be established on the basis of the five principles of peaceful coexistence.
For the purpose of exploring with all members of the Assembly the means of establishing a just and equitable new international order, I should like to set out, at this solemn forum, the position and opinions of the Chinese Government on the question of peace and security and on economic and social matters.
First, Having suffered from the scourge of two world wars this century, mankind has come to appreciate and cherish peace all the more deeply. The development of every country and the progress of mankind require a peaceful international environment. In our view, the following points are essential to the maintenance of world peace. All countries should respect each other's sovereignty, treat each other as an equal, put differences aside in the search for common ground, engage in friendly cooperation and live in harmony. No country should seek hegemony or try to manipulate international affairs, or pursue power politics on the basis of the law of the jungle. All States - large or small, strong or weak, rich or poor - should participate in the discussion and settlement of international affairs as equal members of the international community. Every State has the right to choose independently its own social, political and economic systems and its own path of development in the light of its own national conditions. No country - in particular, no big Power - should impose its own ideology, values or mode of development on other countries. All countries should observe the principle of mutual respect, for territorial integrity and the inviolability of national borders, and no country should be allowed to invade or annex the territory of other countries, under whatever pretext, Disputes between States should be settled in a reasonable manner by peaceful means, and the use or threat of force is not permissible in international relations.
Secondly, an important link in safeguarding the security of all States lies in an end to the arms race and in effective disarmament. This is an important means of easing international tension. All along, China has stood for the complete prohibition and total destruction of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, and for the banning of research into, and the development of, new weapons of mass destruction of any type. We are also for the comprehensive and balanced non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction through just, reasonable, necessary and appropriate measures. China pursues a policy of not advocating, encouraging or facilitating the development of nuclear weapons by other countries. To facilitate the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons, and to safeguard international peace, security and stability, China has announced its decision in principle to accede to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. In addition, China has always stood for the early conclusion of a convention banning chemical weapons and for greater effectiveness for the Convention on the Prohibition of Biological Weapons.
Not long ago the United States and the Soviet Union reached an agreement on the reduction of their strategic nuclear weapons. We welcome this development. Nevertheless, the signing of this treaty is just an initial step in the reduction of the huge strategic nuclear arsenals of the United States and the Soviet Union. Moreover, the treaty does not cover all types of nuclear weapons and does not prohibit continuing United States and Soviet efforts to improve the quality of their weapons and to create new weapons systems. Even after the prescribed reduction under this treaty, the two countries will still possess more than 90 per cent of the world's total nuclear weaponry and remain capable of destroying mankind several times over. The recent changes that occurred in the Soviet Union caused particular concern in the international community as to whether nuclear weapons can be strictly controlled. The United States and the Soviet Union, therefore, still have a long way to go in fulfilling their special responsibilities and obligations with regard to nuclear disarmament.
In principle, China is in favour of placing under fair, reasonable and effective control the trade in arms, including various sophisticated weapons. But this has to be decided by the international community through extensive consultations, with all countries on an equal footing, after full preparation.
We hold that military capabilities should be used only for the purpose of self-defence and that no country should seek a level of armament in excess of its reasonable defence needs. We support the proposal for a zone free from weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East and comprehensive and balanced arms control in the region through consultations and negotiations with the countries concerned on an equal footing. The views and opinions of the countries in that region should be fully heard and respected, and the possibility of a few countries monopolizing the affair and imposing their views on others should be guarded against. Arms control is only a means, and a just and lasting peace in the Middle East is the objective. Arms control in the Middle East, therefore, should be linked to the Middle East peace process. The United Nations should fully play its due role in this connection and, when necessary, a conference on arms control in the Middle East should be convened with the participation of all the countries concerned.
Outer space belongs to all mankind; it should be utilized only for peaceful purposes and for the benefit of mankind. No country should develop outer space weapons. The United States and the Soviet Union, first and foremost, should stop developing, testing and deploying such weapons and destroy all space weapons in their possession. The international community should start negotiations at an early date for the conclusion of an international agreement on the complete prohibition of outer space weapons with a view to stopping and preventing the arms race from extending into outer space.
An important characteristic of current international economic relations is the aggravation of North-South contradictions and the widening of their economic gap. The majority of the developing countries remain confronted with such difficulties as crushing debt burden, negative net flow of financial resources and worsening terms of trade.
To a large extent, the widening economic gap between the North and the South is the result of the existing inequitable and unfair international economic order. The present radical changes in the world situation have created new difficulties for the developing countries. To reverse the situation, it is necessary to establish step by step a new international economic order which should include the following elements:
Every country has the right to choose its own social system, economic model and road to development suited to its national conditions;
Every country has the right to exercise effective control over its own resources and their exploitation; All countries are entitled to participate in the handling of international economic affairs;
The developed countries should respect and accommodate the interests and needs of the developing countries and refrain from attaching political strings to their aid; and
Efforts should be made to strengthen North-South dialogue and cooperation with a view to necessary adjustment and reform in commodity, trade, funds, debt, monetary, financial and other important fields of international economy.
The economy of the world is an interrelated and interdependent whole. While the developing countries need funds and technology from the developed countries, the latter also need the raw materials and markets of the former. In essence, the question of development hinges on North-South relations. Without a fundamental improvement in North-South relations, it will be difficult to ensure world peace and stability, and the situation will benefit neither the poor nor the rich countries. To promote common development, all countries must help each other, like passengers in the same boat, and endeavour to narrow the gap between the North and the South and establish a fair and rational international economic order based on mutual benefit and cooperation.
The environment is another outstanding problem facing the international community today. Improving the environment and protecting the Earth have a vital bearing on the very conditions for the survival of mankind.
The question of environment does not exist by itself. It is closely linked to economic growth and social development. Owing to historical reasons and economic backwardness, a vast number of developing countries are constrained in their ability to participate effectively in the protection of the global environment. Yet without their participation, there can be no fundamental improvement in the environment. We appeal to the countries with comparatively abundant financial and technological resources to take the lead in moving to protect the global environment and help the developing countries enhance their ability in environmental protection.
China attaches great importance to environmental protection, which has become one of its basic state policies. We have taken an active part in international cooperation in this field. Last June, at the invitation of the Chinese Government, the ministers of 41 developing countries met in Beijing for the Ministerial Conference of the Developing Countries on Environment and Development and issued the Beijing Declaration, which sets forth the principled position and basic views of the developing countries on ways to resolve the questions of global environment and development and gives expression to the common will and aspiration of three quarters of mankind for environmental protection and development. This will no doubt exert a positive influence on the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development scheduled for 1992 in Brazil and the efforts for a rational solution to the problem of global environment.
The promotion of the universal attainment of human rights and fundamental freedoms is inextricably linked to the common interests of mankind. Over the past forty years or more, the international community has made positive contributions in safeguarding the purposes stated in the Charter of the United Nations pertaining to the promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms. Thanks to the concerted efforts of its Member States, the United Nations has formulated nearly 70 international conventions, declarations and instruments on human rights which have played a positive role in promoting United Nations activities in the field of human rights.
For a long time, however, the human rights forum of the United Nations has been used by certain countries as a place for waging cold war, with the result that the United Nations efforts for the promotion and protection of human rights are subjected to the influence of abnormal phenomena. For example, human rights has been used as a means of pushing power politics and interfering in affairs that are basically within the jurisdiction of other States; the concept of human rights has been fragmented and double standards have been followed; some have made efforts to glorify themselves and attack others on the question of human rights and set up their own likes and dislikes as criteria of human rights in disregard of the international conventions and the specific conditions of other countries. All this not only runs counter to the purposes and principles of the Charter but also seriously hampers normal international cooperation in the field of human rights and impedes the universal realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
The Chinese Government has consistently supported and respected the principles of protecting human rights contained in the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant international instruments, and has actively participated in a wide range of human rights activities in the United Nations.
We believe that in order effectively to guarantee and promote human rights and fundamental freedoms of all mankind, it is necessary to recognize the various countries' different features - their different political economic and social systems and their different historical, religious and cultural backgrounds. In this regard, all countries, based on the principles of respect for each other's sovereignty and non-interference in each other's internal affairs, should strive to achieve mutual understanding, seek common ground while putting aside differences and replace cold war with normal international cooperation.
In our view, racial discrimination, apartheid, colonialism, foreign aggression and occupation are gross violations of human rights that ought to be given full attention and halted by the international community. In the field of human rights equal importance should be attached to civil and political rights, as well as to economic, social, cultural and developmental rights. He must not emphasise some rights while belittling or even denying others. For the vast number of developing countries, the most fundamental human right is the right to subsistence and development.
As you all know, China is a developing country with a population of 1.15 billion. In spite of a successful family planning policy, our population still grows by 17 million every year. By feeding 22 per cent of the world's population with only 7 per cent of the world's arable land, China has made its utmost contribution to the protection of mankind's right to subsistence. The Chinese Government has also worked actively to safeguard and guarantee the lawful rights and interests of old and young, women and children and the disabled through legislation and other effective measures, and it has had marked success. Any unprejudiced person can readily see that China today enjoys political stability and economic growth and that its people are living in peace and contentment. China's stability and development are without doubt important factors contributing to peace and stability in Asia and in the world at large. Conversely, should China be plunged into turmoil, stability in Asia and the world would be seriously impaired. China needs stability, and the world needs a stable China.
China is advancing along the road of building socialism with Chinese characteristics. Over the past 10 years and more we have adhered to the policies of reform and opening to the outside world and have scored noticeable achievements in economic development. At present the Chinese people are implementing their Ten-Year Programme and their Eighth Five-Year Plan for National Economic and Social Development. We will unswervingly deepen the reform, open the country still wider and gradually establish a new structure of planned commodity economy with a view to quadrupling the 1980 gross national product by the end of this century. In order to reach this target, a great deal of work needs to be accomplished and a huge number of large-scale projects completed. While deepening economic reform, we will also further the policy of opening to the outside world and carry out political restructuring step by step.
This past summer some regions of China were hit by severe floods, which brought the people tremendous losses in lives and property as well as in industrial and agricultural production. In some areas the loss was very heavy. The Chinese Government has adopted effective measures, funnelling large amounts of financial and material resources to assisting the disaster-stricken areas and minimizing the losses. In those areas there has been no occurrence of famine or pestilence and no influx of refugees to cities. China has been victorious in its efforts to combat the floods. It is estimated that China's gross national product will continue to grow at a rate of 6 per cent. In fighting the floods and in the subsequent relief operations, we have received sympathy and assistance from the governments and people of other countries, relevant United Nations agencies, international organizations and various quarters of the international community, for which we wish to express our heartfelt thanks.
We are happy to note that, as the most important global organization in the present world, the United Nations has in the past year played a major role in maintaining world peace, promoting the political settlement of burning issues, enhancing development in various countries and strengthening international cooperation. Facts have proved that the mechanism of the United nations remains effective. Here. I would like to point out in particular that Secretary-General Perez de Cuellar has for many years made fruitful efforts in this respect.
In the present complex and volatile international situation people the world over all hope that, in keeping with the purposes and principles of its Charter, the United Nations will work tirelessly to bring about fair and reasonable solutions to such regional conflicts as the on? Prevailing in the Middle East, promote North-South dialogue and help developing countries overcome their economic difficulties and develop their economies. We sincerely hope that the United Nations will play a positive role in advancing disarmament and in addressing the major problems facing mankind, such as environmental protection and drug control.
In this diversified international community, the search for consensus and commonality is not only the original objective set for the United Nations at its inception but also the distinctive feature of this largest international Organization. Faced with the stupendous changes occurring in the current international situation, the international community has come to regard the establishment of a new international order as a common aspiration. We hope and believe that the United Nations will play a significant role in the establishment of a fair and reasonable new international order.
Twenty years have passed since the restoration of China's lawful seat the United Nations in 1971. Over these years China, as a permanent member of the Security Council, has played a positive role in maintaining peace and promoting economic development In the world. In the future, China will, as always, continue to abide strictly by the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter, to perform its duties conscientiously and to join the rest of the States Member of the United Nations in actively supporting the work of the Organisation, contributing its share to the promotion of world peace, security and development as well as to the establishment of a new international order,
﻿This session of the General Assembly is taking place in a world that has undergone fundamental change. The United Nations is the focal point of mankind's new hopes and expectations. This makes your office, Mr. President, one of special responsibility. I wish you luck and success and greet you as the representative of a country with which we, Germany, have long-standing close relations.
I welcome most heartily the Baltic States of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania as new Members of the United Nations. They had lost their freedom and independence in 1940 as a result of that criminal document, the Hitler-Stalin pact. All the greater, therefore, is the pleasure felt by us Germans at the fact that history has at long last justly rewarded these courageous peoples with the freedom they longed for.
I welcome the two Korean States. We hop« that the wish of the Korean people will be fulfilled, that they will be able, like the German people, to live in freedom and democracy in one sovereign and independent State. I also welcome the Marshall Islands and Micronesia to the family of nations.
Every year since 1974 I have addressed this Assembly on behalf of the Federal Republic of Germany. On each occasion I have expressed our intention to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German people could recover their unity in free self-determination. On 3 October 1990 that wish came true.
At this moment I commemorate all those who had to sacrifice their lives and their freedom in prisons and camps because they wanted to live in a European Germany of freedom, democracy and human rights. We pay a tribute to all those who, is what was then the German Democratic Republic, as everywhere in Central and Eastern Europe, took to the streets to gain freedom, democracy and unity by peaceful means.
Today I address the Assembly for the first time as the Foreign Minister of united Germany. Germany takes its place in the family of United Nations on the basis of the United Nations Charter.
As a European country, we are committed to the Charter of Paris. We Germans regard the greater weight of our people united in one State as a mandate to assume greater responsibility for freedom, democracy and human rights in a European Germany which has put behind it the nation-State thinking of the past. While the division of Germany made manifest the division of Europe, German unity today contributes to the unification of the whole European continent.
Europe stands at a crossroads in its history. We Germans want this Europe to develop in close transatlantic solidarity. The North Atlantic alliance and the involvement of the United States and Canada in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) process are a reflection of that solidarity. The European Community's transatlantic declaration underscores the will for ever closer European-North American cooperation.
The aims of the policy of united Germany are as follows:
First, we want the European Community, of which we are a founding member, to develop into a European Union and ultimately into the United States of Europe. We want this year to bring a final decision in favour of political union and economic and monetary union.
Second, we want all democratic States in Europe to be able to accede to this Community. For the new democracies in Eastern Europe which are introducing market economies the way must be opened, through association, to full membership.
Third, we want to bring the whole of Europe ever closer together on the basis of the Charter of Paris. We also want the peoples of the Soviet Union, who are adopting a new form of coexistence as sovereign republics, to take their place in this Europe.

Europe will find its new order in confederal structures; these will manifest themselves in different forms. They will take account of existing structures and will afford the regions new opportunities. With greater unity, Europe will at the same time acquire greater diversity.
It is the responsibility of the Western democracies also to establish the material conditions for European unity so that new boundaries do not divide Europe into haves and have-nots. Mew priorities will have to be fixed for material assistance as well. Germany is facing up to this task: as Europeans, we aim, together with other Europeans, to create one Europe by providing assistance for our Eastern neighbours. No one in the West will be permanently well off if those in the East are permanently badly off.
Fourth, as a country in the heart of Europe, we want to devote all our energy to achieving the unity of our continent. This is underscored by the unique link between Germany and France. Also important in this process is the close cooperation with our Eastern neighbours. I emphasised this in the Declaration of Weimar, signed on 29 August 1991 with my French colleague, Roland Dumas, and my Polish colleague. Professor Krzysztof Skubiszewski.
As the door to unity began to open for the German people in the autumn of 1989, I stated here before the United Nations on 27 September that year that we wanted Poland to know that the Polish people's

"... right to live within secure borders will not be called into question, not now or in the future, through territorial claims by us Germans". (A/44/PV.8. p. 18) That was a signal, not only to the Polish people but to all our neighbours. 
That statement was incorporated into the two-plus-four Treaty and the German-Polish Treaty, which is at present being debated by the parliaments of both countries. The German-Czechoslovak Treaty on good-neighbourly Relations and Friendly Cooperation is likewise about to be signed. These treaties, like the major treaty with the Soviet Union and the treaties with the other countries of Central and Eastern Europe still to come, manifest our intention to work towards one Europe. Our relationship with the Soviet Union has meanwhile assumed central importance for the whole of Europe.
The German people are emphasising their determination to draw the conclusions from the ill-fated chapters of our history in this century and to help build a Europe based on responsibility and not on the power politics of the past.
Fifth, we want the Western alliance to continue its efforts to ensure stability throughout Europe in a changing political environment. The contacts already established with the former members of the Warsaw Pact, including the Soviet Union, must be developed into a comprehensive partnership for security. Cooperative security structures must emerge. Our alliance, as Czechoslovak President Vaclav Havel confirmed in his address to the NATO Council on 21 March, 1991, was never a threat to others.
The ending of the East-West confrontation has opened the way for the radical reduction of excessively large military arsenals. We want conventional disarmament to be pursued consistently, in accordance with the first Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe. We want a global prohibition on chemical weapons. We want the removal of short-range nuclear missiles and of nuclear artillery ammunition - this is urgent: such weapons are increasingly destabilizing; the danger of their proliferation is growing they must disappear at long last. We expect the nuclear Powers to continue the reduction of strategic nuclear weapons.
Sixth, we want to make the CSCE capable of action. After the establishment of the Council of CSCE Foreign Ministers and of the CSCE emergency mechanism, I submitted specific proposals at the CSCE Conference on the Human Dimension, held in Moscow on 10 September this year, aimed at more effective protection for human rights, democracy and the rule of law. It must also be possible to afford such protection without the consent of the country concerned.
The right to self-determination and, directly linked with it, the rights of minorities, must be respected everywhere. Europe is heading towards more identity and more plurality. From this must not emerge neo-nationalism. European structures must absorb these developments. For all questions we must have a European response. That is a task for the European Community, and it is a task for the CSCE.
The crisis-management capability of the CSCE must be enhanced. The less necessary it becomes to protect oneself from threats from outside, the more we need a system in which all cooperate in guaranteeing common security. If we together learn to guarantee our security from one another, we in Europe will be on the way to a collective system of security.
Seventh, we Germans want the new Europe to exercise its global responsibility. It should not and will not be introspective. The trend towards a Euro-Atlantic area of cooperation stretching from Vancouver to Vladivostok opens up a historic opportunity for development for the countries of the South as well.
The world economic summit of the seven industrial nations - including Japan - faces its greatest test where global responsibilities are concerned. The triad of Worth America, Europe and Japan must prove its worth. The third world will not remain in the shadow of this development. It will benefit vitally from this new era.
The ending of the East-West conflict in Europe is at last releasing those energies tied up by the cold war which mankind now needs in order to solve the global challenges of the twenty-first century. The first fruits of this new development are already appearing. The East-West confrontation is no longer being staged in the third world. Freedom is emerging in Angola and in Cambodia, and in Afghanistan too there are signs of hope.
In the Middle East as well a historic opportunity for peace is opening up. We all hope that at the forthcoming peace conference all participants will at long last realize that there is no justifiable alternative to a genuine balance of interests that gives Israel security and peace and the Palestinians self-determination. With great commitment and unending patience. Secretary of State Baker has paved the way for such a balance. In this he has Germany's full support. The General Assembly resolution equating Zionism with racism must be repealed. We support the American initiative in that regard.
In South Africa, President De Klerk and Nelson Mandela have taken decisive steps toward creating a South Africa free from oppression and racial hatred. All citizens of that country must participate with equal rights in its political, economic and social life. This must be guaranteed by a new constitution. A democratic South Africa can and must become a locomotive of development and stability in a region still afflicted by poverty and conflicts.
The economic fruits of the new development in Europe are likewise discernible. As the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development has calculated, the single European market will mean a 7 per cent increase in the exports of developing countries to the European Community. That will boost their earnings by $10 billion. And if in a few years' time Central and Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union become regions of dynamic growth, they will also develop into important new markets for exports from the South. Above all, however, the end of the arms race between East and Heat will release tremendous energies which will benefit the third world above all.
Eighth, we Germans want the United Nations to become the main forum for action in the new world order. To that end, it is absolutely essential that Security Council resolutions be implemented, completely and unconditionally. Aggressors like Saddam Hussein must no longer be permitted to keep people in constant fear with aggression and means of mass destruction. We support President Bush in his resolve to counteract fresh provocations. Our world Organization must be able to meet the challenges of the new era. Conflict prevention, demographic policy and environmental protection must be improved.
The ending of the East-West conflict has freed the world Organization from its paralysis. This new freedom to act must now be used. Germany is prepared to play its part. The united Germany will assume all rights and meet a11 obligations of the United Nations Charter, including measures of collective security, also with our armed forces. For this purpose we intend to amend our constitution.
Ninth, in order to improve coordination of United Nations disaster relief measures, we advocate the appointment of a high-ranking representative exclusively responsible to the Secretary-General. This person would have to coordinate all international relief measures and have immediately available an emergency fund and national rescue and relief services.
We want to enhance the status of the Secretary-General himself. He has frequently spoken of this necessity, and rightly so. Now his tenure is coming to an end. The world has come to respect him as a guardian of peace, a champion of human rights, and an advocate of the poor. In an era of epochal change, he has, with clear vision and a firm hand, enhanced the reputation of the United Nations. For this the family of nations owes him a debt of gratitude and appreciation.
Tenth, we want to strengthen the instruments asserting the rule of law in the world. The experience of our history has committed us in a special way to freedom, the rule of law and human rights. We pursue these goals in Europe, and we intend to pursue them in the United Nations as well. He intend to pursue a policy which focuses on the individual, makes human rights and human dignity the measures of all human action and does not paralyze people's energy and enterprise.
The world today realizes that this is a precondition for prosperity, social progress and peace. It also realizes that despotism negates development and freedom. The alarming figure of 15 million refugees worldwide shows that the world is still far from ensuring adequate protection for human rights and the rights of minorities.
The violation of human rights must no longer be a domestic concern of individual States but a domestic concern of the community of nations as a whole. Today sovereignty must meet its limits in the responsibility of States for mankind as a whole and for the survival of Creation. When human rights are trampled under foot, the family of nations is not confined to the role of spectator. It can - it must - intervene.
We are witness to the persecution of the Kurdish people. Anyone who threatens peoples with genocide, anyone who deliberately destroys nature's already fragile equilibrium in an entire region, must be brought to account before an international tribunal. We call for an international court of justice of the United Nations where crimes against humanity, crimes against peace, genocide, war crimes and environmental criminality can be prosecuted and punished. We call for a court of justice to which anyone who feels that his human rights have been violated may appeal. We call for the proscription of torture and capital punishment.
We need an effective international environmental law regime with appropriate international controls. It must be possible to impose sanctions on countries that deliberately destroy the environment. We also have to effectively prevent environmental warfare. I ask the General Assembly to support the draft resolution on this important matter which Germany proposes to introduce.
We call upon all States to accede to the International Convention against the Taking of Hostages, and we call for sanctions against countries which tolerate hostage-taking. The World Conference on Human Rights, scheduled to take place in 1993, must deal with those questions that are of such vital importance for a new culture of international coexistence. We are looking forward to hosting the Conference in Berlin, that symbol of a new era of humanity and solidarity in Europe.
Eleventh, as in the case of civil human rights, we seek protection for economic and social human rights. The united Germany will continue to render a significant contribution to the development of the third world. In spite of the challenges presented by economic and ecological reconstruction in central and eastern Europe, the diversion of capital from South to East that had been feared has not taken place. This reflects the determination of the Western industrial nations to live up to their responsibility for development on a global scale.
Germany, in spite of the enormous domestic strain on its resources and the disproportionately high level of support for its eastern neighbours, has increased its official development assistance even more. Furthermore, the German people last year donated more than 1 billion Deutschmarks for humanitarian purposes in third-world countries. This is proof that their own country's problems and those of central and eastern Europe have not caused them to forget the plight of people in Asia, Africa and Latin America.
There is a growing appreciation in third-world countries that it is not enough simply to expect the donor countries to do their duty, but that they themselves are primarily responsible for putting their houses in order. In future the German Government will, more than previously, make its assistance
Conditional upon the extent to which recipients are prepared to create the right pluralistic, rule-of-law and free-market framework. Countries which are more concerned with strengthening their armies than seeing to the needs of their people can no longer count on our support. Considering the degree of hunger and poverty, annual military spending of close to $200 billion by the third world is irresponsible. The responsibility lies with the buyers and sellers of weapons alike. The mere freezing of this military expenditure would save about $15 billion a year - about one quarter of annual development assistance.
The restriction of arms exports requires, as a first step, greater transparency. Since 1980 I have been urging the world Organisation to establish a register in which transfers of weapons would be recorded. This proposal, which is now being advocated by the European Community as a whole, should, during this session of the General Assembly, at long last meet with broad support. We Germans will place even greater restrictions on the export of arms.
Heavy indebtedness remains for many countries one of the greatest obstacles to development. The debate on Africa has shown that we need a new arrangement particularly for the poorest countries. The amount of debt remission should correspond to the plight of the country concerned. The markets of the North must not remain closed. This situation is depriving the South of proceeds from foreign exchange amounting to an estimated $100 billion a year. That is about twice the total sum of development aid. This is why the outcome of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) negotiations is not a matter for the industrial countries among themselves. It affects above all the future of the developing countries.
Twelfth, we want the third-world countries to participate on an equal footing in the dialogue on mankind's future, in all respects - political, economic, ecological and cultural. As before, we regard the Non-Aligned Movement as an indispensable source of global stability. Mankind's new challenges, the greater interdependence and responsibility of the community of nations make new forms of dialogue based on partnership between East and Nest and between North and South imperative. The global trend towards a free society, pluralistic democracy and market economy has created new, favourable conditions for such a "dialogue of the one world". He must now use this opportunity.
While we are here debating the common future tasks of the world community, war is being waged in Europe. People are being killed, are bleeding to death. Fighting is going on in Croatia - but not only there. The President and the Prime Minister of Yugoslavia say that the army has placed itself beyond political control. They have appealed to the United Nations. The peoples of Yugoslavia have a right to peace. The Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE), the European Community and the Western European Union (WEU) are striving to bring about a cease-fire and a peace agreement. For this they require the support of the community of nations and the Security Council. He expect a binding weapons embargo. He expect the Security Council to adopt a clear, unequivocal position so that the fighting can be stopped. The use of force to achieve political ends must remain unlawful. We shall never recognize the acquisition of territory by force. Anyone aiming to alter Yugoslavia's internal and external borders by force is challenging the very foundations of human coexistence. Germany has in recent decades developed friendly relations with all peoples of Yugoslavia. We do not take sides against one people or another; we take the side of the women and mothers who do not want their husbands and sons to die in a senseless war. We take the aide of peace against war, of human rights, of the rights of minorities and the right to self-determination. We wish success to the peace conference that we together with France proposed to the arbitration commission and to the mediator. Lord Carrington. Within the framework of the European Community and the CSCE arbitration mechanism we shall make every effort to achieve a peace settlement in which the peoples of Yugoslavia alone will determine their future, as the CSCE Foreign Ministers decided under my chairmanship in Berlin on 19 June 1991.
On the threshold of the new millennium mankind faces a global challenge that overshadows all else: that of fighting poverty, reducing population growth and protecting the natural sources of life. What the twenty-first century will look like depends on the decisions we take in the next 10 years.
The concern with freedom in the past two years has changed the countenance of Europe, indeed of the world, at breathtaking speed. What could not be changed in that short period were the economic and social conditions of the people. If a billion people have to manage on less than one dollar a day, if 23 per cent of the world's population commands over 85 per cent of the world's income, then everybody's security is threatened. Mau is still waging war against creation.
We need a comprehensive peace pact between peoples, between nations, and between man and nature. These are the tasks for a new world domestic policy.
We need to realise that the social issue on a global scale is the great challenge of the new era. Only decent human conditions for all create freedom. It is only to this kind of freedom that the future will belong. In the last three and a half decades the population of the third world has almost doubled. In the next generation the developing countries will account for over 80 per cent of the world's population. Today already, more than one third of the world's population is undernourished. What will the situation be like a generation hence? This question in itself indicates the whole dimension of our responsibility. Our task is to meet the needs of the present and at the same time protect the Interests of future generations - and also to attempt to reconcile economy and ecology.
The accumulation of arms during the cold war has consumed astronomical sums. How it is a question of directing our combined efforts to the central task of the twenty-first century: solving the world's social, demographic and ecological problems and pursuing disarmament.
This is the spiritual and moral challenge confronting the nations of the world. New thinking is required from each one of us. The signs are there. When did the voice of freedom and democracy speak with such force as today? It is true: the world ha3 changed fundamentally. It has changed through the spirit of freedom. Everywhere human rights and human dignity are gaining ground. Hardly ever have we been more aware of this than on 21 August this year, when the Moscow coup against freedom failed. On exactly that day 23 years previously the Soviet army had brutally crushed the Prague Spring. This time the soldiers of the same army refused to shoot at the people who had gathered in Moscow's "Square of Free Russia" to defend freedom and democracy with their lives. There it became clear to the whole world:
Mikhail Gorbachev's courageous reformist policy has become irreversible. Today already he has taken his place in the annals of history.
The events of that day gave the lie to all those in the West who did not believe that the peoples of the Soviet Union had the will for freedom and democracy. Boris Yeltsin, Eduard Shevardnadze, Anatoly Sobchak, Gavril Popov and Alexander Yakovlev stood unshakably with many, many of their fellow-citizens for freedom and peace.
What Europe and the world was twice denied in this century our generation has the chance to fulfil: President Bush's vision of a new world order. It is the vision of a world community sharing responsibility on the basis of law, the self-determination of nations, international solidarity and respect for man and nature.
If this historic opportunity for new and lasting international solidarity is not to evaporate through economic want, then the West just not forsake the people who risked their lives for freedom. I said it in Davos in 1987 and I say it again today: this concerns Europe's, America's and Japan's joint responsibility for global peace. The chance to create a lastingly free and democratic new Soviet Union is a chance for the whole world.
The German American philosopher Hans Jonas said: "Hope derives from responsibility for the universe". Europe has reflected on its fundamental values and is building its common home. In spite of all the difficulties, this peaceful undertaking is a message of hope to the world.
The united Germany places itself for all time on the side of freedom and democracy, on the side of human rights and human dignity, on the side of the right of self-determination and of protection for minorities. The German people side once and for all with the inalienable values which alone permit a humane society to develop. That is the message of the united Germany to the community of nations to which I have the honour to speak here today for the first time as the representative of one Germany. As a European Germany we intend to face the global challenges. In this we regard every person on earth as our neighbour.
﻿
I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your election as President of the General Assembly. Apart from being a tribute to you personally, to your diplomatic talent and your sense of reason, your election honours the representative of a country whose prominent role and place in the Arab world and on the international scene are known to all.
May I also express our gratitude to the Secretary-General, Mr. Peres de Cuellar, whose indefatigable energy in the service of peace has given so many peoples grounds for hope, and which will have made its mark on our time.
The Organisation is welcoming seven new Members. This is a momentous event, one which is cause for celebration. Welcome to Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. Their return to our midst redresses an injustice that had no equal and effaces the criminal act committed against these peoples.
Welcome to the great Korean people, heir to an ancient and distinguished civilisation, who come to the Organization through the separate admission of two States. We hope that they will thus find occasion for friendly dialogue, which will enable them to recover the unity to which they aspire.
Welcome to the Marshall Islands and to Micronesia. These two States will bring to the Organization the benefits of the ancient wisdom of the Pacific Islands.
The years 1989 and 1990 rang with the sounds of liberation - moments of historic happiness rarely encountered - and 1991 has seen the movement continue and amplify.
History has suddenly accelerated. A real revolution has radically altered our points of reference and swept away old habits. A new world is emerging. It will be based, members can be sure, on freedom, solidarity, security and the rule of law. 
In the course of the past year, freedom has continued to gain ground. Let us rejoice, for freedom is the sun that shines on our peoples: freedom for Kuwait, which was reinstated to sovereignty and independence - admittedly at the price of the use of force - thanks to the new capacity of the United Nations to further the rule of law; burgeoning freedom in South Africa, where the barriers of apartheid have at last been dismantled - may this impetus not be slowed; and hope of freedom and peace in Cambodia. Speaking from this rostrum in 1988, the President of the French Republic proposed an international conference to help this martyred country regain unity and peace.
	It has taken three years for the realities of the situation to prevail, three years of patient negotiations, three years of persistence; for the inevitability of discord seemed to impinge on the slightest progress. The convening of a conference on Cambodia will at last set the seal on a peace agreement. I should like to pay a tribute to Prince Sihanouk, President of the Supreme National Council, who is sitting in our midst at the head of the Cambodian delegation. His patience and sense of dialogue have once again revealed his qualities as a Head of State capable of reuniting a people and reconciling it with itself. I should like to wish a happy future to the people of Cambodia, whose suffering I shared and whose aspirations I hope to share.
- Freedom of choice offered to the peoples of Western Sahara through a referendum organised by the United Nations in accordance with the wish of all the parties concerned.
- Hope in the Middle East. After so many years of conflict and absence of understanding, the prospect of the convening of a peace conference provides the opportunity for a settlement based on law and justice, a comprehensive peace settlement, it should be recalled, which should therefore enshrine the right of all to live in peace within secure and recognized borders, by giving the Palestinians a land and a state. Yes, freedom for the Palestinian people.
- Freedom for Lebanon, which is dressing its wounds and putting an end to its strife. Let it affirm its sovereignty over the whole of its national territory by the disarmament of militia forces, the withdrawal of foreign troops and the implementation of Security Council resolution 425 (1978), Let it boldly address its task of reconstruction and quickly return to the path of democracy by holding free elections. Those are France's wishes for Lebanon, which is so close to it in heart, in mind and in history.
- Freedom too for Moscow, where democratic forces have swept away factions which thought they could use violence to impose the return of an order that had been driven from the scene but remains present in our memories, an order that has been overturned and condemned. Let us pay a tribute to those who threw up the barricades of freedom and confronted the threat so that the will of the people could prevail. Hai1 to the defenders of the White House of Moscow.
In Kuwait, in the Soviet Union and in the Baltic countries, freedom is gaining ground everywhere and democracy is smiling on peoples. The points marked with a cross on the map of oppression and tutelage are gradually fading, and as they fade the old world order, with its compromises and deadlocks, is disappearing. This transformation is taking place before our very eyes. Let us look directly at it. Hope is replacing threat, dialogue is being set in train beyond all expectations, and the world rings with the sound of statues being toppled.
But new clouds are already appearing on the horizon. Will we see those who are gaining their freedom and independence take the path of blind nationalism and make anachronistic territorial claims? Will the clash of interests take the place of ideological confrontations? Roads and struggles of this kind lead nowhere, as experience and history have taught us. Dictatorship, poverty, exodus and war are their end result. To avoid these dangers, we must devise formulas and solutions appropriate for our times. Let us begin by building new solidarities, and use the opportunity to turn towards the future.
With regard to building new solidarities, let us first speak of Europe. It is experiencing on its own soil the world's last great phase of decolonisation. I wish to state here that France will be at one with all peoples which choose to make their voice heard on the international scene and which peacefully and democratically express their resolve to accede to independence. For self-determination is indivisible; and it cannot be an object of bargaining. Let us recall a few simple rules that may help these movements to mature in harmony:
First, every people that wants it has the right to self-determination and sovereignty. Secondly, this presupposes a clear definition of the rights of minorities; we should think about the role the United Nations could play in this respect. Thirdly, it is essential to ensure respect for international treaties, and hence recognition of borders. Fourthly, borders may be changed only through dialogue or, failing that, through arbitration. Lastly, good neighbourly relations can be governed by freely accepted agreements.
What France has proposed for Yugoslavia holds true in a general way for everyone.
Let us spare ourselves a return to empires and opportunistic alliances in the twenty-first century. Let us note our regional complementarities, derive advantage from them and give them a context.
Is this, after all, not the purpose of the Community construction in Europe so well described just a moment ago by my colleague Mr. Van Den Broek? Why have we spent 40 years building a European Community - first of six, then of nine, and now of 12? Because we were convinced that peace, prosperity and our identity would be established in a lasting manner only through the sharing of our national sovereignties. Those who had doubts must now bow to the evidence. The European Community has become a benchmark for some and for others a source of admiration. The European Community owes it to itself to continue to astonish the world by pursuing its integration, planned for the end of 1991. Strengthened by a Germany at last reunited, the European Economic Community will continue its progress towards unity.
The new democracies of central and eastern Europe have understood this necessity of union and cooperation and have turned eagerly and hopefully to the Community. Within the Twelve, France in turn understands this request, this expectation, which it hopes will be answered as soon as possible by preparations for these countries' admission to the European Economic Community. This will of course take time. That is all the more reason to get down to the task right away.
But are we to do nothing during this period, leaving these democracies, which are so close to us, uncertain as to their future? Of course not. Europe needs a new pact right now.
Aware of the danger that still threatens it, can our continent - our ancient continent - rally to preserve the gains of the past few years and go forward? This is the essence of the confederation France has proposed. Our aim is to go beyond the logic of aid, which out of necessity has been the reason for most actions so far, in order to arrive at a real political, economic and social community on the continent, in the spirit of the founding fathers of a free Europe in the immediate post-war period.
It would be a paradox if just as this Europe - which will become more and more confederal - was taking shape, a parallel but contrary movement towards dismemberment and break-up were to prevail elsewhere. That is why we hope that the republics of the USSR succeed in exercising their new responsibilities and organising their relations as they intend to do, and succeed in defining, at the international level, as reason and the course of events dictate, the expression of their common interests and resolve. We hope they can do so with due respect for the principles and norms of security and stability accepted in Europe.
Yugoslavia, which is being torn apart, represents the other example of a necessary transformation. May the legitimate aspirations for freedom which are being expressed there take into consideration the interests of all. May the rights of minorities be preserved and the advantages of a space shared by ill the peoples of Yugoslavia be maintained and guaranteed. That, it seems to me, is the road to peace and regained prosperity. But none of this will be possible so long as the fighting persists. The conflagration is building and threatens to spread. Time is running out. Yugoslavia is heading deeper into an impasse. France believes it is incumbent on the United Nations to bring the parties to their senses by demanding compliance with the cease-fire, by showing them the way to dialogue and to negotiation that has been mapped out with their consent by the European Community, by saying to all that peace has its requirements, theirs and others'. France, which is the current President of the Security Council, will leave no stone unturned to achieve this end.
Can I fail to refer to the solidarity between the North and the South? No. The planet is one. Who can believe in a future in which less than one quarter of the world's population enjoys the benefits of progress while the remaining three quarters are abandoned to despair?
In the course of the past five years, Africa's gross national product has grown less quickly than its population. Today's 500 million Africans will be 1.5 billion in the year 2025, while the sources of financing are drying up. Net capital input fell in real terms from 1986 to 1990. World Bank and International Monetary Fund transfers are currently negative, with African countries paying back far more than they receive.
Without wishing to sound like an oracle, France has consistently spoken of this intolerable and inevitable trend in order to seek a greater effort of solidarity from the rich. My country senses it is being better heeded now, and I hope that is true. It welcomes this especially as another danger is threatening the developing countries: the danger of a society exploding in response to excessive demands.
It is appropriate, certainly, to ensure that the assistance to developing countries is well employed. That is the best way to generate official and private resources and to promote regional integration, which is still in its early stages.
In this respect, the Treaty for the Constitution of the Common Market of the South - the MERCOSUR Treaty - signed in March 1991, which groups Argentina, Brazil, Uruguay and Paraguay in a common market, is a good example of what has to be done. It should not remain an isolated instance. I am thinking it particular of Africa, where plans to set up a large common agricultural market should be pursued. The franc zone, with its single currency, offers a favourable terrain for such a market.
France, together with its European Economic Community partners, intends to support these efforts. It does not intend to render them useless by imposing requirements that go beyond what is reasonable.
Lastly, one cannot speak of solidarity without mentioning the environment. The international community has already held debates on and carried out research into this important subject. It has launched significant concrete programs. France welcomes, for example, the success of the initiative on the decision to protect Antarctica, which it took in 1989 together with Australia, subsequently joined by Italy and Belgium. The Madrid protocol, which will be signed on 4 October 1991, declares Antarctica to be a "natural reserve devoted to peace and science". This responds to the wishes of all those who desire to safeguard our common heritage, our planet. It should inspire other actions.
I believe that everything I have said is of a conservative nature. Yet the exacerbation of risks and the emergence of new dangers require us to think on a new scale and give free rein to our ambition.
Thus, we warmly welcome the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, which is to be held at Rio de Janeiro in 1992 and to which France is lending its assistance and support. That Conference will be preceded by the meeting in Paris at the end of the year, called by the President of the French Republic, which will be attended by all the non-governmental organisations concerned.
The efforts to combat desertification, to preserve and harness the resources of the great forests and to protect the ozone layer, biological diversity and the seas and the oceans: these are subjects of pre-eminent interest to all mankind.
	
It. would be pointless to speak of the future of mankind without referring to security. The end of the cold war provides an exceptional opportunity, so let us seize it by pursuing disarmament world wide. In that sphere my country's policy is consistent with a number of principles that I would like to enumerate briefly.
The most important agreement on conventional arms reduction in Europe was signed at the Paris summit in 1990. Its ratification can wait no longer. Prance is committed to this and hopes that all the signatories will proceed to ratification, thus making it possible to move on to a new phase in these negotiations.
France duly welcomed the signing in Moscow of the strategic arms reduction Treaty - the START Treaty. The reduction of the strategic arsenals of the United States and the USSR, which will take several years, should be followed by new commitments now. France will join in the negotiations once those arsenals have been reduced to a level warranting our participation, under the terms set forth in this very Hall by the President of the French Republic in 1985.
For Europeans, the existence and availability of nuclear armaments raise specific problems which have emerged with the changes in the Soviet Union. France has asked that the four Powers concerned meet as early as possible to examine these problems together.
On a more general note, France is in favour of global disarmament. In June 1991 it made public its plan encompassing all aspects of security. It announced its decision to adhere to the nuclear non-proliferation Treaty. My country will submit the instruments of accession before the year's end.
Already, we are taking steps to exercise complete control over exports related to nuclear energy. France is in favour of finalising at an early date the convention on the final elimination of chemical weapons. It hopes that the convention will be signed next year. The treaty banning chemical weapons should be accompanied by appropriate means for monitoring compliance, without which its effectiveness will be compromised.  For while treaties prepare the way for security, it is confidence that creates it. There is no real confidence without control. The example of Iraq shows this only too well.
Strict compliance with accords and monitoring are the keystones of disarmament, and it is, in my view, for the United Nations to promote accession to these treaties, to monitor their implementation and impose penalties, where necessary, when agreements are violated. Let us, therefore, give the United Nations the means to carry out this task.
My concluding comments will concern strengthening the role of the United Nations. How can this be accomplished? Our Organisation, which is the universal expression of our solidarity, has done more in these past years than reflect our concerns. It has done more than it had done in past decades. With the backing of its Secretary-General and the determined support of the five permanent members of the Security Council, the United Nations has been a driving force. It has affirmed the law on numerous occasions and enforced compliance where necessary.
The United Nations perseverance on behalf of human rights prompted South Africa to move towards abolishing apartheid. The efforts to help restore democracy in Haiti, the part played in the peace process in El Salvador, the Secretary-General's peace plan of 21 May for Afghanistan are all initiatives that have marked for history the growing role of the United Nations.
But it is undoubtedly in regard to the Gulf crisis that the progress has been the most spectacular. The main point was to stop aggression and to lay the often innovative foundations for order through law.
The United Nations could not remain passive in the face of the tragedy which threatened the very existence of the Kurdish people. For the first time, through a Security Council resolution, the United Nations affirmed that the sufferings of a population justified immediate intervention. My country is proud to have proposed the adoption of resolution 688 (1991).
Yet, as members are aware, none of this could be taken for granted. Today the foundations of a new legal order, a new humanitarian order, have been laid. Why not adopt a code of conduct affirming the right to humanitarian assistance every time the integrity and survival of a people is threatened?
However, we must not lose sight of the fact that the progress that has been made is not sufficient to offset the reversals where these exist. If tomorrow, in the conflict between Israel and the Arab countries, the United Nations were to give up its efforts to require compliance with the principles which have earned it its success, it would quickly lose in credibility what it has earned in prestige. The Organization is too much a grande dame now to tolerate disrespect.
At a time when France holds the presidency of the Security Council, it is pleased and proud to contribute to the adoption of two important resolutions, which I hope will be adopted, on Yugoslavia and Cambodia.
More than ever before, the values which underlie the principles of our Organization are a benchmark. New States have joined us and others will follow. National minorities are claiming the right to preserve what constitutes their identity and cohesion. What are they doing? They look to the United Nations. Individuals are thirsting for justice. What do they do?
They invoke the United Nations moral jurisdiction. Never have democracy and human rights - the former thought by some to have been superseded and the latter considered by others the product of an impoverished mind - constituted such important guidelines for a world urgently seeking peace and prosperity.
Let us therefore prepare, clearly and with enthusiasm, for the great rendezvous of 1993s the World Conference on Human Rights, which will also be the rendezvous of democracy victorious.
It is there that, half a century after the cataclysm that shook the world, and the long night that deprived too many peoples of the light of freedom, our generation will finally be able to say: We have been worthy of mankind.
﻿Let me first congratulate you, Mr. Vice-President, and, through you, the President, on your appointments to the high offices you hold. He are very confident that throughout the proceedings of this session of the General Assembly you and the President will carry forward our deliberations with the customary good order and good sense, and we wish you well in this task.
Last year almost of all of us speaking from this rostrum spoke of the dramatic pace of international events. Perhaps we all expected that after those dramas there would be a return to the normal tenor of diplomatic life. But, in fact, during the last 12 months change has continued with a speed and intensity that no one could have foreseen. Some of this change has been beneficial, flowing from the end of the cold war, which we all welcomed. But other changes have reminded us how much hatred and bitterness can still shape the course of our world. This general debate is the right occasion for us to see if we can trace a pattern in all these events and draw the right lessons for the future of our Organisation.
First I would like to add my welcome to the seven new Members of the United Nations, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, the Republic of Korea and the Democratic Peoples' Republic of Korea, the Republic of the Marshall Islands and the Federated States of Micronesia. The presence of you all will enrich this Organisation. Mistrust between East and Meat kept Korea out of the United Nations for too long now the new approaches in international relations allow you to take the seats which should have been yours long ago.

It may be rash, but I believe that we are now watching the collapse of the principle of empire. By that, I mean the principle that people can be forced to work together under a central rule in which they do not themselves participate and which has no respect for their rights. In some places the end of this principle of empire is coming slowly. In others its collapse has been sudden. For example we are seeing beyond doubt the disintegration of the last of the great colonial empires of the last century, namely, that put together by the Russian Tsars. That system, which was transformed into a communist empire by Lenin and Stalin, is now smashed for good - and smashed not by its critics or competitors from outside but by the peoples whom it sought to imprison. That old system has gone; a new system is struggling to birth. The new system tries to accommodate the principle of national identity without following that principle into anarchy.
Nationalism is a legitimate expression of a people's aspirations; but we have all learned the hard way that nationalism is not enough. A new flag, an old flag revived, a new capital, a new parliament, new uniforms do not in themselves bring security and happiness. Nationalism can be sterile unless it respects the rights of individuals and minorities. Nationalism can be dangerous unless nation States work together for collective security and collective prosperity.
So consent within nations, cooperation between nations, must be the pattern at which we aim.
These or similar thoughts must have been in many of our minds as we watched the tragedy of Yugoslavia unfolding. I hope and believe that the Security Council, at its meeting this afternoon, can add its unique authority to the efforts already being made by the European Community and by the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) to help those among all the peoples of Yugoslavia who want to see an end to bloodshed and the beginning of a new pattern for their future. I share the emotions and anxieties expressed a few minutes ago here by Hans Dietrich Genscher, on behalf of Germany, and all of us in the European Community will work strenuously, continuously, to help the Yugoslavs find that new pattern for their future.
We cannot prescribe or dictate this pattern either for the peoples of the Soviet Union or for the peoples of Yugoslavia. We can show sympathy, understanding and help for the huge task of reform now under way. In the Soviet Union when people are hungry this winter we can help to feed them out of the surpluses of the West and, I hope, of central and eastern Europe. We can provide - we are providing - technical assistance, particularly to help bring the food from the farms to the shops. We can build up our relationships with the Republics of the Soviet Union as they gain in authority. He can continue the friendly pressure for human rights embodied in the Charter of Paris of the CSCE, signed last November. It is not in the interests of the International community that the Soviet Union should entirely disintegrate, leaving no central authority to deal with those matters where central decisions are needed. Dramatic progress has been made over arms control and disarmament. That progress should not be dissipated or put at risk by lack of adequate coherent authority in the Soviet Union. The Republics are making their own arrangements with the centre to influence the course of foreign policy, and we look forward to the outcome. But it would be a pity, from the point of view of the United Nations, if the cooperation which we have recently come to expect from the Soviet Union on, for example, the Middle East, the problems of the Gulf, the problems of Africa, were dissipated just when its usefulness is most apparent.
I mentioned South Africa. The situation there is entirely different, but there is one common thread. Here too we are watching the disappearance of a regime which was based on suppression and discrimination. No one can now suppose that apartheid can survive or can return. The courage shown by State President De Klerk, Mr. Nelson Mandela and other leaders of the South African people deserves to be recognized and encouraged. Here again, it is not for the outside world to decide on the constitutional pattern of the new South Africa, though I think we are entitled to urge forward those who are now beginning that task. It is for us, and particularly perhaps as far as we are concerned for the members of the Commonwealth at our forthcoming Heads of Government meeting in Harare, to consider how we can give practical help to the new South Africa. No one who studies the statistics of population growth in that country measured against economic production, no one who visits the townships outside Durban, Johannesburg and Cape Town can doubt either the need or the urgency of this help if the new South Africa is to make a good start and establish itself as a helpful, supportive neighbour to the other countries of southern Africa.
Against this background, against this pattern, how can we build up the performance of our United Nations? Nothing of course changes the elementary duty of the United Nations to do all it can to protect its Members by checking and reversing aggression. That is fundamental.
Iraq's invasion of Kuwait was an unusually clear example. Now that Iraq is out of Kuwait, the United Nations is insisting - for the first time - that a Member State forgo weapons of mass destruction and pay compensation to its victims. The United Nations is resolved to maintain sanctions until Iraq shows that it is playing a constructive part in regional stability, until Iraq observes the rules of international law. Iraq has to comply with the Security Council resolutions, which are mandatory. If it does not, it must face the consequences, and the consequences of persistent defiance would be grave indeed.
So we all share the responsibility to prevent the re-emergence of a danger such as the one we have experienced from Iraq. Everyone accepts that many States depend on arms imports to assure a reasonable level of security and the inherent right of self-defence, which is recognized in our Charter.
But the conflict in the Gulf showed how peace can be undermined when a country acquires an arsenal which goes way beyond the needs of self-defence, and in the United Nations have to make sure that that does not happen again. We believe that all States should observe and apply the three principles: transparency, consultation and action.
And that is why, as a significant step towards transparency, Britain has proposed a universal register of arms transfers under the auspices of the United Nations. Such a register would alert the International community to an attempt by a country to build up holdings of conventional weapons beyond a reasonable level. With the support of our partners in the European Community, and others, Britain is sponsoring a draft resolution at this session of the General Assembly which we hope will result in the prompt establishment of such a register.
The process of consultations on arms exports is well under way. It has been discussed at many international gatherings in recent months, and we have been encouraged by the willingness of arms exporters, large and small, to exchange information about arms sales which hitherto has been jealously guarded. After that, we have to harmonize as best we can the criteria - the tests - by which each arms exporter judges a possible sale.
Openness of this kind will encourage confidence. Confidence allows action. In Europe we agreed on the Treaty on Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) last November. The United States and the Soviet Union signed the START Treaty in July. The main Powers, the main arms suppliers are beginning to reduce the level of their own armaments; they are not simply asking other people to do so. The search for this lower level of armaments is never going to be easy in the real world, and I think we are justified in taking it step by step, provided that one step does in fact follow another. We are justified in being realistic, provided that realism is not an excuse for inaction. The British Government announced yesterday that henceforth we shall adopt a policy of full-scope safeguards as a condition of the supply of significant new nuclear supplies. This means that such goods will not be exported to any country, other than the nuclear-weapon States, where there are any un-safeguarded nuclear installations.
We believe there is another lesson which comes from our experiences in the Middle East in the last year. It is the need to handle emergencies better. Tragedy has touched not just the Middle East, but Bangladesh and Africa, and I should like to pay tribute to the international agencies for all the devotion and effort they have put into tackling these tragedies. But we have learned again that coordination, early response, effective delivery are crucial.
That is why we are proposing a new and, we hope, more effective structure for handling emergencies and disasters starting with an inventory of human and material resources available from donors and non-governmental organizations. At the apex - at the top of this structure - we would like to see one high-powered official immediately under the Secretary-General. There needs to be prompt decision-making and funding in the critical early weeks of an emergency. Preparation is the key to success and would, under our proposal, be the responsibility of one person. The United Nations is best placed to deal with the human consequences of natural disasters.
The United Nations, as has already been stressed, can do more to protect the global environment. Agreement on how we conserve the resources of our planet and use them for sustainable development is equally vital for the future of the world. We have to establish clear priorities soon for what next year's Conference on Environment and Development, in Bio, can achieve.
The United Nations can also help with another problem which is looming larger in our world. I refer to the increasing number of migrants around the world. Eighty per cent of refugees are in the third world. Developed countries face an unprecedented growth in the numbers seeking asylum. Some of these are refugees as defined by the United Nations in its 1951 Convention.
But most are not. We would not be able to continue to offer political asylum in the present way if the system were overwhelmed by economic migrants. Such migrants can deprive the countries they come from of youth and talent and, as we see in Hong Kong - and begin to see in Western Europe - economic migration above a certain level can also create serious political and social strains in the receiving country.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has a vital role within its sphere and its sphere expands all the time. But the international community as a whole has to be increasingly aware of the fundamental nature of this problem.
And so, resistance to aggression, search for disarmament, relief of suffering: these are all parts of the gigantic and I must say growing tasks laid on the United Nations. The Secretary-General has always laid a particular emphasis on preventive diplomacy, on trying to tackle a dispute or a danger before it explodes into violence and suffering. And we have learned to rely on his combination of skill, firmness and courtesy - a combination which he has made very much his own. El Salvador, Western Sahara, Angola: in all these the United Nations has been active either in seeking to prevent trouble or in steering a problem onto a new track away from the suffering which has already occurred. I welcome in particular, and most recently, the recognition by Guatemala of the independence of the State of Belize. This makes a big contribution to regional stability.
It is very good news also that in the last few days the remaining obstacles to a comprehensive political settlement on Cambodia have been overcome. This settlement now needs to be concluded with all speed. The United Nations will remain firmly engaged in carrying out the peace process and this will be an ambitious and, indeed, expensive, unprecedented undertaking. But the price here for Cambodia - for Indochina generally - is very great.
May I, on behalf of the country intimately involved in another of these problems - the affairs of Cyprus - wish the Secretary-General particular success in bringing that dispute to an agreed conclusion. He knows he has our full support in trying to persuade those closely concerned first into a negotiation and then into a settlement.
Through all these different events, these different problems - and many others I have not mentioned - we can see the same thrust. It is a thrust towards better government, more representative government, better cooperation between nations, greater concern for the individual and his or her rights. No one with any sense of history supposes that this current will run with the same strength and at the same time through all the countries and continents represented here. There will be bastions where authoritarian rule still meets only a faint challenge. There will be cruel and bloody quarrels resurrected from a past which we hoped was dead. There will be setbacks, occasions where hope is stimulated, then delayed or even reversed) and it would be patronizing for any one of us to suppose that there is only one model, only one type of institution which can reflect this trend. There is no Westminster model, no Paris model, no Washington model, certainly no Kremlin model which can be exported unchanged to Africa, Latin America, the Middle East or Asia. We all set about it in different ways.
In negotiations inside our European community, we are working hard for an important European step forward before the end of this year along the path of joint action by sovereign States. The peoples of the Soviet Union, as I have mentioned, faced with a quite different set of problems, will be working out their own answers. In Latin America, in Africa and Asia, the same trends are clearly visible. The age of alibis is over. The rhetoric of the 1950s and the 1960s - which as I remember used to echo rather wearily in this Hall - makes no sense any more. Imperialism can no longer, in 1991, be blamed for bad government. The capitalist system can no longer be blamed for lack of prosperity. The evidence, the facts, the experience of the last decade have proved the contrary. I believe that the United Nations, the Commonwealth to which we belong, the regional organizations can all help this realism to expand and deepen.
He are talking, are we not, about consent in place of command, freer trade, edging out protectionism, honest government replacing corruption, government based on elections rather than dictatorship, nations cooperating instead of seeking to dominate. These are the aims - clearly stated in our Charter, clearly stated in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Sometimes they have seemed far out of reach. I believe that, as a result of recent events and currents, they are no longer out of reach and we in Britain, the British Government, will work enthusiastically and energetically within the United Nations to bring them within the grasp of all.
﻿I have great pleasure in congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the General Assembly at its forty-sixth session. I am confident that your wise leadership will enable this session to deal successfully with the broad agenda before it. You may count on my delegation's cooperation in the discharge of your onerous responsibilities. I would like to record my appreciation for the energetic and imaginative presidency of your predecessor, Ambassador Guido de Marco of Malta.
The Secretary-General of the United Nations, His Excellency Mr. Perez de Cuellar, who has served the international community at a critical turning-point in modern history, deserves our deep gratitude and unstinting admiration. His indefatigable energy, dedication, diligence, imagination and resourcefulness have enabled the United Nations to play a pivotal role in the resolution of many crisis situations.
I am delighted to welcome in our midst the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the Republic- of Korea. India enjoys excellent relations with both and trusts that their admission to the United Nations will further contribute to dialogue and reconciliation in the Korean peninsula. This would also enable them to contribute more effectively to the strengthening of peace and security in the region and in the world at large. We are happy that the Baltic Republics - Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania - have taken their rightful place in the Organization. Similarly, I should like to congratulate the Federated States of Micronesia and the Republic of the Marshall Islands on their admission to the United Nations.
In the year that has elapsed since the forty-fifth session of the General Assembly, India and the world lost a distinguished statesman in the person of Mr. Rajiv Gandhi, the former Prime Minister of India. Rajiv Gandhi's commitment and dedication to the cause of peace and international understanding naturally made him an extremely ardent supporter of the United Nations. We firmly believed that the Organisation, where the entire international community is represented, offers an ideal forum to tackle the manifold problems facing mankind: eradication of poverty, disarmament, environmental conservation, elimination of the menace of drugs and so on. He was particularly concerned about the threat of total annihilation posed by nuclear arsenals, and he will long be remembered for the Action Plan for a nuclear-weapon-free and non-violent world that he presented to the special session on disarmament in 19BB.
The recent dramatic changes in the world have led to a restructuring of international relations. After decades of the cold war, there is a move towards dialogue to replace confrontation, trust to replace suspicion and, above all, peace and cooperation to replace strife and discord. Democracy is taking root in the Eastern European countries, which are, at the same time, making efforts to integrate into the world economy. The process of change in the Soviet Union, initiated by President Gorbachev's policies of perestroika and glasnost, has received further momentum recently. Elsewhere in the world, too, there is evidence of the successful assertion of the democratic aspirations of the people. In our own region, there are the shining examples of Bangladesh and Nepal. As the Secretary-General has aptly put it in his report on the work of the Organization:
"Today there are far more solid grounds for hope than there are reasons for frustration and fear." 
While welcoming these positive changes, we cannot but be aware of the formidable obstacles we still face in the creation of an equitable and just world order. Glaring inequalities continue to plague our planet. Disparities among countries and groups of countries have not only persisted, but have also widened. If the promise of a restructured framework for international relations is to be realised, it must address the interests of all and must be accepted by all.
India was among the first to speak out, several decades ago, against the division of the world into hostile camps. The policy of non-alignment, embraced by most of the newly independent nations, stressed the right of nations to determine their own destinies. The Non-Aligned Movement called upon the super-Powers not only to end their rivalry but also to work in cooperation for the benefit of the world. The present situation, marked by the disappearance of bloc rivalries and their replacement by increasing cooperation among major Powers, is a vindication of the Movement's basic plank. As the recent meeting of the Ministers of the non-aligned countries in Accra declared, the Movement will continue to be an important factor in international relations by pursuing the goal of establishing a society based on social, economic and political justice through dialogue and cooperation.
The relaxation of tensions in international relations has inevitably led to progress in the resolution of a number of crisis situations. In Central America, Nicaragua and El Salvador have ceased to be arenas of conflict and tension. Peace has dawned in Angola with the signing of an accord between the parties concerned. Cambodia is on the verge of a negotiated solution. Cyprus and Afghanistan also seem to be moving towards a peaceful settlement. In Western Sahara, a referendum sponsored by the United Nations is about to be held, ending decades of acrimony and conflict in the region.
The crucial role that the United Nations has started to play in these and other crisis situations is in keeping with its original mandate. The convergence of the objectives of the permanent members of the Security Council has led to a consensus among them on several issues, as envisaged in 1945. The United Nations, at the same time, needs to be strengthened and reformed in order to live up to the expectations placed in it.
In this connection, one of the challenges faced by the United Nations today is to make it truly representative of the interests and aspirations of all its Members and to make it an arena of cooperative action of all nations and peoples.
As the Non-Aligned Movement has recently reiterated, the current efforts at reform of the United Nations should include measures designed to make the decision-making process at the United Nations, particularly in the Security Council, more democratic and transparent. In this context, we should examine, as a matter of urgency, the proposals before us for an expansion of the Security Council to reflect the increased membership of the United Nations and to ensure a more equitable and balanced representation of the Members of the United Nations in the Council.
This year has seen the conclusion of the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START), an outstanding achievement in the field of nuclear disarmament. For the first time in history, there is going to be real reduction in the strategic nuclear forces of the United States and the Soviet Union. This has been long overdue, but there is no reason to be complacent. The process of reduction of nuclear weapons must continue. The START reductions are very limited and are confined to numbers, without any effect on the quality of these weapons. The reductions should now be deeper, quicker and should involve all the nuclear-weapon States. The Treaty should not lead to qualitative upgrading of the remaining arsenals, nor should the warheads released be reused in other systems.
Nuclear weapons have no place in today's world and with the end of the cold war the irrelevance of the doctrine of nuclear deterrence stands further exposed. Unfortunately, new theories of deterrence are being developed in order to legitimise the continued possession end Improvement of nuclear weapons. Deterrence is now being conceived either in the balance-of-power context or against the so-called delinquent powers among developing countries.
The action plan proposed by India at the third special session on disarmament in 1988 assumes increased relevance today. The present is the opportune moment to commence work for a new treaty to give legal effect to a binding commitment by the nuclear-weapon States to eliminate nuclear weapons within a time-bound framework, and by all non-nuclear-weapon States not to cross the nuclear threshold. The implementation of the action plan could also help in ending the unnatural division of the world into nuclear "haves" and "have-nots" and the need to erect all kinds of discriminatory ad hoc regimes to sustain such a division.
The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty symbolises this division. India has not accepted the Treaty because it does not impose reciprocal obligations on the nuclear-weapon States to eliminate nuclear weapons. Furthermore, the Treaty enforces inequitable full-scale safeguards on all the nuclear activities of the non-nuclear-weapon States without imposing commensurate obligations on the nuclear-weapon States.
Nevertheless, I should like to state that, even without having signed the Non-Proliferation Treaty, India has scrupulously adhered to a non-proliferation policy and has never helped any other nation in developing nuclear weapons. We shall continue to abide by such a policy.
We also have our best opportunity in the coming year to conclude a global convention banning chemical weapons. India is committed to working along with all those delegations that wish to complete the work on a draft chemical-weapons convention within the stipulated time frame. What remains to be done in the field of verification, compliance and consultative mechanism should be accomplished without further delay through common effort and understanding. He should all realise that the greater good of humanity is at stake in the abolition of chemical weapons and this good should not be compromised for lesser, short-term ends.
The Gulf crisis earlier this year underscored the inadmissibility of aggression by one country against another. Like the rest of the international community, we feel gratified that aggression has been reversed. We rejoice that Kuwait is once again a sovereign independent State. The Gulf region has long been a focal point of tension and instability. This region is our neighbour, and we are hopeful and confident that, following the recent crisis, there will be peace and stability in the region.
As a member of the Security Council since January of this year, India has tried to play a constructive role in the Council's effort to deal with the Gulf crisis. We lent support to all endeavours to secure the withdrawal of Iraq from Kuwait without resorting to war. Once the war started, we combined our efforts with those of like-minded countries to bring it to a speedy end and, in any case, to ensure that the destruction and devastation unleashed by the war remained limited. We also tried to assert the Security Council's role in guiding the course of the war and in calling for a cease-fire. Being conscious throughout of the humanitarian aspects of the crisis, we made a number of proposals in the Council to provide succour to the innocent civilian victims of the conflict.
The Gulf crisis and the ensuing war severely damaged the economies of many countries, including my own. Nevertheless, we remained in step with the international community in imposing comprehensive sanctions. The Gulf crisis demonstrated that in the present era of global economic interdependence, the imposition of sanctions in a region, particularly when that region happens to be a major source of the energy supply, is bound to have an adverse effect on the economies of a large number of other countries both within and outside the region.
Our experience of invoking Article 50 of the Charter to seek redress was, to say the least, both frustrating and disappointing. The consideration of our case took place after long delays and it resulted only in a call on Member States and United Nations specialised agencies to give attention to our problems. A lesson that we should draw from this experience is that, in future, a mechanism should be devised for the automatic commencement of action under Article 50 in the event of the imposition of sanctions. As the Secretary-General stated in his report on the work of the Organisation: "n today's conditions of economic interdependence, the effect of the imposition of comprehensive economic sanctions on third States that are economic partners of the offender State requires that Article 50 of the Charter be supplemented by appropriate arrangements creating obligations to assist concretely the disadvantaged third State or States". (A/46/1, p.6)
The Gulf region still suffers from the aftermath of war. The United Nations has the duty and responsibility to exert all its energies to remove the suffering, hunger and squalor left behind by the war. This is particularly true of the Iraqi civilian population, whose misery is not lightened by the continuation of economic and trade sanctions. We commend the humanitarian assistance provided to the people of the region by Member countries as well as United Nations agencies. At the same time, we believe that any outside intervention in a Member country on humanitarian grounds constitutes an abridgement of national sovereignty and is, therefore, fraught with serious implications.
We sincerely hope that the flexibility shown by all parties concerned will help to resolve the Middle East conflict, at the core of which is the Palestinian question. India applauds the assiduousness with which the United States has worked to get the various parties involved to the negotiating table. I trust that these efforts, along with those of the parties concerned, will mark a beginning in the resolution of the vexed Middle East problem. He believe that a just and comprehensive settlement of the Middle East question will be possible and durable only if it restores to the Palestinian people their fundamental rights, including their right to a homeland.
I mentioned Cambodia earlier. Events there are shaping towards what we hope will be a peaceful resolution of the conflict. We specially welcome the Cambodian delegation to the United Nations, led by His Royal Highness Prince Sihanouk, Chairman of the Supreme National Council of Cambodia, which has recently taken several initiatives in bringing Cambodia closer to an era of peace and restoration.
India appreciates the contribution made by the five permanent members of the Security Council and the Paris International Conference on Cambodia towards resolving this long-drawn-out problem. We are glad to be associated with this process as a member of the Paris International Conference. The Cambodian people, who have suffered so much in the past, deserve the continued support of the international community to complete the badly needed process of national reconciliation and reconstruction. We look forward to the emergence of Cambodia as a sovereign, independent, neutral and non-aligned nation in accordance with the wishes of its people.
I trust that the Secretary-General's five-point plan on Afghanistan will inspire the parties to the conflict to negotiate a framework for resolving this issue. We welcome the decision by the United States and the Soviet Union not to supply arms to the parties involved, but this step will be effective only if supplies from other sources also stop forthwith. The United States has a major role to play in this regard. We call for a comprehensive political settlement of the conflict in Afghanistan which would preserve the sovereign, non-aligned and independent status of Afghanistan.
Of late, further movement in dealing with the Cyprus issue is discernible. India supports peace efforts that ensure the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Cyprus, and in this light welcomes further negotiations under United Nations auspices. Myanmar remains deprived of the democratic rights its own people voted for over three years ago. India calls upon the Myanmar leadership to accept the people's verdict and work with them to restore democracy in the country.
The South African Government has recently undertaken a number of positive steps towards dismantling the apartheid regime. We welcome these changes. At the same time, we remain fully aware that a lot more needs to be done. The South African authorities must immediately take all necessary measures to start the process of negotiations. Equally important is curbing the continuing violence in certain parts of the country. The pressure that has been brought to bear on Pretoria by the application of sanctions has proved to be useful and must be sustained. The international community must remain vigilant until the complete eradication of apartheid and the transformation of South Africa into a non-racial, unitary democracy.
While apartheid is on the retreat in South Africa, an attempt is being made to institutionalize racism in Fiji. The interim government in Fiji has incorporated into a new constitution certain provisions which are in violation of the internationally accepted principles of democracy and human rights. By institutionalizing oppression and injustice, Fiji appears to be moving backwards in history to a darker age. The Suva regime should abandon such anachronistic policies and join the rest of the world in enlightened democratic governance.
In the economic field, there is an increasing trend of integration of the process of production, consumption and trade in the world economy, brought about mainly by the communications revolution. This has led to an unprecedented enhancement of the interdependence of nations and increasing competitiveness among major operators in the world economy. One of the very significant outcomes of this phenomenon has been the creation and strengthening of regional economic groupings, particularly among developed countries. Western Europe is moving towards an integrated market by the end of 1992. The former East and West Germanys have been united. In a few years Germany is expected to emerge as an even stronger economic Power. While these are significant economic changes, we do not see concomitant moves towards meaningfully addressing North-South development issues.
Responding to the changing realities, many developing countries are making strenuous efforts to carry out structural changes in order to meet the challenges. We in India have also introduced far-reaching changes in our industrial, trade and monetary and fiscal policies. Our aim is to remove unnecessary controls and regulations so as to release the creative forces in the economy and realise its full potential. As a consequence of these policy changes, we envisage sharply increased interlinkages with the world economy. We need the understanding and cooperation of our partners from developed countries to derive the full benefits from the measures we have adopted and as a cushion against the short-run pressures that may build up. We also need an international economic environment which is conducive to ensuring the success of such measures. In various multilateral organizations, it will be our endeavour to work towards establishing an international economic order which is truly multilateral and based on the principle of non-discrimination and the rule of law.
The overall external economic environment for developing countries remains unfavourable. Many of these countries are facing the problem of worsening terms of trade, increasing problems in finding access to advanced technology, and reductions in the resources available for development.
The overall debt situation for the developing countries has assumed alarming proportions and poses a serious threat to their economic viability. A solution to the developing countries' debt problem would need a comprehensive and integrated strategy encompassing all categories of affected countries and all forms of debt.
Against this backdrop, the Secretary-General's proposal for an international conference on the financing of development deserves support. As he further points out in his report on the work of the Organisation:
"A reinvigoration of the North-South dialogue has now become more urgent than ever. Fortunately, conditions exist now for advancing it constructively without a needless overlay of rhetoric or ideological controversy." (A/46/1, p. 12)
India attaches great importance to an early, successful and balanced outcome of the current Uruguay round of multilateral trade negotiations. He are a serious partner in these negotiations, which we approach with an open mind and a considerable degree of flexibility. But we have our own concerns to be met and interests to safeguard. That is why we have been insisting that the overall package that emerges from these negotiations must contain specific and time-bound commitments on issues of concern to developing countries.
The developments of recent years have further validated the disarmament and development linkage and made it a reality. National budgetary policies of some of the major military Powers already provide for the channelling of resources now locked into the arms race into economic growth. The peace dividend now needs to be realized at the international level. The International Conference on Disarmament and Development envisaged mechanisms in this regard which should be put into effect. We notice another disturbing trend in the economic field. Attempts are being made to factor into the calculus of international and bilateral economic cooperation, non-economic considerations such as good governance, observance of human rights, environment, military expenditure, and so on. The Indian polity is firmly anchored on political pluralism and individual freedom. We attach high priority to the preservation of the environment and would very much like to reduce our military budget. But these laudable goals should apply to all countries, developed and developing. What is questionable is the linkage of these issues with development assistance of which only the developing countries are the recipients.
Environmental concerns are fast moving to the top of the world agenda and are rightly at the forefront of international concern and attention. We are convinced that environmental problems cannot be isolated from the general issue of development and must be viewed as an integral part of development efforts. For global environmental problems to be dealt with effectively, we need to forge global partnership which seeks to protect the environment while simultaneously addressing the development requirements of the developing countries.
It is well recognized that the principal sources of pollutants in the environment lie in the developed countries and these countries accordingly bear the main responsibility for combating such pollution. Furthermore, if financial, technical and other capabilities are also taken into account, then it becomes quite clear that the responsibility for undertaking corrective action devolves on the developed countries. Without the provision of adequate, new and additional financial resources and environmentally benign technologies on preferential and non-commercial terms, it would be difficult for the developing countries to adopt environmentally safe and desirable technologies, much as they would like to do so. Such technologies should not become simply another source of commercial profit for the developed world.
India will continue its constructive contribution to the preparations for the 1992 United Nations Conference on Environment and Development. We hope that at the Conference the twin issues of environment and development will be addressed in a balanced way and in their totality.
India is glad to see changes around the world that serve to strengthen fundamental human rights. India's own deep commitment to human rights, true to its democratic traditions and practices, is well known. India's parliamentary institutions, independent judiciary, free press and public opinion provide the necessary checks and balances to safeguard individual as well as collective human rights. I would, however, urge caution in projecting the promotion of human rights in an intrusive manner that militates against national sovereignty. Contexts and situations differ from country to country, and international concern for human rights preservation should not detract from the efforts in the same direction made by the country concerned.
In recent years, terrorism has emerged as one of the most dangerous and pernicious threats to the enjoyment of human rights, peace and stability in many parts of the world. Through killings, kidnappings, extortion and other such means, terrorists and their organisations have effectively usurped the basic human rights of innocent civilians. In a number of cases, they are using brutality and fear to undermine the free functioning of democratic institutions, including the legislative, executive and judiciary branches of government, as well as the press. Such terrorism assumes a particularly pernicious form when it is aided, abetted and sponsored from abroad. Sponsorship of terrorism in another country constitutes a violation of the principles governing relations among States which have been enshrined in the United Nations Charter. This deserves the condemnation of the international community.
Drug abuse control has gained a commendable measure of global co-operation. Drug abuse is a menace calling for concerted and strong action. India welcomes the establishment of the United Nations Global Programme of Action for international drug control. He would stress the need for additional financial resources and technical assistance for crop substitution and other measures to combat drug trafficking and abuse. In conclusion, let me say that we in India wish the recent epochal changes worldwide to be the harbingers of peace, prosperity and an equitable and just world order. The logic of progress in on the side of those who think and act progressively, not of those who wish to remain frozen in an unresponsive status quo. India looks forward to cooperating with other nations in the noble endeavour of strengthening world peace and cooperation.
﻿Let me begin by congratulating Ambassador Shihabi on his election to the office of President of the forty-sixth session of the General Assembly, which I hope will be crowned with success. I also take this opportunity to congratulate the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Peres de Cuellar, on his endeavours and his valuable contribution to the promotion of world peace and understanding among nations.
In this era of heightened expectations of freedom and of peace among nations, the threat of despotism has not yet disappeared from the world. This Assembly convenes in the aftermath of two crises that threatened human freedoms and that aroused profound concern throughout the enlightened international community. Future historians will undoubtedly cast more light on these two grim chapters in the closing years of this century from an appropriate perspective. But we, representatives of Governments, do not have the time to indulge in the luxury of observing events passively, as historians can do.
We are making history, not writing it, making history here and now. It is incumbent upon us as representatives of responsible Governments to mould current events in a spirit of respect for the values our democratic regimes represent, and aspiring to a world order based on universal freedoms.
We must draw the correct conclusions and apply the lessons of the crises of the past year and bequeath to all mankind a code of conduct, thus ensuring that our world will no longer be exposed to insane outbursts of tyranny. Our lesson from the two recent crises is that there is an unequivocal link between the nature of political regimes and the peace and stability of the world.
Democratic government is based on the recognition of civil liberties and on respect for the sovereignty of other nations. Democracy is the natural condition of a healthy society. It would be the preferred system for all mankind, were it free to choose. Man was born to freedom; it is part of his intrinsic nature. He was born to live, not to fight wars; to create, not to destroy. The spirit of freedom is embedded in the human intellect and the law of the jungle is alien to it. Therein lies the superiority of man over creatures that are devoid of the power of choice. "Live and let live" is the voice of human reason. "When one saves a human life it is as if one has saved all of humanity," runs an ancient Jewish saying.
These basic truisms have thrust themselves to the fore during recent years, when a new dawn has broken in the Soviet Union and in the countries of Eastern Europe. Seventy years of an oppressive regime could not suppress man's spirit of freedom. That spirit has arisen anew and broken its chains after three generations of independence denied. Now that the wind of freedom has been liberated no power on Earth can ever return it to captivity.
We saw this with our own eyes in the 70 hours of the abortive coup in the Soviet Union. We could have anticipated the end of that coup from the moment a small group of citizens first appeared in the streets of Moscow to face the approaching tanks. They stood against them unarmed, like a human banner, and the soldiers did not shoot. The army held its fire, faced as it was with the spirit of freedom that had taken root even among its own ranks. When the muse of freedom sang, the guns fell silent.
That is the lesson the world has drawn from the crisis of August 1991. Yet it learned another bitter and rapid lesson from the Persian Gulf crisis of August 1990. It learned how short-sighted it had been in supplying, over the years and without any controls, vast quantities of weapons to a dictatorial regime. It has learned just how terrifying can be the combination of military power and a lack of inhibition regarding its use. The chameleon that had bemused the entire enlightened world turned into a lethal python that wound itself around mankind's neck.
The billows of black smoke that rose from hundreds of oil wells across the Kuwaiti desert are a living and tangible illustration of the evil genie that had escaped from its bottle, throwing a huge pall over entire continents. Tyranny - and the tyrant - displayed an undreamed-of vitality.
Saddam Hussein has not been removed from the world scene. His defeated people have not rejected him. The Kurdish revolt has been brutally suppressed, leaving in its wake hundreds of thousands of homeless refugees. The scale of military strength that Saddam Hussein has retained is now revealed as a renewed and genuine threat to the region.
The Iraqi tyrant continues to scheme against and deceive the rest of the world. The United Nations inspection commissions have, one after the other, uncovered his lies and discovered the hidden stocks of non-conventional weapons he sought to conceal. Saddam Hussein is attempting to keep the world in ignorance of his revived military power, but the world, under the determined leadership of the United States, is not turning a blind eye to the facts, and will not permit the tyranny of Saddam Hussein to survive.
Last September, from this rostrum, I warned that Israel was about to become the target of attacks by Saddam Hussein in a war in which it was not involved, and to which it was not a party. And indeed Israel came under missile attack. It clenched its fists and gritted its teeth in refraining from any counter-attack, so as not to upset the international coalition. The international community has come to understand Israel's position as the bastion of genuine democracy in a dangerous and violent region. The events of the past year have made enlightened States world-wide re-evaluate the character of the Israeli-Arab conflict in the light of this correct political and historical perspective. Many countries realise today that the root causes of this bitter conflict, which has lasted decades, lie in the refusal of the Arab States - excluding Egypt - to recognise the existence of Israel and to accept its independence and sovereignty. It is this intransigence that has been the source of the wars imposed on Israel.
It has been clearly established that Israel is the only country in the world under a permanent tangible, physical threat to its very existence - a threat that has brought upon it six wars in the four decades of its existence. States that were themselves involved in the Gulf crisis have now come to understand, perhaps for the first time, the logic of Israel's insistence on a peace ensuring its security and the well-being of its inhabitants.
In January 1991 we presented a consolidated formula of five principles designed to promote the peace process: first, an end to the state of war between the Arab States and Israel, with a view to the signing of a peace treaty; secondly, reduction and control of the arms race; thirdly, direct negotiations, without preconditions, between Israel and its neighbours, with a view to the signing of peace agreements between Israel and each of the Arab States; fourthly, the simultaneous start of a resolution of the Palestinian problem, to be carried out in stages by us and the residents of Judea, Samaria and Gaza, in a joint framework with Jordan; and, fifthly, the drafting of joint programmes for regional development, with international aid, in areas such as water, the environment, electricity, solar energy, agriculture, health, transportation and the infrastructure. These principles have strengthened the foundations of the peace process in which we have been engaged since the cease-fire in the Gulf.
Since its establishment Israel has tirelessly sought to talk peace with its neighbours. In the aftermath of each of the ware that was forced upon us Israel has appealed to the Arab States to conduct direct talks with it, with no prior conditions, to attain a true and lasting peace. It seems that this appeal will now at last be answered. In a few weeks we shall, I hope, meet in face-to-face discussions with our neighbours in order to lay the foundations of a better future for our peoples and our coming generations. Israel is convinced that the sufferings of our war-torn region will be brought to an end, not as a result of any balance of terror, but of the benefits that peace will bring.
The bitter arms race in the Gulf and the Middle East has brought many tragedies to the peoples of the region. It is responsible for the poverty and misery of millions of human beings and for the wars which have broken out in our region over and over again in the latter half of this century. The arms race has drained the resources of the different States to the detriment of the welfare of their citizens. The potential means of destruction amassed by cruel dictators with limitless ambitions is a proven recipe for the outbreak of wars.
Our region has also known the use of chemical weapons, which Saddam Hussein used against his own people as well as against his Iranian enemy. The elimination of chemical weapons everywhere, and especially in the Middle East, is of supreme importance. This is why Israel has agreed to become a party to the convention to eliminate chemical weapons, while maintaining the principle of universality. For the convention to be effective all States of the region must become party to it.
The term "weapons of mass destruction" is no mere technical phrase. Every type of weapon - including conventional - that entails a threat of the indiscriminate destruction of large numbers of people falls, in our view, into the category of "weapons of mass destruction". Arms control must therefore include conventional weaponry as well.
On the eve of the convening of a regional peace conference, I appeal from this rostrum to the leaders of the Arab States. I say "Stop the insane arms race in weapons of extermination. Abandon all destructive impulses. Put an end to blind hatred. Do not waste your resources. Do not give up the opportunity for progress and well-being for your own countries for the illusory dream of destroying Israel.
"Israel draws its strength from its historic and moral right to a safe existence in its own country. Set out with us on the path of peace. Think of your children, as we think of ours. For they were born not for war, to be killed, but to live."
The far-reaching changes that have occurred in the struggle between blocs in the world have also been accompanied by positive changes in Africa. Some internal wars have ended, and others we hope are about to end. The process of African States' attaining their independence has been completed. The apartheid regime in South Africa is nearing its end. A wind of democracy has blown through many African States, inspiring a progressive evolution.
But in many States of the third world, especially in Africa, hunger, disease and misery are still on the rise. The growing birth rate has led to a population explosion and has aggravated the shortage of essential foodstuffs. In extensive areas the desert has reclaimed arable land and pasture land. Hundreds of thousands of people are falling victim to starvation and epidemics. All this is happening at the end of the twentieth century, a century that has seen unprecedented scientific, technological and medical achievements. In an era in which borderlines between East and West are becoming blurred, the developed countries must seek to bridge the huge gaps between the living standards of the northern and southern hemispheres. We must lend an attentive ear, especially to the heart-rending appeals for help from the African continent.
Israel is a small country, poor in natural resources and material riches, but it has its faith. It faces the tremendous challenge of absorbing every year hundreds of thousands of new immigrants, who flock to it from many countries. 
However, in the process of building a new society and developing its economy, Israel has, over the past 40 years, accumulated considerable knowledge and experience in agriculture, technology, medicine and science, as well as in organisation and management. Israel has for many years placed its knowledge at the disposal of developing countries. The result of this mission which we have taken upon ourselves has been decades of cooperation and assistance to 96 countries.
In Israel, for several generations we have witnessed a revival in the life of a nation which has brought to the world values of peace, liberty and justice. These principles are the essence of the law of the Jewish people and of its universal message.
The Jewish people is the only people ever to have been exiled again and again, with its faith in its return to its homeland remaining unshaken. Bach time, mankind has benefited from the spiritual assets and values of justice which have accompanied the revival of the Jewish people in its ancestral land. The return to Zion in our own times, which has been the objective of the Zionist movement, has resulted in a gathering in Israel of the Jewish people from all over the world. Wherever tyranny has raged and our people have been persecuted, assistance came from Israel, bringing them back to their national homeland in freedom and security. In the aftermath of the Second World War, Israel took in hundreds of thousands of our brethren who had survived in Europe as well as hundreds of thousands from Arab countries and elsewhere, escaping discrimination and persecution.
These very days we are witnessing a phenomenon stirring in its enormity - that of the return of Jews from the Soviet Union and from Ethiopia to their ancestral homeland. The Zionist movement is colour-blind. The distinction between colours is alien to Zionism. That is why it has been proven that Zionism is tolerant and liberal par excellence.
Last week, President Bush appealed to this Assembly to abrogate the cynical and deplorable resolution which equates Zionism with racism. The President aptly described the unique character of the Zionist movement and its spiritual and humanitarian values. More and more representatives of nations are joining his appeal, guided by this great historical truth. This appeal will continue to reverberate both within this Hall and outside it until the repeal, in the near future, of that resolution, which constitutes a calumny on this Organisation and a disgrace to it.
This session stands on the threshold of a new hope. People the world over aspire for an end to hardship and suffering and for the beginning, at last, of an era full of promise and hope. For us, the Jewish people, it is also the beginning of a new year, when we exchange the traditional blessing: "May the outgoing year sweep away its maledictions, and may the new year bring with it blessings for all mankind."
﻿Mr. President, on behalf of the Government and the people of New Zealand let me first congratulate you on your election. It has certainly been a momentous year both for you and for the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
I should like also to pay tribute to the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Peres de Cuellar, who has worked tirelessly over the past 10 years towards the reduction of tension throughout the world. As he comes to the end of a decade of service I offer to the Secretary-General my congratulations, and those of the Government and the people of New Zealand on his personal contribution to the cause of peace.
I am delighted to join you, Sir, in welcoming new Members to this forty-sixth session of the General Assembly of the United Nations. In particular I want to welcome the Federated States of Micronesia - a new member of this body, but a familiar friend to my country as host of the most recent meeting of South Pacific Forum nations. I am delighted that they and their close neighbours, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, are joining us at this time.
It is a source of immense satisfaction that we see here today for the first time the legitimate representatives of Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia. I pay tribute to the courage and determination of these three European nations that have struggled against totalitarian rule for so long. Their international recognition as independent sovereign States brings to an end a chapter in their history when they were forcibly incorporated into the Soviet Union in 1940.
Their independence and membership of this Organisation coupled with the membership of the Republic of Korea, which I warmly welcome, and the membership of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea signal the end of an era, or more importantly the beginning of a new era, in international relations.
New opportunities in politics and trade command our attention. New problems constantly challenge our capabilities. In Yugoslavia, we see a situation that cries out for peaceful resolution. Mediation has been tried. It must be tried again. It will never be successful unless and until the parties to the conflict are prepared to commit themselves fully to the process. So my Government appeals to all other members of the international community that might have some influence - direct or indirect - to use that Influence to persuade the parties to the conflict to commit themselves to mediation if they cannot resolve their differences peacefully on their own.
Today the problems may look intractable but difficult issues can be solved. Already the change in global politics has been rewarded by significant progress in the field of disarmament. The super-Powers have committed themselves to substantial reductions in their arsenals of nuclear weapons. While the world warmly welcomes each new step in the reduction of nuclear weapons agreed to by the super-Powers, this progress is undermined by the actual or potential proliferation of nuclear weapons to other nations. Therefore on arms control nothing is more important than moves to halt the proliferation of nuclear weapons.
New Zealand, as one of the first nations to sign and ratify the United Nations Non-Proliferation Treaty, firmly believes that attempts to halt the proliferation of nuclear weapons must be an agenda item of the highest priority for the Organisation. The dangers from nuclear weapons are such that a failure to halt their proliferation would seriously diminish the recent success in strategic arms reductions.
We welcome the decisions of France and the people's Republic of China to join the Non-Proliferation Treaty. Now that the Treaty will cover all the current nuclear Powers of the world. New Zealand urges all parties to agree to its indefinite extension in 1995.
In singling out nuclear weapons for particular attention, I do not in any way diminish the work needed to control other weapons of mass destruction, such as those using chemical or biological agents.
The importance of the task of stopping the proliferation of all weapons of mass destruction should be firmly embedded in the minds of thinking people everywhere following the fearful possibility that Saddam Hussein would use such weapons during his illegal take-over of the State of Kuwait. That act of aggression tested the strength and commitment of this world body.

We can all take pride in the fact that the leadership shown by the United Nations in the exercise of its undoubted moral authority was successful in facilitating the coming together of a great coalition of nations who were determined that the might of Saddam Hussein would not succeed and that Kuwait would be restored to its independent sovereign status. During the dangerous weeks of the Gulf crisis the United Nations, with strong leadership from the Security Council, showed firmness of judgment and a commitment to the ideals of the United Nations that has reinforced the status and authority of this Organisation. The Security Council was able to reflect accurately the mood of the General Assembly because of its broad representation aerobe regional lines and its inclusion of the small and vulnerable as well as the large and powerful.
I want to pay a warm tribute to Kuwait's Arab neighbours, who were resolute in their support of the rights of a small independent nation and refused to back down to intimidation or threats. Their steadfastness in the early stages of the crisis was a major reason why Kuwait was eventually liberated.
The role of the United States in bringing together the coalition of nations who worked in concert to liberate Kuwait was an impressive display of international diplomacy. United States forces, with their British, French and Arab counterparts, gave an equally impressive display on the ground and in the air. But overriding the achievements of the individual nations was the commitment given by nations, large and small, to the military task force that gathered to halt aggression and to guarantee the independent sovereign rights of the small nation, Kuwait. I am proud that my country played a small part in that coalition and has been able to contribute to the post-war United Nations commissions, such as that on the disposal of weapons of mass destruction.
As a small country in the south-west Pacific, we do not threaten anyone, nor do we peek to impose our will on other countries. But in joining the coalition we honoured a New Zealand tradition to oppose tyranny and support freedom. Luckier than a number, all our military personnel came home safely on this occasion, but many of their forebears in pursuit of the same goals rest alongside the battlefields of the modern world. We have never shirked our responsibilities.
As we opposed a dictator in the Gulf, freedom-loving people around the world have rejoiced as we have witnessed, too, the collapse of totalitarian communism in Europe. That system was defeated not by force of arms but by ordinary people, in their hundreds of thousands, reaching in the streets to reclaim their God-given right to freedom of thought, expression and assembly and their right to democratic government. It has been a glorious victory for the indomitable spirit of the human person.
But let me sound a note of warning: this impressive victory could turn to bitterness, and hope to despair, unless all nations show equal courage in addressing an equally unprecedented economic challenge. The helping hand that both the emerging democracies of Europe and the developing countries of the world need most is the hand of trade. So, today, the barricades we must pull down are not those erected to prevent tanks but those erected to hinder trade.
To sustain and secure the dramatic political changes that have occurred, to deny dictators the excuse for coveting others' territory, to ease the
crushing debt burdens that too many countries face, to provide an economic alternative to the destruction of our environment - to do all these things, and more, we have to realise that a change in the international trading system is essential. Without change, how can the new democracies in Europe do what they want to do for their people if their exports face restrictions in foreign markets? How can debt-ridden developing nations ever pay their way if they face not only similar restrictions but subsidised competition too?
This is not a debate that can be drawn wholly across North-South lines, because trade restrictions occur on both sides, as does subsidisation. This is a debate about giving meaning to the many fine words, about helping those who are struggling to escape poverty, and about securing the democratic freedoms so recently won. This is a debate about complementing aid with trade.
The Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations began nearly five years ago. It was, and remains, the moat ambitious of all the trade negotiating rounds. Yet it is in real danger of faltering if the political commitments that were given in 1986, and have been repeated since then - moat recently at the G-7 meeting this year - are not translated into the substantive decisions that are already overdue.
A country like mine, dependent on trade for its very livelihood, finds it incredible that political and economic leaders who are responsible in so many things, who are participating in, and encouraging, the dawn of a new political era, have not yet broken the log-jam in the negotiations. Certainly the G-7 group of industrialised countries, under the chairmanship of the British Prime Minister, gave us cause for new hope. Certainly the United States has been, and remains, a strong proponent of a liberalised international trading system. Thoughtful leaders In the European Community, and many leaders in the developing world, have all called for greater progress.
But it seems to be a case of words, words and more words, but little action. If we are to succeed, action must now take the place of words. Time is running out. The alternative to a successful and substantive conclusion to the Uruguay Round is often said to be a series of trade blocs - groups of countries turning in on themselves, failing to realise their full competitive advantage) surviving, perhaps, but at a lower and more unstable level than would be possible in a liberal world trading system.
All this is quite possible, but I suggest that it is not the worst-case scenario. The worst-case scenario is those countries that have found new freedoms having those freedoms taken away by regimes who use the excuse of the need for economic control of disintegrating economies as a cover for political oppression; it is having stable countries being made less stable because they cannot earn the foreign exchange necessary to provide for the legitimate aspirations of their people; it is turning the clock back rather than forward.
With a view to avoiding that - and avoid it we must - I make a plea from this rostrum that the barricades that prevent fair trade be taken down. And if the powerful will not do it to help the weak, then they should do it for the selfish reason that it is the only way the world will secure a lasting peace. Trade between nations is what breaks down fear, and the sharing of resources by trade is what prevents ware of acquisition. If the selfish win, if the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade fails, then today's leaders will have planted the seed of future conflicts. That is a strong message, but it is no more so than the seriousness of the situation warrants. 
Let us achieve a milestone in the progress of international trade this year, so that we can move forward with confidence to the United Nations Conference on Environment, and Development next year. A free and fair trade system is central to our efforts to conserve and enhance the environment. We have already made progress on issues such as driftnet fishing and with the Montreal Osona Protocol) but we need to maximise these gains by ensuring that States fully observe the measures that have been adopted in such fields. Next year's United Nations Conference in Brazil will be the real test of our ability to cooperate in the endeavour to find the proper balance between development and environmental protection. My country is the first anywhere to enshrine the concept of sustainable development in legislation on natural resources.
Just before I departed from New Zealand seven students from seven continents of the world lit a candle for peace in front of Maori tukutuku panels symbolising the seeking of knowledge. They were greeting the dawning of this new session of the United Nations General Assembly. The students participated in this ceremony in New Zealand because ours is one of the first countries to see the sun rise, and a ceremony at dawn is the traditional Maori way to acknowledge a new beginning.
We in this Assembly can all rejoice in that we are seeing new beginnings in many parts of the world: in Europe, in Cambodia, in South Africa. We must not let this moment in history pass; we must now replace an understanding of how to destroy each other with a new understanding of how to live and trade with each other. It is my most fervent hope and prayer that this great assembly of nations has the moral courage to do not only what is necessary but what is right.
















﻿Mingling with the other people taking part in this General Assembly debate and looking to their faces makes one almost physically aware of fact that, today, the representatives of the Soviet Union, which is transforming itself into a union of sovereign States, are viewed - and rightly so - as envoys of a new nation. It is a nation on the threshold of an entirely new era in its centuries-old political, philosophical, international, legal and day-to-day history.
We have just experienced a purifying storm - the defeat of a criminal coup, and everything that took place in connection with the recent Congress of People's Deputies. Today I extend the words of deep gratitude to all those who associated themselves with our resistance to the coup. Those days in August have convinced us finally of one thing - that the quest for freedom has become the main thrust in our own development and in the development of the entire world community. Only a society that gives full protection to individual freedoms and rights can be prosperous and dynamic.
The longing for freedom and democracy has always been present in the minds and hearts of our people. It has survived despite decades of despotism and lawlessness, and the years of perestroika brought it to life with renewed vigour and translated it into concrete deeds. The courage of unarmed people stemming the advance of political monsters who opposed the new thinking proved that the peoples of our country will no longer bow the knee to diktat. In essence, the defeat of a coup aimed at restoring totalitarian rule led to a revolution that changed the face of the nation, sweeping away the last remaining pillars of a bankrupt regime.
The failure of the coup was also a world-wide victory for the forces of good. Together, we managed to avert the threat of a return to the cold war. To remove the obstacles to progress towards a new state of interaction and partnership, towards democracy and a new era of peace-making.
	The political developments of the first half of this year created the major prerequisites for this change. There have been breakthroughs in two central areas of disarmament - conventional arms in Europe, and strategic nuclear arms. Armaments are being reduced, although only recently it was held that an arms build-up was precisely what guarantees national security. As President Bush pointed out in his address to the General Assembly yesterday, this proves that relations between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States, between East and West, are no longer relations between adversaries. Such drastic cuts are possible only between partners who have recognized that they have shared, rather than conflicting, security interests.
	A decisive step towards the end of the cold war has been taken in an area that is most resistant to new trends - the economy. The London meeting between the Soviet President and the G-7 leaders and subsequent contacts between the Seven and the leaders of our Union and its republics sec the stags for overcoming the economic division of the world and restoring its integrity, its economic interdependence and its market and financial fabric.
	Iraq's aggression against Kuwait put the nascent global unity to a serious test. The world community's concerted efforts to resist the aggressor, including the efforts of the five permanent members of the Security Council, were truly unprecedented. The consensus that emerged in the United Nations around the central idea that breaches of the peace are inadmissible remained intact even after the crisis in the Gulf was over. Indeed, this consensus led to practical steps to resolve other burning issues, including the formidable challenge of the search for a Middle East settlement, and the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems. Today, there remains hardly a single regional conflict where there is not a glimmer of light, at the end of the tunnel.
Europe - once the epicentre of two world wars and an arena of confrontation - is becoming n laboratory for new forms of interaction. In fact, the process of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe already transcends regional frontiers. A new transcontinental community is coming into being - a "belt" of trust, cooperation and security that spans the countries of these parts of the world: the entire northern hemisphere.
Political dialogue is getting under way in Asia and the Pacific, as nations and international associations in that region join in a search for mechanism for the discussion and collective solution of common problems. Latin America as a community of mutually tolerant and democratic nations is becoming a political reality. On the African continent, negotiations are replacing hostilities and, at times, barbaric methods of force.
This global change is inextricably linked with perestroika in the Soviet Union. Before the events of August the progress of perestroika inside the country lagged far behind its international impact. Now that that gap has been closed, internal and external activities can proceed at a single and accelerating pace. The steadfastness of the President of the USSR, Mr. Gorbachev, the courage and initiative of Mr. Yeltsin, the Russian President, the vigorous popular movement and the overwhelming solidarity of the rest of the world enabled us not only to defeat the coup but also to dismantle the braking mechanisms that hindered the country's progress towards the rule of law and a civic society.
To a certain extent the coup and all the risks involved are precisely what brought about a strong centrifugal trend in our country as, between 22 August and 9 September, eight republics declared themselves independent from the union. That is how they reacted to the threat posed by the putsch, the aim of which was the restoration of a totalitarian society.
The extraordinary Congress of People's Deputies at the beginning of September met the challenge of the time, establishing for a period of transition a structure whereby the republics - to use the words of the President of Russia - would obtain as much sovereignty as they could take. Now that the element of coercion is behind us and the sovereign republics are able to take stock of the situation, there has developed a centripetal trend, which is gaining momentum.
This is evidenced by the intensive activity of the State Council, chaired by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, and comprising the leaders of the Republics. The first decision of this body was the recognition of the independence of the three Baltic States. At the second session of the Council the basic forms of an economic union - which will be open for participation by any Republic, including the Baltic States, should they so desire - were addressed and endorsed.
The State Council is working on measures to overcome the rather critical problems - to say the least - of food and medical supplies in the coming winter and spring months. The Inter-Republican Economic Committee has been very active in this regard.
All-union government agencies constituted by the Congress continue to function in the four key areas: foreign policy, defence, law enforcement and security. Profound military reforms are taking place, these will lead to a radical cut in military expenditures, which for many years have placed such a heavy burden on the budget of our State.
The Extraordinary Congress of People's Deputies, the State Council and the President of the USSR have thus answered the questions that had been causing world-wide concern. It can now be seen that the answers were constructive and sent a positive signal to the world community. As a dynamic, although still fragile, balance emerges between the centre and the Republics, we can see that we are now on the right course - despite the deviations or set-backs that may occur - and we look with renewed expectations to the international community for all the support it can lend us in making a rapid transition and taking a respected place in the family of nations. By stating this publicly I am fulfilling one of my important tasks at this session of the General Assembly,
The new Union, at this decisive stage of its formation, needs the support of the world community, but it is precisely the world community that has an interest in the success of our efforts, since the prospects for creating a stable, democratic and civilised world order on our planet. Earth - which may be the only one in the universe - depend on this.
The President of the USSR and the leaders of all sovereign States and Soviet Republics are aware of their responsibilities under the Soviet Union's existing international agreements and obligations. I should like to reaffirm that the union of sovereign States will be the direct successor of all such commitments, including those we have assumed as a nuclear Power. Our country's nuclear weapons remain under effective centralised control.
"New challenges" is a favourite subject of political scientists. Not so long ago this term came to denote such things as international terrorism, international drug and arms trafficking, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), degradation of the environment, and the problems of human psychological adaptation to new parameters of progress. The depth and danger of these new risks have forced the world community - and did so even back in the days of the cold war - to begin formulating adequate responses to these transnational challenges. And although the bulk of the work still lies ahead, negotiating mechanisms are already emerging and international legal instruments are being put into place.
However, let us admit, both to ourselves and to the whole of mankind, that virtually none of us was prepared to face the risks of the new, historic period. Cleansing storms have thundered over the expanses of eastern and central Europe, bringing with them all the promise that freedom holds out, bringing back the sense of dignity, self-esteem and faith in man's lofty mission on Earth. And it is not freedom's fault if the flames of ethnic strife have suddenly engulfed the world like the outbreak of a long-forgotten disease. Age-old and seemingly subdued instincts have come alive - instincts which have no place in the new environment. And all this is accompanied by the threat of economic chaos, flaring social contradictions, refugees and disease.
Europe, which had seemed the least vulnerable of all the continents, has suddenly shown its susceptibility to the virus of nationalism. After the division of Europe had been overcome without confrontation or instability and Germany had been peacefully and democratically reunited, Yugoslavia faced a crisis and is now on the brink of civil war.
Why this un-preparedness for new risks? We were too busy eliminating the deformations of the cold-war era to formulate in good time a positive agenda that would meet national aspirations. Regrettably, the energy released as a result of East-West reconciliation has not only served constructive purposes but also fuelled a resurgence of national egotism. Nationalism is becoming the main breeding ground for terrorism. The mortar attack on Downing Street, the villainous assassination of Rajiv Ghandi, the bloodshed which is still going on in Nagorny Karabakh, and elsewhere, are convincing evidence of that.
There is a danger that the ideological division of the world may be replaced by attempts to divide and antagonize countries, peoples and nations on national, ethnic or religious grounds. The result may be the nineteenth century revisited, albeit it with significant new features, such as global interdependence and weapons of mass destruction.
The problem is how to make the growing national self-awareness serve the cause of progress, freedom and the prosperity of people; to keep national identity slogans from becoming vehicles of separatist policies leading away from the mainstream of world integration to absurd autarchy in either economic or cultural life.
Whenever national egotism spills over State borders as was the case with Iraq's aggression against Kuwait, the international community must remain true to its position of principle and take the necessary steps, including enforcement measures, in keeping with the United Nations Charter. Of course, military force - or using it in appropriate measure - should be the last resort. Using it even to maintain international law and order necessarily means a set-back for the new thinking, a reversal of the trend towards establishing a new type of international relations. Today, the international community and the United Nations have sufficient capabilities to curb an aggressor, whoever he may be, and to restore justice without the use of military force - or using it in appropriate measure and on a collective basis.
There is also a certain degree of understanding with regard to ethnic conflicts of a purely domestic nature. The golden rule in this respect is to do no harm.
Problems arise also in the grey zone between internal jurisdiction and international responsibility. Basically, it is a question of the further development of the sovereignty principle in international law, as applied to the new realities and risks and to the need for universal interaction between States.
Consensus must be achieved on a set of basic rules, criteria and principles for international response by the world community to emergency situations, a kind of code of responsible conduct for States, in an era of an interrelated and integral world. Such a consensus should combine the principles of sovereignty, self-determination and non-interference in the internal affairs of States with the need for States to fulfil their obligations under the United Nations Charter and other international legal instruments, and for the United Nations to pursue its goals in all the spheres prescribed by its Charter.
The principal objective hare is to harmonise national, regional and global interests, to assert a single universal scale of democratic values providing for freedom of choice, a variety of forms of social development, economic and political pluralism and the supremacy of international law and human rights.
The problem of individual freedom in all its dimensions is becoming central in world politics today. Providing for all basic human rights has become an imperative both of national development and international relations.
The gravest challenges arise in the world economy. Imbalances and deformations are the inevitable companions of economic progress. On the one hand, the end of the cold war has put an end to bloc rivalry in dealing with the third world. Against the background of interdependence, development ceases to be a one-dimensional notion and assumes a universal character. This is the key to a balanced world economy and to providing a solid basis for resolving global issues. On the other hand, there are growing fears that the new East-West relationship will leave many developing nations on the periphery of the world economy. At the same time, the third world is becoming increasingly polarized. Economic success in a number of countries is accompanied by worsening crises, poverty and hunger in the poorest nations. To prevent accumulated contradictions from exploding is a priority task. Moving away from ideologically motivated assistance should not mean forgetting those who simply cannot survive without outside help.
The same applies to the factors which hamper progress towards environmental security. Chernobyl became a world-wide disaster. Yet, it is also a symbol of international solidarity in a struggle for survival and the triumph of humanism in relations between States. The United Nations Chernobyl Pledging Conference, which was held here recently, demonstrated this once again.
One of the lessons to be learned from Chernobyl and other environmental catastrophes is that there can be no effective way of avoiding disaster without overcoming the inertia of old industrial practices. The objective is to readjust the whole structure of the world economy to make it environmentally safe. This can only be achieved through concerted efforts.
New international relations should be universal. Within generally recognised norms of civilised behaviour, a11 nations, regardless of their ideological or political preferences and dislikes, should maintain normal and proper relations. Lingering hostility, let alone the lack of elementary dialogue between a number of States, objectively generates tension within the very fabric of international relations.
The USSR is paying its last diplomatic debts inherited from the cold war. We have normalised our relations with the Republic of Korea and launched a comprehensive process of restoring normal relations with Israel.
The new world realities of today require institutionalised security and cooperation structures, the modernization of existing mechanisms and the creation of new ones where necessary. At the same time, we should not hesitate to abandon certain previously established structures which are inherently incapable of evolution. The Co-ordinating Committee for East-West Trade Policy (COCOM) is at the top of that list.
The activities of newly established as well as restructured international organizations should be integrated in order to add stability to the pillars of comprehensive security.
The general outlines of this process were defined by the international community in a resolution adopted at the forty-fourth session of the General Assembly on enhancing international peace, security and International cooperation in all its aspects in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. It was at that time - two years ago - that conceptual agreement was reached to begin drafting the fundamental principles of civilised international communication at the current stage of history - sometimes referred to as the new world order.
Members may recall that that resolution was the joint initiative of the USSR and the United States. When I met President Bush today, we reiterated the commitment of our two countries to broader cooperation in strengthening the United Nations as well as in all other areas. This commitment rests on a new foundation in the Soviet-United States relationship - no longer one of confrontation or even rivalry, but cooperation and friendship for the good of the world community as a whole.
The philosophy of new international solidarity, which is finding its way into practice, signifies a de-ideologization of the United Nations. In renewing our Organisation we should once and for all leave behind us the legacy of the ice age - like the obnoxious resolution equating Zionism with racism.
A transition to partnership and collective action bears the promise of United Nations universality, both in terms of its membership and in terms of its areas of activity. The process has already been set in motion. At this session of the General Assembly new Members have joined the ranks of the Organization. These include States of differing size and population. Our support for their admission to the United Nations mirrors the overall Soviet foreign policy of developing relations with all States, including small and medium-sized States.
It is with a special feeling that I wish to congratulate our colleagues, the plenipotentiary representatives of new sovereign and independent States - the Latvian Republic, the Lithuanian Republic and the Estonian Republic.
I see special symbolism in the fact that one of the first foreign policy steps of the country which began its new political calendar recently was to recognize the full independence of the Baltic Republics and provide immediate support for their joining the United Nations end associating themselves with the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) process. That took place in Moscow at the beginning of the Conference on the Human Dimension. At the present time the process of establishing diplomatic relations and exchanging embassies between the USSR and the Baltic States has started. We are going to hold large-scale talks on vital issues affecting the destinies of millions of people.
Adapting the entire United Nations system to the new realities of international life is an item on our agenda. Progress has already been achieved in such adaptation and great credit for this goes to the Secretary-General. Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, who is a confident leader of the Organization at this juncture which is perhaps most decisive. We hope that the line he so strongly supports will be duly continued.
There is a wealth of promising ideas on this subject. It would appear to make sense to agree upon launching practical exploration of approaches to reforming the United Nations. We are open to any fruitful ideas; we are also working on our own proposals. A concerted and essentially collective regulation of international relations in the areas of security and disarmament crucial for the destiny of the world has become a priority in the activities of the United Nations end the world community.
Supremacy of law is the main point of reference on the way to shaping a new model of international security. A system of political and legal deterrence should be its cornerstone - a system based not on mutual deterrence but rather on confidence that mutual threat does not exist and also on a high level of trust and openness in the military and other spheres. To achieve thin, it is important to establish, with active United Nations involvement, an atmosphere of general aversion to aggression throughout the world community. Any act of aggression must, from the very start, be regarded as doomed, not only militarily but also politically, economically and morally. An international boycott is the first step to deter and warn the aggressor.
Next in line is a joint elaboration and implementation of the concept of the next stage of disarmament to absorb the experience gained and make the disarmament processes stable, comprehensive and universal.
Priority tasks include making military potentials exclusively defence-oriented and working out the guidelines States could follow while restructuring their armed forces in conformity with the doctrine of reasonable sufficiency. That now is taking place in the Soviet Union.
The General Assembly could recommend initiating, as an intermediate stage, consultations to work on specific quantitative and qualitative parameters for minimum nuclear deterrence in all its aspects. It is becoming an urgent task to conduct negotiations on the total elimination of tactical nuclear weapons in as short as time as possible. 
A reduction in the number of nuclear tests, with a view to phasing them out altogether as soon as possible, is one means of halting the nuclear arms race. A broad movement in support of this idea has materialized in the political and scientific communities and among the public in various countries of the world. The time has come to establish a United Nations register of conventional arms sales and supplies and to identify jointly its technical parameters with a view to arriving at agreed principles of restraint in arms sales.
The development of a long-term concept of the use of United Nations forces in accordance with the Charter of the Organization, including the refinement of rapid response mechanisms for countering threats to international peace, legally codified procedures for deterring a potential aggressor and optimal strategies for defusing conflicts, would facilitate more comprehensive utilization of United Nations capacities. Major tasks in this area include efforts to make United Nations peace-keeping operations more effective and institutionalized, broader use of the preventive capacities of the United Nations and efforts to find ways to correlate global and regional security structures. There is proof that conflicts can indeed be settled through national reconciliation, a balance of interests and responsibility among all the parties involved and the expression of the will of the people in democratic free elections. I am particularly pleased to note the important role that is to be played by the United Nations in implementing the settlement in Cambodia as a truly unique instrument for maintaining international peace.
Today a unique chance is at hand to set in motion the process of a Middle East settlement. It is essential to lock in the significant pi ogress that has been made in solving the Afghan problem. This session must take action to support efforts in these areas.
The ultimate beneficiary of the movement towards stable peace with maximum guarantees is the human being. The domestic policies of States and the practice of international communication should rest on uniform rules applied across the entire range of human rights as an inseparable set of equal categories of a political, civil, social, economic and cultural nature defining the status of the individual and his relations with the State and society. Substantive discussion of specific human rights issues and matters of compliance with international commitments in this area can no longer be dismissed under the artificial pretext of interference in internal affairs. By signing appropriate international instruments, every State, as it were, delegates a fraction of its sovereignty to the international community. The criterion is the primacy of human rights over the rights of nations and other bodies.
At the Moscow meeting of the CSCE conference on the human dimension, we focused on the problem of strengthening not only the national, but also the international basis of guarantees for democracy, political pluralism, the supremacy of law and human rights.
We might provide for far-reaching collective procedures that would ultimately include binding and mandatory elements. Non-governmental and human rights organisations should be actively encouraged to participate in their verification. In other words, after the Moscow conference, the concept of confidence-building measures, which has been put to work so successfully in the political and military fields since the conferences held in Madrid and Stockholm should, we firmly believe, become the cornerstone and driving force of the new turn to human rights within the all-European and the global context.
	Much has been done in the United Nations, but there are still greater tasks ahead, reflecting the risks and challenges that face the international community today. Our common and inseparable destinies largely, if not decisively, depend on whether the United Nations will be able to succeed in renovating itself and become a true multilateral guarantor of peace and security.
Today all of us, politicians and diplomats alike, constantly find ourselves with the word "space" on our tongues. We speak of a single economic, legal and ecological space. This has become an extremely up-to-date and fashionable expression. Yet, half a century ago, in the heyday of Stalin's tyranny, the great Russian poet, Boris Pasternak, used it to describe an artist's calling!
"We have to live without vainglory Live in such a way that after all A love that space bestows upon us Would let us hear the future's call."
The call of the future! The author of Doctor Zhivago and the winner of the Nobel Prize heeded this call. Let us also heed it.
﻿I am honoured to speak with you as you open the forty-sixth session of the General Assembly. I should first like to congratulate the outgoing President, Guido de Marco of Malta, and salute our incoming President, Samir Al-Shihabi of Saudi Arabia.
I also want to salute especially Secretary-General Javier Peres de Cuellar, who will step down in just over three months. But let me say, Secretary-General Peres de Cuellar has served with great distinction during a period of unprecedented change and turmoil, and for almost 10 years we have enjoyed the leadership of this man of peace, a man that I, along with many Members, feel proud to call friend, and so today let us congratulate our friend and praise his spectacular service to the United Nations and to the people of the world, the Secretary-General.
Let me also welcome new Members in this Hall, two delegations representing Korea, particularly our democratic friends, the Republic of Korea, the Republics of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, and new missions from the Marshall Islands and Micronesia. Twenty years ago, when I was the Permanent Representative here for the United States, there were 132 United Nations Members. Just one week ago, 159 nations enjoyed membership in the United Nations, and today the number stands at 166. The presence of these new Members alone provides reason for us to celebrate. 
My statement today will not sound like any you have heard from a President of the United States. I am not going to dwell on the super-Power competition that defined international politics for half a century. Instead, I will discuss the challenges of building peace and prosperity in a world leavened by the cold war's end and the resumption of history.
Communism held history captive for years. It suspended ancient disputes; and it suppressed ethnic rivalries, nationalist aspirations and old prejudices. As it has dissolved, suspended hatreds have sprung to life. People who for years have been denied their pasts, have begun searching for their own identities, often through peaceful and constructive means, occasionally through factionalism and bloodshed.
This revival of history ushers in a new era teeming with opportunities and perils. Let us begin by discussing the opportunities. First, history's renewal enables people to pursue their natural instincts for enterprise. Communism froze that progress until its failures became too much for even its defenders to bear, and now citizens throughout the world have chosen enterprise over envy, personal responsibility over the enticements of the State, prosperity over the poverty of central planning.
The United Nations Charter encourages this adventure by pledging to employ international machinery for the promotion of the economic and social advancement of all peoples, and I can think of no better way to fulfil this Mission than to promote the free flow of goods and Ideas, frankly, ideas and goods will travel around the globe with or without our help. The information revolution has destroyed the weapons of enforced isolation and ignorance. In many parts of the world technology has overwhelmed tyranny, proving that the age of Information can become the age of liberation, if we limit State power wisely and free our people to make the best use of new ideas, inventions and insights. By the same token, the world has learned that free markets provide levels of prosperity, growth and happiness that centrally planned economies can never offer.
Even the most charitable estimates indicate that in recent years the free world's economies have grown at twice the rate of the former communist world. Growth does more than fill shelves; it permits every person to gain, not at the expense of others but to the benefit of others. Prosperity encourages people to live as neighbours, not as predators. Economic growth can aid international relations in exactly the same way.
Many nations represented here are parties to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). The Uruguay Round, the latest in the post-war series of trade negotiations, offers hope to developing nations, many of which have been cruelly divided, cruelly deceived, by the false promises of totalitarianism. Here in this Hall, we hear about North-South problems. But free and open trade, including unfettered access to markets and credit, offers developing countries means of self-sufficiency and economic dignity.
If the Uruguay Round should fail, a new wave of protectionism could destroy our hopes for a better future. History shows all too clearly that protectionism can destroy wealth within countries and poison relations between them. Therefore, I call upon all members of GATT to redouble their efforts to reach a successful conclusion for the Uruguay Round. I pledge that the United States will do its part.
I cannot stress this enough: Economic progress will play a vital role In the new world. It supplies the soil in which democracy grows best. People everywhere seek government of and by the people, and they want to enjoy their inalienable rights to freedom and property and person. Challenges to democracy have failed. Just last month, coup plotters in the Soviet Union tried to derail the forces of liberty and reform, but Soviet citizens refused to follow. Most of the nations in this Hall stood with the forces of reform led by Mikhail Gorbachev and Boris Yeltsin, and against the coup plotters.
The challenge facing the Soviet peoples now, that of building political systems based upon individual liberty, minority rights, democracy and free markets, mirrors every nation's responsibility for encouraging peaceful, democratic reform, but it also testifies to the extraordinary power of the democratic ideal. As democracy flourishes, so does the opportunity (or a third historical breakthrough, international cooperation. A year ago, the Soviet Union joined the United States and a host of other nations in defending a tiny country against aggression and opposing Saddam Hussein. For the very first time on a matter of major importance super-Power competition was replaced with international cooperation. The United Nations, in one of its finest moments, constructed a measured, principled, deliberate and courageous response to Saddam Hussein. It stood up to an outlaw who invaded Kuwait, who threatened many States within the region, who sought to set a menacing precedent for the post-cold-war world.
The coalition effort established a model for the collective settlement of disputes. Members sat the goal - the liberation of Kuwait - and devised a courageous, unified means of achieving that goal. Mow, for the first time, we have a real chance to fulfil the United Nations Charter's ambition of working "to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war ... to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men and women and of nations large and small ... to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom". Those are the words of the Charter.
He will not revive these ideals if we fail to acknowledge the challenge that the renewal of history presents. In Europe and Asia, nationalist passions have flared anew, challenging borders, straining the fabric of international society. At the same time, around the world many age-old conflicts still fester. We see signs of this tumult right here. The United Nations has mounted more peace-keeping missions in the last 36 months than during its first 43 years, and although we now seem mercifully liberated from the fear of nuclear holocaust, these smaller, virulent conflicts should trouble us all.
We must face this challenge squarely - first, by pursuing the peaceful resolution of disputes now in progress; secondly, and more importantly, by trying to prevent others from erupting. No one hare can promise that today's borders will remain fixed for all time, but we must strive to ensure the peaceful, negotiated settlement of border disputes.
We must also promote the cause of international harmony by addressing old feuds. We should take seriously the Charter's pledge to practise tolerance and live together in peace with one another as good neighbours. United Nations General Assembly resolution 3379 (XXX), the so-called "Zionism is racism" resolution, mocks this pledge and the principles upon which the United Nations was founded, and I call now for its repeal. Zionism is not a policy; it is the idea that led to the creation of a home for the Jewish people, to the State of Israel, and to equate Zionism with the intolerable sin of racism is to twist history and forget the terrible plight of Jews in the Second World War - and indeed throughout history. To equate Zionism with racism is to reject Israel itself, a Member in good standing of the United Nations. This body cannot claim to seek peace and at the same time challenge Israel's right to exist. By repealing this resolution unconditionally the United Nations will enhance its credibility and serve the cause of peace.
As we work to meet the challenge posed by the resumption of history, we also must defend the Charter's emphasis on inalienable human rights. Government has failed if citizens cannot speak their mind, if they cannot form political parties freely and elect governments without coercion, it they cannot practice their religion freely, if they cannot raise their families in peace, if they cannot enjoy a just return from their labour, if they cannot live fruitful lives and at the end of their days look upon their achievements and their society's, progress with pride. Politicians who talk about democracy and freedom but provide neither eventually will feel the sting of public disapproval and the power of peoples yearning to live free.
Some nations still deny their basic rights to the people, and too many voices cry out for freedom. For example, the people of Cuba suffer oppression at the hands of a dictator who has not got the word, the lone hold-out in an otherwise democratic hemisphere, a man who has not adapted to a world that has no use for totalitarian tyranny. Elsewhere, despots ignore the heartening fact that the rest of the world is embarked upon a new age of liberty.
The renewal of history also imposes an obligation to remain vigilant about new threats and old. He must expand our efforts to control nuclear proliferation. We must work to prevent the spread of chemical and biological weapons and the missiles to deliver them.
It is for this reason that I put forward my Middle East arms initiative, a comprehensive approach to stop and, where possible, reverse the accumulation of arms in that part of the world moat prone to violence. We must remember that self-interest will tug nations in different directions, and that struggles over perceived interests will flare sometimes into violence. We can never say with confidence where the next conflict may arise. And we cannot promise eternal peace - not while demagogue peddle false promises to people hungry with hope; not while terrorists use our citizens as pawns and drug dealers destroy our peoples. He, as a result, must band together to overwhelm affronts to basic human dignity. It is no longer acceptable to shrug and say that one man's terrorist is another man's freedom fighter. Let us put the law above the crude and cowardly practice of hostage-holding.
In a world defined by change, we must be as firm in principle as we are flexible in our response to changing international conditions. That is especially true today of Iraq. Six months after the adoption of Security Council resolutions 687 (1991) and 688 (1991), Saddam continues to rebuild his weapons of mass destruction and to subject the Iraqi people to brutal repression. Saddam's contempt for United Nations resolutions was first demonstrated back in August 1990, and it continues even as I am speaking. His Government refuses to permit unconditional helicopter inspections, and right now is refusing to allow United Nations inspectors to leave inspected premises with documents relating to an Iraqi nuclear weapons programme. It is the view of the United States that we must keep the United Nations sanctions in place as long as he remains in power. This also shows that we cannot compromise for a moment in seeing that Iraq destroys all of its weapons of mass destruction and the means to deliver them. And we will not compromise.
This is not to say - let me be clear on this point - that we should punish the Iraqi people. Let me repeat: our argument has never been with the people of Iraq. It was, and is, with a brutal dictator whose arrogance dishonours the Iraqi people. Security Council resolution 706 (1991) created a responsible mechanism for sending humanitarian relief to innocent Iraqi citizens. He must put that mechanism to work. Ma must not abandon our principled stand against Saddam's aggression. This cooperative effort has liberated Kuwait. Now it can lead to a just government in Iraq. And when it does - when it does - the Iraqi people can look forward to better lives, free at home, free to engage in a world beyond their borders.
The resumption of history also permits the United Nations to resume the important business of promoting the values that I have discussed today. This body can serve as a vehicle through which willing parties can settle old disputes. In the months to come, I look forward to working with Secretary-General Peres de Cuellar and his successor as we pursue peace in such diverse and divided lands as Afghanistan, Cambodia, Cyprus, El Salvador, and Western Sahara. The United Nations can encourage free market development through its international lending and aid institutions. However, it should not dictate the particular forms of government that nations should adopt. It can, and should, encourage the values upon which the Organization was founded. Together, we should insist that nations seeking our acceptance meet standards of human decency.
Where institutions of freedom have lain dormant, the United Nations can offer them new life. These institutions play a crucial role in our quest for a new world order, an order in which no nation must surrender one iota of its own sovereignty, an order characterized by the rule of law rather than the resort to force, the cooperative development of disputes rather than anarchy and bloodshed, and an unstinting belief in human rights.
Finally, you may wonder about America's role the new world I have described. Let me assure you, the United States has no intention of striving for a pax americana. However, we will remain engaged. We will not retreat and pull back into isolationism. We will offer friendship and leadership. In short, we seek a pax universalis, built upon shared responsibilities and aspirations.
To all assembled: We have an opportunity to spare our sons and daughters the sins and errors of the past. We can build a future more satisfying than any our world has ever known. The future lies undefined before us, full of promise, littered with peril. We can choose the kind of world we want: one blistered by the fires of war and subjected to the winds of coercion and chance, or one made more peaceful by reflection and choice. Take this challenge seriously. Inspire future generations to praise and venerate you, to say, "On the ruins of conflict, these brave men and women built an era of peace and understanding. They inaugurated a new world order, an order worth preserving for the ages."
Good luck to each and every one of you.






﻿Sir, first of all, please allow me to warmly congratulate you on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly of the United Nations at its forty-sixth session. I believe that, with your wisdom and experience, you will accomplish with distinction the noble task entrusted to you by the Assembly. Meanwhile I would like to express my appreciation and thanks to your predecessor, Mr. De Marco, for his positive contribution to the work of the last session.
Seven new Members have been admitted at the current session to the United Nations. This is a gratifying event. I wish to extend my sincere congratulations to the Democratic People"3 Republic of Korea, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic of Estonia, the Republic of Latvia and the Republic of Lithuania on their admission to membership in the United Nations.
It. is still fresh in people's memory that the forty-fifth session of the General Assembly was convened under the dark cloud of the ongoing Gulf crisis. As we gather here for the forty-sixth session, this dark cloud has already dispersed. Yet peace, security and development still face grave challenges in various regions and the world as a whole. And the people of all countries are anxious to see the establishment of a new international order which will make our world a better one to live in. Though the past year has seen some relaxation of tension in the international situation, more serious problems of instability and turbulence have emerged, with the sharpening of new conflicts and North-South contradictions. This has caused widespread concern on the part of the international community.
The tendency towards reduced tension and stability on the Korean peninsula accords with the aspirations of the Korean people and serves peace and security in Asia and the world at large. The simultaneous admission at the current session of North and South Korea an full Members of the United Nations is an important event conducive to the relaxation of tension on the Korean peninsula. We hope that both North and South Korea will continue to improve their relations through dialogue and consultations, expand their exchanges and cooperation and gradually remove antagonism and estrangement between them, looking towards the final independent and peaceful reunification of the nation.
The Cambodian Supreme National Council, under the presidency of Prince Norodom Sihanouk, has held several successful meetings, and, as the organ of supreme power in Cambodia, has sent its delegation to this session. Here we should like to express our warm welcome to the Cambodian delegation headed by Prince Sihanouk, Proceeding from their overall national interest, all the Cambodian parties are working to set aside their past mutual grievances and strengthen their unity and cooperation with a view to attaining soon a comprehensive political settlement of the Cambodian question on the basis of the United Nations framework document. They are making fruitful efforts to build an independent, peaceful, neutral and non-aligned Cambodia. For over 10 years the international community, the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council, the members of the Association of South-East Asian Nations and the other participants in the Paris International Conference on Cambodia have all made great efforts to achieve a political settlement of the Cambodian question. We wish to see an early resumption of the Paris conference and the official conclusion of an agreement on a comprehensive settlement of the Cambodian question. We believe that a settlement of the Cambodian question will bring about peace and stability in South-East Asia and will create a favourable environment for cooperation between, and the economic development, of, all countries in the region.
The situation in southern Africa continues to improve. After 16 years of civil war, the Angolan Government and UNITA have finally signed a peace accord. Following the independence of Namibia, the people of South Africa have also won significant victories in their struggle against apartheid, and progress is being made towards a political settlement of the South African question. We welcome the positive measures taken by the South African Government, and hope that Government, will continue its efforts to remove obstacles to constitutional negotiations and accelerate the process aimed at a political settlement, of the South African question.
We are pleased that the question of Western Sahara is moving towards a political solution. China sincerely hopes that, with the concerted efforts of the international community and the parties concerned, a proper resolution will soon be found.
We are deeply concerned about the exacerbation of ethnic, racial and religious contradictions in a number of countries, including several in Europe. The national independence and territorial integrity of some countries are under threat, while intense civil strife and political turmoil have caused serious damage to others. We are deeply disturbed by the grave situation confronting Yugoslavia today. We call on the Yugoslav people of different nationalities to solve their differences by peaceful means and to refrain from intensifying the conflict so as to enable their country to re-embark on the road of peaceful development.
It is reassuring that, following the Gulf war, the sovereignty, independence and legitimate Government of Kuwait have been restored. However, peace and stability in the Gulf region have not yet materialized, and the Middle East region remains fraught with contradictions. The achievement of peace and stability in the Middle East hinges on the early resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict. As a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council, China will join the rest of the international community in a continued effort to advance the Middle East peace process. We have always stood for a political settlement of the Middle East question on the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions, especially Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) end 338 (1973). The occupied Arab territories should be returned, the legitimate national rights of the Palestinian people restored, and the sovereignty and security of all the countries in the Middle East, region, including Israel, respected and guaranteed.
We believe that the convening of an international peace conference at an appropriate time under the auspices of the United Nations and with the participation of the five permanent members of the Security Council and all the parties concerned, including the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), would be the best means of achieving a final settlement of the Middle East question.
Pending the achievement of these targets, we support all the efforts of the parties concerned in that region that they deem appropriate and useful with a view to accelerating the Middle East peace process. To help move the peace process forward, we call upon all parties to undertake not to use force and to adopt effective measures to ease tension. The international community should endeavour to help to stop Israel's activities in establishing Jewish settlements in the occupied territories and suppressing the Palestinian inhabitants. Genuine and lasting peace can be achieved only through mutual recognition between the State of Palestine and the State of Israel for the purpose of facilitating the Middle East peace process, as well as peaceful coexistence of the Arab and the Jewish nations.
The discrepancies between North and South are aggravated by the widening economic gap and the increasing inequality between rich and poor. Such imbalance in development may lead to a more turbulent world situation. To make matters worse, more than a billion people around the world living in absolute poverty still do not have adequate food and clothing, and many are struggling against starvation and disease just to survive.
In the 1990s - the last decade of this century - the people of all countries are confronted with this increasingly acute question: where is our world going, and what kind of new international order should be established?
The establishment of a peaceful, stable, just and equitable new international order would accord with the will of the people and meet the needs of the times. It is the view of the Chinese Government that a new international order should conform to the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, as well as those principles that have proved practical and are widely accepted by the international community. Facts have proved that five principles - mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity; mutual non-aggression; non-interference in each other's internal affairs; equality and mutual benefit; and peaceful coexistence - comprise the most fundamental norms governing international relations. Those principles are in keeping with the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and reflect the characteristics essential to international relations of a new type. Therefore, we maintain that the new international order that is envisaged should be established on the basis of the five principles of peaceful coexistence.
For the purpose of exploring with all members of the Assembly the means of establishing a just and equitable new international order, I should like to set out, at this solemn forum, the position and opinions of the Chinese Government on the question of peace and security and on economic and social matters.
First, Having suffered from the scourge of two world wars this century, mankind has come to appreciate and cherish peace all the more deeply. The development of every country and the progress of mankind require a peaceful international environment. In our view, the following points are essential to the maintenance of world peace. All countries should respect each other's sovereignty, treat each other as an equal, put differences aside in the search for common ground, engage in friendly cooperation and live in harmony. No country should seek hegemony or try to manipulate international affairs, or pursue power politics on the basis of the law of the jungle. All States - large or small, strong or weak, rich or poor - should participate in the discussion and settlement of international affairs as equal members of the international community. Every State has the right to choose independently its own social, political and economic systems and its own path of development in the light of its own national conditions. No country - in particular, no big Power - should impose its own ideology, values or mode of development on other countries. All countries should observe the principle of mutual respect, for territorial integrity and the inviolability of national borders, and no country should be allowed to invade or annex the territory of other countries, under whatever pretext, Disputes between States should be settled in a reasonable manner by peaceful means, and the use or threat of force is not permissible in international relations.
Secondly, an important link in safeguarding the security of all States lies in an end to the arms race and in effective disarmament. This is an important means of easing international tension. All along, China has stood for the complete prohibition and total destruction of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, and for the banning of research into, and the development of, new weapons of mass destruction of any type. We are also for the comprehensive and balanced non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction through just, reasonable, necessary and appropriate measures. China pursues a policy of not advocating, encouraging or facilitating the development of nuclear weapons by other countries. To facilitate the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons, and to safeguard international peace, security and stability, China has announced its decision in principle to accede to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. In addition, China has always stood for the early conclusion of a convention banning chemical weapons and for greater effectiveness for the Convention on the Prohibition of Biological Weapons.
Not long ago the United States and the Soviet Union reached an agreement on the reduction of their strategic nuclear weapons. We welcome this development. Nevertheless, the signing of this treaty is just an initial step in the reduction of the huge strategic nuclear arsenals of the United States and the Soviet Union. Moreover, the treaty does not cover all types of nuclear weapons and does not prohibit continuing United States and Soviet efforts to improve the quality of their weapons and to create new weapons systems. Even after the prescribed reduction under this treaty, the two countries will still possess more than 90 per cent of the world's total nuclear weaponry and remain capable of destroying mankind several times over. The recent changes that occurred in the Soviet Union caused particular concern in the international community as to whether nuclear weapons can be strictly controlled. The United States and the Soviet Union, therefore, still have a long way to go in fulfilling their special responsibilities and obligations with regard to nuclear disarmament.
In principle, China is in favour of placing under fair, reasonable and effective control the trade in arms, including various sophisticated weapons. But this has to be decided by the international community through extensive consultations, with all countries on an equal footing, after full preparation.
We hold that military capabilities should be used only for the purpose of self-defence and that no country should seek a level of armament in excess of its reasonable defence needs. We support the proposal for a zone free from weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East and comprehensive and balanced arms control in the region through consultations and negotiations with the countries concerned on an equal footing. The views and opinions of the countries in that region should be fully heard and respected, and the possibility of a few countries monopolizing the affair and imposing their views on others should be guarded against. Arms control is only a means, and a just and lasting peace in the Middle East is the objective. Arms control in the Middle East, therefore, should be linked to the Middle East peace process. The United Nations should fully play its due role in this connection and, when necessary, a conference on arms control in the Middle East should be convened with the participation of all the countries concerned.
Outer space belongs to all mankind; it should be utilized only for peaceful purposes and for the benefit of mankind. No country should develop outer space weapons. The United States and the Soviet Union, first and foremost, should stop developing, testing and deploying such weapons and destroy all space weapons in their possession. The international community should start negotiations at an early date for the conclusion of an international agreement on the complete prohibition of outer space weapons with a view to stopping and preventing the arms race from extending into outer space.
An important characteristic of current international economic relations is the aggravation of North-South contradictions and the widening of their economic gap. The majority of the developing countries remain confronted with such difficulties as crushing debt burden, negative net flow of financial resources and worsening terms of trade.
To a large extent, the widening economic gap between the North and the South is the result of the existing inequitable and unfair international economic order. The present radical changes in the world situation have created new difficulties for the developing countries. To reverse the situation, it is necessary to establish step by step a new international economic order which should include the following elements:
Every country has the right to choose its own social system, economic model and road to development suited to its national conditions;
Every country has the right to exercise effective control over its own resources and their exploitation; All countries are entitled to participate in the handling of international economic affairs;
The developed countries should respect and accommodate the interests and needs of the developing countries and refrain from attaching political strings to their aid; and
Efforts should be made to strengthen North-South dialogue and cooperation with a view to necessary adjustment and reform in commodity, trade, funds, debt, monetary, financial and other important fields of international economy.
The economy of the world is an interrelated and interdependent whole. While the developing countries need funds and technology from the developed countries, the latter also need the raw materials and markets of the former. In essence, the question of development hinges on North-South relations. Without a fundamental improvement in North-South relations, it will be difficult to ensure world peace and stability, and the situation will benefit neither the poor nor the rich countries. To promote common development, all countries must help each other, like passengers in the same boat, and endeavour to narrow the gap between the North and the South and establish a fair and rational international economic order based on mutual benefit and cooperation.
The environment is another outstanding problem facing the international community today. Improving the environment and protecting the Earth have a vital bearing on the very conditions for the survival of mankind.
The question of environment does not exist by itself. It is closely linked to economic growth and social development. Owing to historical reasons and economic backwardness, a vast number of developing countries are constrained in their ability to participate effectively in the protection of the global environment. Yet without their participation, there can be no fundamental improvement in the environment. We appeal to the countries with comparatively abundant financial and technological resources to take the lead in moving to protect the global environment and help the developing countries enhance their ability in environmental protection.
China attaches great importance to environmental protection, which has become one of its basic state policies. We have taken an active part in international cooperation in this field. Last June, at the invitation of the Chinese Government, the ministers of 41 developing countries met in Beijing for the Ministerial Conference of the Developing Countries on Environment and Development and issued the Beijing Declaration, which sets forth the principled position and basic views of the developing countries on ways to resolve the questions of global environment and development and gives expression to the common will and aspiration of three quarters of mankind for environmental protection and development. This will no doubt exert a positive influence on the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development scheduled for 1992 in Brazil and the efforts for a rational solution to the problem of global environment.
The promotion of the universal attainment of human rights and fundamental freedoms is inextricably linked to the common interests of mankind. Over the past forty years or more, the international community has made positive contributions in safeguarding the purposes stated in the Charter of the United Nations pertaining to the promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms. Thanks to the concerted efforts of its Member States, the United Nations has formulated nearly 70 international conventions, declarations and instruments on human rights which have played a positive role in promoting United Nations activities in the field of human rights.
For a long time, however, the human rights forum of the United Nations has been used by certain countries as a place for waging cold war, with the result that the United Nations efforts for the promotion and protection of human rights are subjected to the influence of abnormal phenomena. For example, human rights has been used as a means of pushing power politics and interfering in affairs that are basically within the jurisdiction of other States; the concept of human rights has been fragmented and double standards have been followed; some have made efforts to glorify themselves and attack others on the question of human rights and set up their own likes and dislikes as criteria of human rights in disregard of the international conventions and the specific conditions of other countries. All this not only runs counter to the purposes and principles of the Charter but also seriously hampers normal international cooperation in the field of human rights and impedes the universal realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
The Chinese Government has consistently supported and respected the principles of protecting human rights contained in the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant international instruments, and has actively participated in a wide range of human rights activities in the United Nations.
We believe that in order effectively to guarantee and promote human rights and fundamental freedoms of all mankind, it is necessary to recognize the various countries' different features - their different political economic and social systems and their different historical, religious and cultural backgrounds. In this regard, all countries, based on the principles of respect for each other's sovereignty and non-interference in each other's internal affairs, should strive to achieve mutual understanding, seek common ground while putting aside differences and replace cold war with normal international cooperation.
In our view, racial discrimination, apartheid, colonialism, foreign aggression and occupation are gross violations of human rights that ought to be given full attention and halted by the international community. In the field of human rights equal importance should be attached to civil and political rights, as well as to economic, social, cultural and developmental rights. He must not emphasise some rights while belittling or even denying others. For the vast number of developing countries, the most fundamental human right is the right to subsistence and development.
As you all know, China is a developing country with a population of 1.15 billion. In spite of a successful family planning policy, our population still grows by 17 million every year. By feeding 22 per cent of the world's population with only 7 per cent of the world's arable land, China has made its utmost contribution to the protection of mankind's right to subsistence. The Chinese Government has also worked actively to safeguard and guarantee the lawful rights and interests of old and young, women and children and the disabled through legislation and other effective measures, and it has had marked success. Any unprejudiced person can readily see that China today enjoys political stability and economic growth and that its people are living in peace and contentment. China's stability and development are without doubt important factors contributing to peace and stability in Asia and in the world at large. Conversely, should China be plunged into turmoil, stability in Asia and the world would be seriously impaired. China needs stability, and the world needs a stable China.
China is advancing along the road of building socialism with Chinese characteristics. Over the past 10 years and more we have adhered to the policies of reform and opening to the outside world and have scored noticeable achievements in economic development. At present the Chinese people are implementing their Ten-Year Programme and their Eighth Five-Year Plan for National Economic and Social Development. We will unswervingly deepen the reform, open the country still wider and gradually establish a new structure of planned commodity economy with a view to quadrupling the 1980 gross national product by the end of this century. In order to reach this target, a great deal of work needs to be accomplished and a huge number of large-scale projects completed. While deepening economic reform, we will also further the policy of opening to the outside world and carry out political restructuring step by step.
This past summer some regions of China were hit by severe floods, which brought the people tremendous losses in lives and property as well as in industrial and agricultural production. In some areas the loss was very heavy. The Chinese Government has adopted effective measures, funnelling large amounts of financial and material resources to assisting the disaster-stricken areas and minimizing the losses. In those areas there has been no occurrence of famine or pestilence and no influx of refugees to cities. China has been victorious in its efforts to combat the floods. It is estimated that China's gross national product will continue to grow at a rate of 6 per cent. In fighting the floods and in the subsequent relief operations, we have received sympathy and assistance from the governments and people of other countries, relevant United Nations agencies, international organizations and various quarters of the international community, for which we wish to express our heartfelt thanks.
We are happy to note that, as the most important global organization in the present world, the United Nations has in the past year played a major role in maintaining world peace, promoting the political settlement of burning issues, enhancing development in various countries and strengthening international cooperation. Facts have proved that the mechanism of the United nations remains effective. Here. I would like to point out in particular that Secretary-General Perez de Cuellar has for many years made fruitful efforts in this respect.
In the present complex and volatile international situation people the world over all hope that, in keeping with the purposes and principles of its Charter, the United Nations will work tirelessly to bring about fair and reasonable solutions to such regional conflicts as the on? Prevailing in the Middle East, promote North-South dialogue and help developing countries overcome their economic difficulties and develop their economies. We sincerely hope that the United Nations will play a positive role in advancing disarmament and in addressing the major problems facing mankind, such as environmental protection and drug control.
In this diversified international community, the search for consensus and commonality is not only the original objective set for the United Nations at its inception but also the distinctive feature of this largest international Organization. Faced with the stupendous changes occurring in the current international situation, the international community has come to regard the establishment of a new international order as a common aspiration. We hope and believe that the United Nations will play a significant role in the establishment of a fair and reasonable new international order.
Twenty years have passed since the restoration of China's lawful seat the United Nations in 1971. Over these years China, as a permanent member of the Security Council, has played a positive role in maintaining peace and promoting economic development In the world. In the future, China will, as always, continue to abide strictly by the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter, to perform its duties conscientiously and to join the rest of the States Member of the United Nations in actively supporting the work of the Organisation, contributing its share to the promotion of world peace, security and development as well as to the establishment of a new international order,
﻿This session of the General Assembly is taking place in a world that has undergone fundamental change. The United Nations is the focal point of mankind's new hopes and expectations. This makes your office, Mr. President, one of special responsibility. I wish you luck and success and greet you as the representative of a country with which we, Germany, have long-standing close relations.
I welcome most heartily the Baltic States of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania as new Members of the United Nations. They had lost their freedom and independence in 1940 as a result of that criminal document, the Hitler-Stalin pact. All the greater, therefore, is the pleasure felt by us Germans at the fact that history has at long last justly rewarded these courageous peoples with the freedom they longed for.
I welcome the two Korean States. We hop« that the wish of the Korean people will be fulfilled, that they will be able, like the German people, to live in freedom and democracy in one sovereign and independent State. I also welcome the Marshall Islands and Micronesia to the family of nations.
Every year since 1974 I have addressed this Assembly on behalf of the Federal Republic of Germany. On each occasion I have expressed our intention to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German people could recover their unity in free self-determination. On 3 October 1990 that wish came true.
At this moment I commemorate all those who had to sacrifice their lives and their freedom in prisons and camps because they wanted to live in a European Germany of freedom, democracy and human rights. We pay a tribute to all those who, is what was then the German Democratic Republic, as everywhere in Central and Eastern Europe, took to the streets to gain freedom, democracy and unity by peaceful means.
Today I address the Assembly for the first time as the Foreign Minister of united Germany. Germany takes its place in the family of United Nations on the basis of the United Nations Charter.
As a European country, we are committed to the Charter of Paris. We Germans regard the greater weight of our people united in one State as a mandate to assume greater responsibility for freedom, democracy and human rights in a European Germany which has put behind it the nation-State thinking of the past. While the division of Germany made manifest the division of Europe, German unity today contributes to the unification of the whole European continent.
Europe stands at a crossroads in its history. We Germans want this Europe to develop in close transatlantic solidarity. The North Atlantic alliance and the involvement of the United States and Canada in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) process are a reflection of that solidarity. The European Community's transatlantic declaration underscores the will for ever closer European-North American cooperation.
The aims of the policy of united Germany are as follows:
First, we want the European Community, of which we are a founding member, to develop into a European Union and ultimately into the United States of Europe. We want this year to bring a final decision in favour of political union and economic and monetary union.
Second, we want all democratic States in Europe to be able to accede to this Community. For the new democracies in Eastern Europe which are introducing market economies the way must be opened, through association, to full membership.
Third, we want to bring the whole of Europe ever closer together on the basis of the Charter of Paris. We also want the peoples of the Soviet Union, who are adopting a new form of coexistence as sovereign republics, to take their place in this Europe.

Europe will find its new order in confederal structures; these will manifest themselves in different forms. They will take account of existing structures and will afford the regions new opportunities. With greater unity, Europe will at the same time acquire greater diversity.
It is the responsibility of the Western democracies also to establish the material conditions for European unity so that new boundaries do not divide Europe into haves and have-nots. Mew priorities will have to be fixed for material assistance as well. Germany is facing up to this task: as Europeans, we aim, together with other Europeans, to create one Europe by providing assistance for our Eastern neighbours. No one in the West will be permanently well off if those in the East are permanently badly off.
Fourth, as a country in the heart of Europe, we want to devote all our energy to achieving the unity of our continent. This is underscored by the unique link between Germany and France. Also important in this process is the close cooperation with our Eastern neighbours. I emphasised this in the Declaration of Weimar, signed on 29 August 1991 with my French colleague, Roland Dumas, and my Polish colleague. Professor Krzysztof Skubiszewski.
As the door to unity began to open for the German people in the autumn of 1989, I stated here before the United Nations on 27 September that year that we wanted Poland to know that the Polish people's

"... right to live within secure borders will not be called into question, not now or in the future, through territorial claims by us Germans". (A/44/PV.8. p. 18) That was a signal, not only to the Polish people but to all our neighbours. 
That statement was incorporated into the two-plus-four Treaty and the German-Polish Treaty, which is at present being debated by the parliaments of both countries. The German-Czechoslovak Treaty on good-neighbourly Relations and Friendly Cooperation is likewise about to be signed. These treaties, like the major treaty with the Soviet Union and the treaties with the other countries of Central and Eastern Europe still to come, manifest our intention to work towards one Europe. Our relationship with the Soviet Union has meanwhile assumed central importance for the whole of Europe.
The German people are emphasising their determination to draw the conclusions from the ill-fated chapters of our history in this century and to help build a Europe based on responsibility and not on the power politics of the past.
Fifth, we want the Western alliance to continue its efforts to ensure stability throughout Europe in a changing political environment. The contacts already established with the former members of the Warsaw Pact, including the Soviet Union, must be developed into a comprehensive partnership for security. Cooperative security structures must emerge. Our alliance, as Czechoslovak President Vaclav Havel confirmed in his address to the NATO Council on 21 March, 1991, was never a threat to others.
The ending of the East-West confrontation has opened the way for the radical reduction of excessively large military arsenals. We want conventional disarmament to be pursued consistently, in accordance with the first Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe. We want a global prohibition on chemical weapons. We want the removal of short-range nuclear missiles and of nuclear artillery ammunition - this is urgent: such weapons are increasingly destabilizing; the danger of their proliferation is growing they must disappear at long last. We expect the nuclear Powers to continue the reduction of strategic nuclear weapons.
Sixth, we want to make the CSCE capable of action. After the establishment of the Council of CSCE Foreign Ministers and of the CSCE emergency mechanism, I submitted specific proposals at the CSCE Conference on the Human Dimension, held in Moscow on 10 September this year, aimed at more effective protection for human rights, democracy and the rule of law. It must also be possible to afford such protection without the consent of the country concerned.
The right to self-determination and, directly linked with it, the rights of minorities, must be respected everywhere. Europe is heading towards more identity and more plurality. From this must not emerge neo-nationalism. European structures must absorb these developments. For all questions we must have a European response. That is a task for the European Community, and it is a task for the CSCE.
The crisis-management capability of the CSCE must be enhanced. The less necessary it becomes to protect oneself from threats from outside, the more we need a system in which all cooperate in guaranteeing common security. If we together learn to guarantee our security from one another, we in Europe will be on the way to a collective system of security.
Seventh, we Germans want the new Europe to exercise its global responsibility. It should not and will not be introspective. The trend towards a Euro-Atlantic area of cooperation stretching from Vancouver to Vladivostok opens up a historic opportunity for development for the countries of the South as well.
The world economic summit of the seven industrial nations - including Japan - faces its greatest test where global responsibilities are concerned. The triad of Worth America, Europe and Japan must prove its worth. The third world will not remain in the shadow of this development. It will benefit vitally from this new era.
The ending of the East-West conflict in Europe is at last releasing those energies tied up by the cold war which mankind now needs in order to solve the global challenges of the twenty-first century. The first fruits of this new development are already appearing. The East-West confrontation is no longer being staged in the third world. Freedom is emerging in Angola and in Cambodia, and in Afghanistan too there are signs of hope.
In the Middle East as well a historic opportunity for peace is opening up. We all hope that at the forthcoming peace conference all participants will at long last realize that there is no justifiable alternative to a genuine balance of interests that gives Israel security and peace and the Palestinians self-determination. With great commitment and unending patience. Secretary of State Baker has paved the way for such a balance. In this he has Germany's full support. The General Assembly resolution equating Zionism with racism must be repealed. We support the American initiative in that regard.
In South Africa, President De Klerk and Nelson Mandela have taken decisive steps toward creating a South Africa free from oppression and racial hatred. All citizens of that country must participate with equal rights in its political, economic and social life. This must be guaranteed by a new constitution. A democratic South Africa can and must become a locomotive of development and stability in a region still afflicted by poverty and conflicts.
The economic fruits of the new development in Europe are likewise discernible. As the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development has calculated, the single European market will mean a 7 per cent increase in the exports of developing countries to the European Community. That will boost their earnings by $10 billion. And if in a few years' time Central and Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union become regions of dynamic growth, they will also develop into important new markets for exports from the South. Above all, however, the end of the arms race between East and Heat will release tremendous energies which will benefit the third world above all.
Eighth, we Germans want the United Nations to become the main forum for action in the new world order. To that end, it is absolutely essential that Security Council resolutions be implemented, completely and unconditionally. Aggressors like Saddam Hussein must no longer be permitted to keep people in constant fear with aggression and means of mass destruction. We support President Bush in his resolve to counteract fresh provocations. Our world Organization must be able to meet the challenges of the new era. Conflict prevention, demographic policy and environmental protection must be improved.
The ending of the East-West conflict has freed the world Organization from its paralysis. This new freedom to act must now be used. Germany is prepared to play its part. The united Germany will assume all rights and meet a11 obligations of the United Nations Charter, including measures of collective security, also with our armed forces. For this purpose we intend to amend our constitution.
Ninth, in order to improve coordination of United Nations disaster relief measures, we advocate the appointment of a high-ranking representative exclusively responsible to the Secretary-General. This person would have to coordinate all international relief measures and have immediately available an emergency fund and national rescue and relief services.
We want to enhance the status of the Secretary-General himself. He has frequently spoken of this necessity, and rightly so. Now his tenure is coming to an end. The world has come to respect him as a guardian of peace, a champion of human rights, and an advocate of the poor. In an era of epochal change, he has, with clear vision and a firm hand, enhanced the reputation of the United Nations. For this the family of nations owes him a debt of gratitude and appreciation.
Tenth, we want to strengthen the instruments asserting the rule of law in the world. The experience of our history has committed us in a special way to freedom, the rule of law and human rights. We pursue these goals in Europe, and we intend to pursue them in the United Nations as well. He intend to pursue a policy which focuses on the individual, makes human rights and human dignity the measures of all human action and does not paralyze people's energy and enterprise.
The world today realizes that this is a precondition for prosperity, social progress and peace. It also realizes that despotism negates development and freedom. The alarming figure of 15 million refugees worldwide shows that the world is still far from ensuring adequate protection for human rights and the rights of minorities.
The violation of human rights must no longer be a domestic concern of individual States but a domestic concern of the community of nations as a whole. Today sovereignty must meet its limits in the responsibility of States for mankind as a whole and for the survival of Creation. When human rights are trampled under foot, the family of nations is not confined to the role of spectator. It can - it must - intervene.
We are witness to the persecution of the Kurdish people. Anyone who threatens peoples with genocide, anyone who deliberately destroys nature's already fragile equilibrium in an entire region, must be brought to account before an international tribunal. We call for an international court of justice of the United Nations where crimes against humanity, crimes against peace, genocide, war crimes and environmental criminality can be prosecuted and punished. We call for a court of justice to which anyone who feels that his human rights have been violated may appeal. We call for the proscription of torture and capital punishment.
We need an effective international environmental law regime with appropriate international controls. It must be possible to impose sanctions on countries that deliberately destroy the environment. We also have to effectively prevent environmental warfare. I ask the General Assembly to support the draft resolution on this important matter which Germany proposes to introduce.
We call upon all States to accede to the International Convention against the Taking of Hostages, and we call for sanctions against countries which tolerate hostage-taking. The World Conference on Human Rights, scheduled to take place in 1993, must deal with those questions that are of such vital importance for a new culture of international coexistence. We are looking forward to hosting the Conference in Berlin, that symbol of a new era of humanity and solidarity in Europe.
Eleventh, as in the case of civil human rights, we seek protection for economic and social human rights. The united Germany will continue to render a significant contribution to the development of the third world. In spite of the challenges presented by economic and ecological reconstruction in central and eastern Europe, the diversion of capital from South to East that had been feared has not taken place. This reflects the determination of the Western industrial nations to live up to their responsibility for development on a global scale.
Germany, in spite of the enormous domestic strain on its resources and the disproportionately high level of support for its eastern neighbours, has increased its official development assistance even more. Furthermore, the German people last year donated more than 1 billion Deutschmarks for humanitarian purposes in third-world countries. This is proof that their own country's problems and those of central and eastern Europe have not caused them to forget the plight of people in Asia, Africa and Latin America.
There is a growing appreciation in third-world countries that it is not enough simply to expect the donor countries to do their duty, but that they themselves are primarily responsible for putting their houses in order. In future the German Government will, more than previously, make its assistance
Conditional upon the extent to which recipients are prepared to create the right pluralistic, rule-of-law and free-market framework. Countries which are more concerned with strengthening their armies than seeing to the needs of their people can no longer count on our support. Considering the degree of hunger and poverty, annual military spending of close to $200 billion by the third world is irresponsible. The responsibility lies with the buyers and sellers of weapons alike. The mere freezing of this military expenditure would save about $15 billion a year - about one quarter of annual development assistance.
The restriction of arms exports requires, as a first step, greater transparency. Since 1980 I have been urging the world Organisation to establish a register in which transfers of weapons would be recorded. This proposal, which is now being advocated by the European Community as a whole, should, during this session of the General Assembly, at long last meet with broad support. We Germans will place even greater restrictions on the export of arms.
Heavy indebtedness remains for many countries one of the greatest obstacles to development. The debate on Africa has shown that we need a new arrangement particularly for the poorest countries. The amount of debt remission should correspond to the plight of the country concerned. The markets of the North must not remain closed. This situation is depriving the South of proceeds from foreign exchange amounting to an estimated $100 billion a year. That is about twice the total sum of development aid. This is why the outcome of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) negotiations is not a matter for the industrial countries among themselves. It affects above all the future of the developing countries.
Twelfth, we want the third-world countries to participate on an equal footing in the dialogue on mankind's future, in all respects - political, economic, ecological and cultural. As before, we regard the Non-Aligned Movement as an indispensable source of global stability. Mankind's new challenges, the greater interdependence and responsibility of the community of nations make new forms of dialogue based on partnership between East and Nest and between North and South imperative. The global trend towards a free society, pluralistic democracy and market economy has created new, favourable conditions for such a "dialogue of the one world". He must now use this opportunity.
While we are here debating the common future tasks of the world community, war is being waged in Europe. People are being killed, are bleeding to death. Fighting is going on in Croatia - but not only there. The President and the Prime Minister of Yugoslavia say that the army has placed itself beyond political control. They have appealed to the United Nations. The peoples of Yugoslavia have a right to peace. The Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE), the European Community and the Western European Union (WEU) are striving to bring about a cease-fire and a peace agreement. For this they require the support of the community of nations and the Security Council. He expect a binding weapons embargo. He expect the Security Council to adopt a clear, unequivocal position so that the fighting can be stopped. The use of force to achieve political ends must remain unlawful. We shall never recognize the acquisition of territory by force. Anyone aiming to alter Yugoslavia's internal and external borders by force is challenging the very foundations of human coexistence. Germany has in recent decades developed friendly relations with all peoples of Yugoslavia. We do not take sides against one people or another; we take the side of the women and mothers who do not want their husbands and sons to die in a senseless war. We take the aide of peace against war, of human rights, of the rights of minorities and the right to self-determination. We wish success to the peace conference that we together with France proposed to the arbitration commission and to the mediator. Lord Carrington. Within the framework of the European Community and the CSCE arbitration mechanism we shall make every effort to achieve a peace settlement in which the peoples of Yugoslavia alone will determine their future, as the CSCE Foreign Ministers decided under my chairmanship in Berlin on 19 June 1991.
On the threshold of the new millennium mankind faces a global challenge that overshadows all else: that of fighting poverty, reducing population growth and protecting the natural sources of life. What the twenty-first century will look like depends on the decisions we take in the next 10 years.
The concern with freedom in the past two years has changed the countenance of Europe, indeed of the world, at breathtaking speed. What could not be changed in that short period were the economic and social conditions of the people. If a billion people have to manage on less than one dollar a day, if 23 per cent of the world's population commands over 85 per cent of the world's income, then everybody's security is threatened. Mau is still waging war against creation.
We need a comprehensive peace pact between peoples, between nations, and between man and nature. These are the tasks for a new world domestic policy.
We need to realise that the social issue on a global scale is the great challenge of the new era. Only decent human conditions for all create freedom. It is only to this kind of freedom that the future will belong. In the last three and a half decades the population of the third world has almost doubled. In the next generation the developing countries will account for over 80 per cent of the world's population. Today already, more than one third of the world's population is undernourished. What will the situation be like a generation hence? This question in itself indicates the whole dimension of our responsibility. Our task is to meet the needs of the present and at the same time protect the Interests of future generations - and also to attempt to reconcile economy and ecology.
The accumulation of arms during the cold war has consumed astronomical sums. How it is a question of directing our combined efforts to the central task of the twenty-first century: solving the world's social, demographic and ecological problems and pursuing disarmament.
This is the spiritual and moral challenge confronting the nations of the world. New thinking is required from each one of us. The signs are there. When did the voice of freedom and democracy speak with such force as today? It is true: the world ha3 changed fundamentally. It has changed through the spirit of freedom. Everywhere human rights and human dignity are gaining ground. Hardly ever have we been more aware of this than on 21 August this year, when the Moscow coup against freedom failed. On exactly that day 23 years previously the Soviet army had brutally crushed the Prague Spring. This time the soldiers of the same army refused to shoot at the people who had gathered in Moscow's "Square of Free Russia" to defend freedom and democracy with their lives. There it became clear to the whole world:
Mikhail Gorbachev's courageous reformist policy has become irreversible. Today already he has taken his place in the annals of history.
The events of that day gave the lie to all those in the West who did not believe that the peoples of the Soviet Union had the will for freedom and democracy. Boris Yeltsin, Eduard Shevardnadze, Anatoly Sobchak, Gavril Popov and Alexander Yakovlev stood unshakably with many, many of their fellow-citizens for freedom and peace.
What Europe and the world was twice denied in this century our generation has the chance to fulfil: President Bush's vision of a new world order. It is the vision of a world community sharing responsibility on the basis of law, the self-determination of nations, international solidarity and respect for man and nature.
If this historic opportunity for new and lasting international solidarity is not to evaporate through economic want, then the West just not forsake the people who risked their lives for freedom. I said it in Davos in 1987 and I say it again today: this concerns Europe's, America's and Japan's joint responsibility for global peace. The chance to create a lastingly free and democratic new Soviet Union is a chance for the whole world.
The German American philosopher Hans Jonas said: "Hope derives from responsibility for the universe". Europe has reflected on its fundamental values and is building its common home. In spite of all the difficulties, this peaceful undertaking is a message of hope to the world.
The united Germany places itself for all time on the side of freedom and democracy, on the side of human rights and human dignity, on the side of the right of self-determination and of protection for minorities. The German people side once and for all with the inalienable values which alone permit a humane society to develop. That is the message of the united Germany to the community of nations to which I have the honour to speak here today for the first time as the representative of one Germany. As a European Germany we intend to face the global challenges. In this we regard every person on earth as our neighbour.
﻿
I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your election as President of the General Assembly. Apart from being a tribute to you personally, to your diplomatic talent and your sense of reason, your election honours the representative of a country whose prominent role and place in the Arab world and on the international scene are known to all.
May I also express our gratitude to the Secretary-General, Mr. Peres de Cuellar, whose indefatigable energy in the service of peace has given so many peoples grounds for hope, and which will have made its mark on our time.
The Organisation is welcoming seven new Members. This is a momentous event, one which is cause for celebration. Welcome to Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. Their return to our midst redresses an injustice that had no equal and effaces the criminal act committed against these peoples.
Welcome to the great Korean people, heir to an ancient and distinguished civilisation, who come to the Organization through the separate admission of two States. We hope that they will thus find occasion for friendly dialogue, which will enable them to recover the unity to which they aspire.
Welcome to the Marshall Islands and to Micronesia. These two States will bring to the Organization the benefits of the ancient wisdom of the Pacific Islands.
The years 1989 and 1990 rang with the sounds of liberation - moments of historic happiness rarely encountered - and 1991 has seen the movement continue and amplify.
History has suddenly accelerated. A real revolution has radically altered our points of reference and swept away old habits. A new world is emerging. It will be based, members can be sure, on freedom, solidarity, security and the rule of law. 
In the course of the past year, freedom has continued to gain ground. Let us rejoice, for freedom is the sun that shines on our peoples: freedom for Kuwait, which was reinstated to sovereignty and independence - admittedly at the price of the use of force - thanks to the new capacity of the United Nations to further the rule of law; burgeoning freedom in South Africa, where the barriers of apartheid have at last been dismantled - may this impetus not be slowed; and hope of freedom and peace in Cambodia. Speaking from this rostrum in 1988, the President of the French Republic proposed an international conference to help this martyred country regain unity and peace.
	It has taken three years for the realities of the situation to prevail, three years of patient negotiations, three years of persistence; for the inevitability of discord seemed to impinge on the slightest progress. The convening of a conference on Cambodia will at last set the seal on a peace agreement. I should like to pay a tribute to Prince Sihanouk, President of the Supreme National Council, who is sitting in our midst at the head of the Cambodian delegation. His patience and sense of dialogue have once again revealed his qualities as a Head of State capable of reuniting a people and reconciling it with itself. I should like to wish a happy future to the people of Cambodia, whose suffering I shared and whose aspirations I hope to share.
- Freedom of choice offered to the peoples of Western Sahara through a referendum organised by the United Nations in accordance with the wish of all the parties concerned.
- Hope in the Middle East. After so many years of conflict and absence of understanding, the prospect of the convening of a peace conference provides the opportunity for a settlement based on law and justice, a comprehensive peace settlement, it should be recalled, which should therefore enshrine the right of all to live in peace within secure and recognized borders, by giving the Palestinians a land and a state. Yes, freedom for the Palestinian people.
- Freedom for Lebanon, which is dressing its wounds and putting an end to its strife. Let it affirm its sovereignty over the whole of its national territory by the disarmament of militia forces, the withdrawal of foreign troops and the implementation of Security Council resolution 425 (1978), Let it boldly address its task of reconstruction and quickly return to the path of democracy by holding free elections. Those are France's wishes for Lebanon, which is so close to it in heart, in mind and in history.
- Freedom too for Moscow, where democratic forces have swept away factions which thought they could use violence to impose the return of an order that had been driven from the scene but remains present in our memories, an order that has been overturned and condemned. Let us pay a tribute to those who threw up the barricades of freedom and confronted the threat so that the will of the people could prevail. Hai1 to the defenders of the White House of Moscow.
In Kuwait, in the Soviet Union and in the Baltic countries, freedom is gaining ground everywhere and democracy is smiling on peoples. The points marked with a cross on the map of oppression and tutelage are gradually fading, and as they fade the old world order, with its compromises and deadlocks, is disappearing. This transformation is taking place before our very eyes. Let us look directly at it. Hope is replacing threat, dialogue is being set in train beyond all expectations, and the world rings with the sound of statues being toppled.
But new clouds are already appearing on the horizon. Will we see those who are gaining their freedom and independence take the path of blind nationalism and make anachronistic territorial claims? Will the clash of interests take the place of ideological confrontations? Roads and struggles of this kind lead nowhere, as experience and history have taught us. Dictatorship, poverty, exodus and war are their end result. To avoid these dangers, we must devise formulas and solutions appropriate for our times. Let us begin by building new solidarities, and use the opportunity to turn towards the future.
With regard to building new solidarities, let us first speak of Europe. It is experiencing on its own soil the world's last great phase of decolonisation. I wish to state here that France will be at one with all peoples which choose to make their voice heard on the international scene and which peacefully and democratically express their resolve to accede to independence. For self-determination is indivisible; and it cannot be an object of bargaining. Let us recall a few simple rules that may help these movements to mature in harmony:
First, every people that wants it has the right to self-determination and sovereignty. Secondly, this presupposes a clear definition of the rights of minorities; we should think about the role the United Nations could play in this respect. Thirdly, it is essential to ensure respect for international treaties, and hence recognition of borders. Fourthly, borders may be changed only through dialogue or, failing that, through arbitration. Lastly, good neighbourly relations can be governed by freely accepted agreements.
What France has proposed for Yugoslavia holds true in a general way for everyone.
Let us spare ourselves a return to empires and opportunistic alliances in the twenty-first century. Let us note our regional complementarities, derive advantage from them and give them a context.
Is this, after all, not the purpose of the Community construction in Europe so well described just a moment ago by my colleague Mr. Van Den Broek? Why have we spent 40 years building a European Community - first of six, then of nine, and now of 12? Because we were convinced that peace, prosperity and our identity would be established in a lasting manner only through the sharing of our national sovereignties. Those who had doubts must now bow to the evidence. The European Community has become a benchmark for some and for others a source of admiration. The European Community owes it to itself to continue to astonish the world by pursuing its integration, planned for the end of 1991. Strengthened by a Germany at last reunited, the European Economic Community will continue its progress towards unity.
The new democracies of central and eastern Europe have understood this necessity of union and cooperation and have turned eagerly and hopefully to the Community. Within the Twelve, France in turn understands this request, this expectation, which it hopes will be answered as soon as possible by preparations for these countries' admission to the European Economic Community. This will of course take time. That is all the more reason to get down to the task right away.
But are we to do nothing during this period, leaving these democracies, which are so close to us, uncertain as to their future? Of course not. Europe needs a new pact right now.
Aware of the danger that still threatens it, can our continent - our ancient continent - rally to preserve the gains of the past few years and go forward? This is the essence of the confederation France has proposed. Our aim is to go beyond the logic of aid, which out of necessity has been the reason for most actions so far, in order to arrive at a real political, economic and social community on the continent, in the spirit of the founding fathers of a free Europe in the immediate post-war period.
It would be a paradox if just as this Europe - which will become more and more confederal - was taking shape, a parallel but contrary movement towards dismemberment and break-up were to prevail elsewhere. That is why we hope that the republics of the USSR succeed in exercising their new responsibilities and organising their relations as they intend to do, and succeed in defining, at the international level, as reason and the course of events dictate, the expression of their common interests and resolve. We hope they can do so with due respect for the principles and norms of security and stability accepted in Europe.
Yugoslavia, which is being torn apart, represents the other example of a necessary transformation. May the legitimate aspirations for freedom which are being expressed there take into consideration the interests of all. May the rights of minorities be preserved and the advantages of a space shared by ill the peoples of Yugoslavia be maintained and guaranteed. That, it seems to me, is the road to peace and regained prosperity. But none of this will be possible so long as the fighting persists. The conflagration is building and threatens to spread. Time is running out. Yugoslavia is heading deeper into an impasse. France believes it is incumbent on the United Nations to bring the parties to their senses by demanding compliance with the cease-fire, by showing them the way to dialogue and to negotiation that has been mapped out with their consent by the European Community, by saying to all that peace has its requirements, theirs and others'. France, which is the current President of the Security Council, will leave no stone unturned to achieve this end.
Can I fail to refer to the solidarity between the North and the South? No. The planet is one. Who can believe in a future in which less than one quarter of the world's population enjoys the benefits of progress while the remaining three quarters are abandoned to despair?
In the course of the past five years, Africa's gross national product has grown less quickly than its population. Today's 500 million Africans will be 1.5 billion in the year 2025, while the sources of financing are drying up. Net capital input fell in real terms from 1986 to 1990. World Bank and International Monetary Fund transfers are currently negative, with African countries paying back far more than they receive.
Without wishing to sound like an oracle, France has consistently spoken of this intolerable and inevitable trend in order to seek a greater effort of solidarity from the rich. My country senses it is being better heeded now, and I hope that is true. It welcomes this especially as another danger is threatening the developing countries: the danger of a society exploding in response to excessive demands.
It is appropriate, certainly, to ensure that the assistance to developing countries is well employed. That is the best way to generate official and private resources and to promote regional integration, which is still in its early stages.
In this respect, the Treaty for the Constitution of the Common Market of the South - the MERCOSUR Treaty - signed in March 1991, which groups Argentina, Brazil, Uruguay and Paraguay in a common market, is a good example of what has to be done. It should not remain an isolated instance. I am thinking it particular of Africa, where plans to set up a large common agricultural market should be pursued. The franc zone, with its single currency, offers a favourable terrain for such a market.
France, together with its European Economic Community partners, intends to support these efforts. It does not intend to render them useless by imposing requirements that go beyond what is reasonable.
Lastly, one cannot speak of solidarity without mentioning the environment. The international community has already held debates on and carried out research into this important subject. It has launched significant concrete programs. France welcomes, for example, the success of the initiative on the decision to protect Antarctica, which it took in 1989 together with Australia, subsequently joined by Italy and Belgium. The Madrid protocol, which will be signed on 4 October 1991, declares Antarctica to be a "natural reserve devoted to peace and science". This responds to the wishes of all those who desire to safeguard our common heritage, our planet. It should inspire other actions.
I believe that everything I have said is of a conservative nature. Yet the exacerbation of risks and the emergence of new dangers require us to think on a new scale and give free rein to our ambition.
Thus, we warmly welcome the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, which is to be held at Rio de Janeiro in 1992 and to which France is lending its assistance and support. That Conference will be preceded by the meeting in Paris at the end of the year, called by the President of the French Republic, which will be attended by all the non-governmental organisations concerned.
The efforts to combat desertification, to preserve and harness the resources of the great forests and to protect the ozone layer, biological diversity and the seas and the oceans: these are subjects of pre-eminent interest to all mankind.
	
It. would be pointless to speak of the future of mankind without referring to security. The end of the cold war provides an exceptional opportunity, so let us seize it by pursuing disarmament world wide. In that sphere my country's policy is consistent with a number of principles that I would like to enumerate briefly.
The most important agreement on conventional arms reduction in Europe was signed at the Paris summit in 1990. Its ratification can wait no longer. Prance is committed to this and hopes that all the signatories will proceed to ratification, thus making it possible to move on to a new phase in these negotiations.
France duly welcomed the signing in Moscow of the strategic arms reduction Treaty - the START Treaty. The reduction of the strategic arsenals of the United States and the USSR, which will take several years, should be followed by new commitments now. France will join in the negotiations once those arsenals have been reduced to a level warranting our participation, under the terms set forth in this very Hall by the President of the French Republic in 1985.
For Europeans, the existence and availability of nuclear armaments raise specific problems which have emerged with the changes in the Soviet Union. France has asked that the four Powers concerned meet as early as possible to examine these problems together.
On a more general note, France is in favour of global disarmament. In June 1991 it made public its plan encompassing all aspects of security. It announced its decision to adhere to the nuclear non-proliferation Treaty. My country will submit the instruments of accession before the year's end.
Already, we are taking steps to exercise complete control over exports related to nuclear energy. France is in favour of finalising at an early date the convention on the final elimination of chemical weapons. It hopes that the convention will be signed next year. The treaty banning chemical weapons should be accompanied by appropriate means for monitoring compliance, without which its effectiveness will be compromised.  For while treaties prepare the way for security, it is confidence that creates it. There is no real confidence without control. The example of Iraq shows this only too well.
Strict compliance with accords and monitoring are the keystones of disarmament, and it is, in my view, for the United Nations to promote accession to these treaties, to monitor their implementation and impose penalties, where necessary, when agreements are violated. Let us, therefore, give the United Nations the means to carry out this task.
My concluding comments will concern strengthening the role of the United Nations. How can this be accomplished? Our Organisation, which is the universal expression of our solidarity, has done more in these past years than reflect our concerns. It has done more than it had done in past decades. With the backing of its Secretary-General and the determined support of the five permanent members of the Security Council, the United Nations has been a driving force. It has affirmed the law on numerous occasions and enforced compliance where necessary.
The United Nations perseverance on behalf of human rights prompted South Africa to move towards abolishing apartheid. The efforts to help restore democracy in Haiti, the part played in the peace process in El Salvador, the Secretary-General's peace plan of 21 May for Afghanistan are all initiatives that have marked for history the growing role of the United Nations.
But it is undoubtedly in regard to the Gulf crisis that the progress has been the most spectacular. The main point was to stop aggression and to lay the often innovative foundations for order through law.
The United Nations could not remain passive in the face of the tragedy which threatened the very existence of the Kurdish people. For the first time, through a Security Council resolution, the United Nations affirmed that the sufferings of a population justified immediate intervention. My country is proud to have proposed the adoption of resolution 688 (1991).
Yet, as members are aware, none of this could be taken for granted. Today the foundations of a new legal order, a new humanitarian order, have been laid. Why not adopt a code of conduct affirming the right to humanitarian assistance every time the integrity and survival of a people is threatened?
However, we must not lose sight of the fact that the progress that has been made is not sufficient to offset the reversals where these exist. If tomorrow, in the conflict between Israel and the Arab countries, the United Nations were to give up its efforts to require compliance with the principles which have earned it its success, it would quickly lose in credibility what it has earned in prestige. The Organization is too much a grande dame now to tolerate disrespect.
At a time when France holds the presidency of the Security Council, it is pleased and proud to contribute to the adoption of two important resolutions, which I hope will be adopted, on Yugoslavia and Cambodia.
More than ever before, the values which underlie the principles of our Organization are a benchmark. New States have joined us and others will follow. National minorities are claiming the right to preserve what constitutes their identity and cohesion. What are they doing? They look to the United Nations. Individuals are thirsting for justice. What do they do?
They invoke the United Nations moral jurisdiction. Never have democracy and human rights - the former thought by some to have been superseded and the latter considered by others the product of an impoverished mind - constituted such important guidelines for a world urgently seeking peace and prosperity.
Let us therefore prepare, clearly and with enthusiasm, for the great rendezvous of 1993s the World Conference on Human Rights, which will also be the rendezvous of democracy victorious.
It is there that, half a century after the cataclysm that shook the world, and the long night that deprived too many peoples of the light of freedom, our generation will finally be able to say: We have been worthy of mankind.
﻿Let me first congratulate you, Mr. Vice-President, and, through you, the President, on your appointments to the high offices you hold. He are very confident that throughout the proceedings of this session of the General Assembly you and the President will carry forward our deliberations with the customary good order and good sense, and we wish you well in this task.
Last year almost of all of us speaking from this rostrum spoke of the dramatic pace of international events. Perhaps we all expected that after those dramas there would be a return to the normal tenor of diplomatic life. But, in fact, during the last 12 months change has continued with a speed and intensity that no one could have foreseen. Some of this change has been beneficial, flowing from the end of the cold war, which we all welcomed. But other changes have reminded us how much hatred and bitterness can still shape the course of our world. This general debate is the right occasion for us to see if we can trace a pattern in all these events and draw the right lessons for the future of our Organisation.
First I would like to add my welcome to the seven new Members of the United Nations, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, the Republic of Korea and the Democratic Peoples' Republic of Korea, the Republic of the Marshall Islands and the Federated States of Micronesia. The presence of you all will enrich this Organisation. Mistrust between East and Meat kept Korea out of the United Nations for too long now the new approaches in international relations allow you to take the seats which should have been yours long ago.

It may be rash, but I believe that we are now watching the collapse of the principle of empire. By that, I mean the principle that people can be forced to work together under a central rule in which they do not themselves participate and which has no respect for their rights. In some places the end of this principle of empire is coming slowly. In others its collapse has been sudden. For example we are seeing beyond doubt the disintegration of the last of the great colonial empires of the last century, namely, that put together by the Russian Tsars. That system, which was transformed into a communist empire by Lenin and Stalin, is now smashed for good - and smashed not by its critics or competitors from outside but by the peoples whom it sought to imprison. That old system has gone; a new system is struggling to birth. The new system tries to accommodate the principle of national identity without following that principle into anarchy.
Nationalism is a legitimate expression of a people's aspirations; but we have all learned the hard way that nationalism is not enough. A new flag, an old flag revived, a new capital, a new parliament, new uniforms do not in themselves bring security and happiness. Nationalism can be sterile unless it respects the rights of individuals and minorities. Nationalism can be dangerous unless nation States work together for collective security and collective prosperity.
So consent within nations, cooperation between nations, must be the pattern at which we aim.
These or similar thoughts must have been in many of our minds as we watched the tragedy of Yugoslavia unfolding. I hope and believe that the Security Council, at its meeting this afternoon, can add its unique authority to the efforts already being made by the European Community and by the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) to help those among all the peoples of Yugoslavia who want to see an end to bloodshed and the beginning of a new pattern for their future. I share the emotions and anxieties expressed a few minutes ago here by Hans Dietrich Genscher, on behalf of Germany, and all of us in the European Community will work strenuously, continuously, to help the Yugoslavs find that new pattern for their future.
We cannot prescribe or dictate this pattern either for the peoples of the Soviet Union or for the peoples of Yugoslavia. We can show sympathy, understanding and help for the huge task of reform now under way. In the Soviet Union when people are hungry this winter we can help to feed them out of the surpluses of the West and, I hope, of central and eastern Europe. We can provide - we are providing - technical assistance, particularly to help bring the food from the farms to the shops. We can build up our relationships with the Republics of the Soviet Union as they gain in authority. He can continue the friendly pressure for human rights embodied in the Charter of Paris of the CSCE, signed last November. It is not in the interests of the International community that the Soviet Union should entirely disintegrate, leaving no central authority to deal with those matters where central decisions are needed. Dramatic progress has been made over arms control and disarmament. That progress should not be dissipated or put at risk by lack of adequate coherent authority in the Soviet Union. The Republics are making their own arrangements with the centre to influence the course of foreign policy, and we look forward to the outcome. But it would be a pity, from the point of view of the United Nations, if the cooperation which we have recently come to expect from the Soviet Union on, for example, the Middle East, the problems of the Gulf, the problems of Africa, were dissipated just when its usefulness is most apparent.
I mentioned South Africa. The situation there is entirely different, but there is one common thread. Here too we are watching the disappearance of a regime which was based on suppression and discrimination. No one can now suppose that apartheid can survive or can return. The courage shown by State President De Klerk, Mr. Nelson Mandela and other leaders of the South African people deserves to be recognized and encouraged. Here again, it is not for the outside world to decide on the constitutional pattern of the new South Africa, though I think we are entitled to urge forward those who are now beginning that task. It is for us, and particularly perhaps as far as we are concerned for the members of the Commonwealth at our forthcoming Heads of Government meeting in Harare, to consider how we can give practical help to the new South Africa. No one who studies the statistics of population growth in that country measured against economic production, no one who visits the townships outside Durban, Johannesburg and Cape Town can doubt either the need or the urgency of this help if the new South Africa is to make a good start and establish itself as a helpful, supportive neighbour to the other countries of southern Africa.
Against this background, against this pattern, how can we build up the performance of our United Nations? Nothing of course changes the elementary duty of the United Nations to do all it can to protect its Members by checking and reversing aggression. That is fundamental.
Iraq's invasion of Kuwait was an unusually clear example. Now that Iraq is out of Kuwait, the United Nations is insisting - for the first time - that a Member State forgo weapons of mass destruction and pay compensation to its victims. The United Nations is resolved to maintain sanctions until Iraq shows that it is playing a constructive part in regional stability, until Iraq observes the rules of international law. Iraq has to comply with the Security Council resolutions, which are mandatory. If it does not, it must face the consequences, and the consequences of persistent defiance would be grave indeed.
So we all share the responsibility to prevent the re-emergence of a danger such as the one we have experienced from Iraq. Everyone accepts that many States depend on arms imports to assure a reasonable level of security and the inherent right of self-defence, which is recognized in our Charter.
But the conflict in the Gulf showed how peace can be undermined when a country acquires an arsenal which goes way beyond the needs of self-defence, and in the United Nations have to make sure that that does not happen again. We believe that all States should observe and apply the three principles: transparency, consultation and action.
And that is why, as a significant step towards transparency, Britain has proposed a universal register of arms transfers under the auspices of the United Nations. Such a register would alert the International community to an attempt by a country to build up holdings of conventional weapons beyond a reasonable level. With the support of our partners in the European Community, and others, Britain is sponsoring a draft resolution at this session of the General Assembly which we hope will result in the prompt establishment of such a register.
The process of consultations on arms exports is well under way. It has been discussed at many international gatherings in recent months, and we have been encouraged by the willingness of arms exporters, large and small, to exchange information about arms sales which hitherto has been jealously guarded. After that, we have to harmonize as best we can the criteria - the tests - by which each arms exporter judges a possible sale.
Openness of this kind will encourage confidence. Confidence allows action. In Europe we agreed on the Treaty on Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) last November. The United States and the Soviet Union signed the START Treaty in July. The main Powers, the main arms suppliers are beginning to reduce the level of their own armaments; they are not simply asking other people to do so. The search for this lower level of armaments is never going to be easy in the real world, and I think we are justified in taking it step by step, provided that one step does in fact follow another. We are justified in being realistic, provided that realism is not an excuse for inaction. The British Government announced yesterday that henceforth we shall adopt a policy of full-scope safeguards as a condition of the supply of significant new nuclear supplies. This means that such goods will not be exported to any country, other than the nuclear-weapon States, where there are any un-safeguarded nuclear installations.
We believe there is another lesson which comes from our experiences in the Middle East in the last year. It is the need to handle emergencies better. Tragedy has touched not just the Middle East, but Bangladesh and Africa, and I should like to pay tribute to the international agencies for all the devotion and effort they have put into tackling these tragedies. But we have learned again that coordination, early response, effective delivery are crucial.
That is why we are proposing a new and, we hope, more effective structure for handling emergencies and disasters starting with an inventory of human and material resources available from donors and non-governmental organizations. At the apex - at the top of this structure - we would like to see one high-powered official immediately under the Secretary-General. There needs to be prompt decision-making and funding in the critical early weeks of an emergency. Preparation is the key to success and would, under our proposal, be the responsibility of one person. The United Nations is best placed to deal with the human consequences of natural disasters.
The United Nations, as has already been stressed, can do more to protect the global environment. Agreement on how we conserve the resources of our planet and use them for sustainable development is equally vital for the future of the world. We have to establish clear priorities soon for what next year's Conference on Environment and Development, in Bio, can achieve.
The United Nations can also help with another problem which is looming larger in our world. I refer to the increasing number of migrants around the world. Eighty per cent of refugees are in the third world. Developed countries face an unprecedented growth in the numbers seeking asylum. Some of these are refugees as defined by the United Nations in its 1951 Convention.
But most are not. We would not be able to continue to offer political asylum in the present way if the system were overwhelmed by economic migrants. Such migrants can deprive the countries they come from of youth and talent and, as we see in Hong Kong - and begin to see in Western Europe - economic migration above a certain level can also create serious political and social strains in the receiving country.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has a vital role within its sphere and its sphere expands all the time. But the international community as a whole has to be increasingly aware of the fundamental nature of this problem.
And so, resistance to aggression, search for disarmament, relief of suffering: these are all parts of the gigantic and I must say growing tasks laid on the United Nations. The Secretary-General has always laid a particular emphasis on preventive diplomacy, on trying to tackle a dispute or a danger before it explodes into violence and suffering. And we have learned to rely on his combination of skill, firmness and courtesy - a combination which he has made very much his own. El Salvador, Western Sahara, Angola: in all these the United Nations has been active either in seeking to prevent trouble or in steering a problem onto a new track away from the suffering which has already occurred. I welcome in particular, and most recently, the recognition by Guatemala of the independence of the State of Belize. This makes a big contribution to regional stability.
It is very good news also that in the last few days the remaining obstacles to a comprehensive political settlement on Cambodia have been overcome. This settlement now needs to be concluded with all speed. The United Nations will remain firmly engaged in carrying out the peace process and this will be an ambitious and, indeed, expensive, unprecedented undertaking. But the price here for Cambodia - for Indochina generally - is very great.
May I, on behalf of the country intimately involved in another of these problems - the affairs of Cyprus - wish the Secretary-General particular success in bringing that dispute to an agreed conclusion. He knows he has our full support in trying to persuade those closely concerned first into a negotiation and then into a settlement.
Through all these different events, these different problems - and many others I have not mentioned - we can see the same thrust. It is a thrust towards better government, more representative government, better cooperation between nations, greater concern for the individual and his or her rights. No one with any sense of history supposes that this current will run with the same strength and at the same time through all the countries and continents represented here. There will be bastions where authoritarian rule still meets only a faint challenge. There will be cruel and bloody quarrels resurrected from a past which we hoped was dead. There will be setbacks, occasions where hope is stimulated, then delayed or even reversed) and it would be patronizing for any one of us to suppose that there is only one model, only one type of institution which can reflect this trend. There is no Westminster model, no Paris model, no Washington model, certainly no Kremlin model which can be exported unchanged to Africa, Latin America, the Middle East or Asia. We all set about it in different ways.
In negotiations inside our European community, we are working hard for an important European step forward before the end of this year along the path of joint action by sovereign States. The peoples of the Soviet Union, as I have mentioned, faced with a quite different set of problems, will be working out their own answers. In Latin America, in Africa and Asia, the same trends are clearly visible. The age of alibis is over. The rhetoric of the 1950s and the 1960s - which as I remember used to echo rather wearily in this Hall - makes no sense any more. Imperialism can no longer, in 1991, be blamed for bad government. The capitalist system can no longer be blamed for lack of prosperity. The evidence, the facts, the experience of the last decade have proved the contrary. I believe that the United Nations, the Commonwealth to which we belong, the regional organizations can all help this realism to expand and deepen.
He are talking, are we not, about consent in place of command, freer trade, edging out protectionism, honest government replacing corruption, government based on elections rather than dictatorship, nations cooperating instead of seeking to dominate. These are the aims - clearly stated in our Charter, clearly stated in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Sometimes they have seemed far out of reach. I believe that, as a result of recent events and currents, they are no longer out of reach and we in Britain, the British Government, will work enthusiastically and energetically within the United Nations to bring them within the grasp of all.
﻿I have great pleasure in congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the General Assembly at its forty-sixth session. I am confident that your wise leadership will enable this session to deal successfully with the broad agenda before it. You may count on my delegation's cooperation in the discharge of your onerous responsibilities. I would like to record my appreciation for the energetic and imaginative presidency of your predecessor, Ambassador Guido de Marco of Malta.
The Secretary-General of the United Nations, His Excellency Mr. Perez de Cuellar, who has served the international community at a critical turning-point in modern history, deserves our deep gratitude and unstinting admiration. His indefatigable energy, dedication, diligence, imagination and resourcefulness have enabled the United Nations to play a pivotal role in the resolution of many crisis situations.
I am delighted to welcome in our midst the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the Republic- of Korea. India enjoys excellent relations with both and trusts that their admission to the United Nations will further contribute to dialogue and reconciliation in the Korean peninsula. This would also enable them to contribute more effectively to the strengthening of peace and security in the region and in the world at large. We are happy that the Baltic Republics - Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania - have taken their rightful place in the Organization. Similarly, I should like to congratulate the Federated States of Micronesia and the Republic of the Marshall Islands on their admission to the United Nations.
In the year that has elapsed since the forty-fifth session of the General Assembly, India and the world lost a distinguished statesman in the person of Mr. Rajiv Gandhi, the former Prime Minister of India. Rajiv Gandhi's commitment and dedication to the cause of peace and international understanding naturally made him an extremely ardent supporter of the United Nations. We firmly believed that the Organisation, where the entire international community is represented, offers an ideal forum to tackle the manifold problems facing mankind: eradication of poverty, disarmament, environmental conservation, elimination of the menace of drugs and so on. He was particularly concerned about the threat of total annihilation posed by nuclear arsenals, and he will long be remembered for the Action Plan for a nuclear-weapon-free and non-violent world that he presented to the special session on disarmament in 19BB.
The recent dramatic changes in the world have led to a restructuring of international relations. After decades of the cold war, there is a move towards dialogue to replace confrontation, trust to replace suspicion and, above all, peace and cooperation to replace strife and discord. Democracy is taking root in the Eastern European countries, which are, at the same time, making efforts to integrate into the world economy. The process of change in the Soviet Union, initiated by President Gorbachev's policies of perestroika and glasnost, has received further momentum recently. Elsewhere in the world, too, there is evidence of the successful assertion of the democratic aspirations of the people. In our own region, there are the shining examples of Bangladesh and Nepal. As the Secretary-General has aptly put it in his report on the work of the Organization:
"Today there are far more solid grounds for hope than there are reasons for frustration and fear." 
While welcoming these positive changes, we cannot but be aware of the formidable obstacles we still face in the creation of an equitable and just world order. Glaring inequalities continue to plague our planet. Disparities among countries and groups of countries have not only persisted, but have also widened. If the promise of a restructured framework for international relations is to be realised, it must address the interests of all and must be accepted by all.
India was among the first to speak out, several decades ago, against the division of the world into hostile camps. The policy of non-alignment, embraced by most of the newly independent nations, stressed the right of nations to determine their own destinies. The Non-Aligned Movement called upon the super-Powers not only to end their rivalry but also to work in cooperation for the benefit of the world. The present situation, marked by the disappearance of bloc rivalries and their replacement by increasing cooperation among major Powers, is a vindication of the Movement's basic plank. As the recent meeting of the Ministers of the non-aligned countries in Accra declared, the Movement will continue to be an important factor in international relations by pursuing the goal of establishing a society based on social, economic and political justice through dialogue and cooperation.
The relaxation of tensions in international relations has inevitably led to progress in the resolution of a number of crisis situations. In Central America, Nicaragua and El Salvador have ceased to be arenas of conflict and tension. Peace has dawned in Angola with the signing of an accord between the parties concerned. Cambodia is on the verge of a negotiated solution. Cyprus and Afghanistan also seem to be moving towards a peaceful settlement. In Western Sahara, a referendum sponsored by the United Nations is about to be held, ending decades of acrimony and conflict in the region.
The crucial role that the United Nations has started to play in these and other crisis situations is in keeping with its original mandate. The convergence of the objectives of the permanent members of the Security Council has led to a consensus among them on several issues, as envisaged in 1945. The United Nations, at the same time, needs to be strengthened and reformed in order to live up to the expectations placed in it.
In this connection, one of the challenges faced by the United Nations today is to make it truly representative of the interests and aspirations of all its Members and to make it an arena of cooperative action of all nations and peoples.
As the Non-Aligned Movement has recently reiterated, the current efforts at reform of the United Nations should include measures designed to make the decision-making process at the United Nations, particularly in the Security Council, more democratic and transparent. In this context, we should examine, as a matter of urgency, the proposals before us for an expansion of the Security Council to reflect the increased membership of the United Nations and to ensure a more equitable and balanced representation of the Members of the United Nations in the Council.
This year has seen the conclusion of the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START), an outstanding achievement in the field of nuclear disarmament. For the first time in history, there is going to be real reduction in the strategic nuclear forces of the United States and the Soviet Union. This has been long overdue, but there is no reason to be complacent. The process of reduction of nuclear weapons must continue. The START reductions are very limited and are confined to numbers, without any effect on the quality of these weapons. The reductions should now be deeper, quicker and should involve all the nuclear-weapon States. The Treaty should not lead to qualitative upgrading of the remaining arsenals, nor should the warheads released be reused in other systems.
Nuclear weapons have no place in today's world and with the end of the cold war the irrelevance of the doctrine of nuclear deterrence stands further exposed. Unfortunately, new theories of deterrence are being developed in order to legitimise the continued possession end Improvement of nuclear weapons. Deterrence is now being conceived either in the balance-of-power context or against the so-called delinquent powers among developing countries.
The action plan proposed by India at the third special session on disarmament in 1988 assumes increased relevance today. The present is the opportune moment to commence work for a new treaty to give legal effect to a binding commitment by the nuclear-weapon States to eliminate nuclear weapons within a time-bound framework, and by all non-nuclear-weapon States not to cross the nuclear threshold. The implementation of the action plan could also help in ending the unnatural division of the world into nuclear "haves" and "have-nots" and the need to erect all kinds of discriminatory ad hoc regimes to sustain such a division.
The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty symbolises this division. India has not accepted the Treaty because it does not impose reciprocal obligations on the nuclear-weapon States to eliminate nuclear weapons. Furthermore, the Treaty enforces inequitable full-scale safeguards on all the nuclear activities of the non-nuclear-weapon States without imposing commensurate obligations on the nuclear-weapon States.
Nevertheless, I should like to state that, even without having signed the Non-Proliferation Treaty, India has scrupulously adhered to a non-proliferation policy and has never helped any other nation in developing nuclear weapons. We shall continue to abide by such a policy.
We also have our best opportunity in the coming year to conclude a global convention banning chemical weapons. India is committed to working along with all those delegations that wish to complete the work on a draft chemical-weapons convention within the stipulated time frame. What remains to be done in the field of verification, compliance and consultative mechanism should be accomplished without further delay through common effort and understanding. He should all realise that the greater good of humanity is at stake in the abolition of chemical weapons and this good should not be compromised for lesser, short-term ends.
The Gulf crisis earlier this year underscored the inadmissibility of aggression by one country against another. Like the rest of the international community, we feel gratified that aggression has been reversed. We rejoice that Kuwait is once again a sovereign independent State. The Gulf region has long been a focal point of tension and instability. This region is our neighbour, and we are hopeful and confident that, following the recent crisis, there will be peace and stability in the region.
As a member of the Security Council since January of this year, India has tried to play a constructive role in the Council's effort to deal with the Gulf crisis. We lent support to all endeavours to secure the withdrawal of Iraq from Kuwait without resorting to war. Once the war started, we combined our efforts with those of like-minded countries to bring it to a speedy end and, in any case, to ensure that the destruction and devastation unleashed by the war remained limited. We also tried to assert the Security Council's role in guiding the course of the war and in calling for a cease-fire. Being conscious throughout of the humanitarian aspects of the crisis, we made a number of proposals in the Council to provide succour to the innocent civilian victims of the conflict.
The Gulf crisis and the ensuing war severely damaged the economies of many countries, including my own. Nevertheless, we remained in step with the international community in imposing comprehensive sanctions. The Gulf crisis demonstrated that in the present era of global economic interdependence, the imposition of sanctions in a region, particularly when that region happens to be a major source of the energy supply, is bound to have an adverse effect on the economies of a large number of other countries both within and outside the region.
Our experience of invoking Article 50 of the Charter to seek redress was, to say the least, both frustrating and disappointing. The consideration of our case took place after long delays and it resulted only in a call on Member States and United Nations specialised agencies to give attention to our problems. A lesson that we should draw from this experience is that, in future, a mechanism should be devised for the automatic commencement of action under Article 50 in the event of the imposition of sanctions. As the Secretary-General stated in his report on the work of the Organisation: "n today's conditions of economic interdependence, the effect of the imposition of comprehensive economic sanctions on third States that are economic partners of the offender State requires that Article 50 of the Charter be supplemented by appropriate arrangements creating obligations to assist concretely the disadvantaged third State or States". (A/46/1, p.6)
The Gulf region still suffers from the aftermath of war. The United Nations has the duty and responsibility to exert all its energies to remove the suffering, hunger and squalor left behind by the war. This is particularly true of the Iraqi civilian population, whose misery is not lightened by the continuation of economic and trade sanctions. We commend the humanitarian assistance provided to the people of the region by Member countries as well as United Nations agencies. At the same time, we believe that any outside intervention in a Member country on humanitarian grounds constitutes an abridgement of national sovereignty and is, therefore, fraught with serious implications.
We sincerely hope that the flexibility shown by all parties concerned will help to resolve the Middle East conflict, at the core of which is the Palestinian question. India applauds the assiduousness with which the United States has worked to get the various parties involved to the negotiating table. I trust that these efforts, along with those of the parties concerned, will mark a beginning in the resolution of the vexed Middle East problem. He believe that a just and comprehensive settlement of the Middle East question will be possible and durable only if it restores to the Palestinian people their fundamental rights, including their right to a homeland.
I mentioned Cambodia earlier. Events there are shaping towards what we hope will be a peaceful resolution of the conflict. We specially welcome the Cambodian delegation to the United Nations, led by His Royal Highness Prince Sihanouk, Chairman of the Supreme National Council of Cambodia, which has recently taken several initiatives in bringing Cambodia closer to an era of peace and restoration.
India appreciates the contribution made by the five permanent members of the Security Council and the Paris International Conference on Cambodia towards resolving this long-drawn-out problem. We are glad to be associated with this process as a member of the Paris International Conference. The Cambodian people, who have suffered so much in the past, deserve the continued support of the international community to complete the badly needed process of national reconciliation and reconstruction. We look forward to the emergence of Cambodia as a sovereign, independent, neutral and non-aligned nation in accordance with the wishes of its people.
I trust that the Secretary-General's five-point plan on Afghanistan will inspire the parties to the conflict to negotiate a framework for resolving this issue. We welcome the decision by the United States and the Soviet Union not to supply arms to the parties involved, but this step will be effective only if supplies from other sources also stop forthwith. The United States has a major role to play in this regard. We call for a comprehensive political settlement of the conflict in Afghanistan which would preserve the sovereign, non-aligned and independent status of Afghanistan.
Of late, further movement in dealing with the Cyprus issue is discernible. India supports peace efforts that ensure the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Cyprus, and in this light welcomes further negotiations under United Nations auspices. Myanmar remains deprived of the democratic rights its own people voted for over three years ago. India calls upon the Myanmar leadership to accept the people's verdict and work with them to restore democracy in the country.
The South African Government has recently undertaken a number of positive steps towards dismantling the apartheid regime. We welcome these changes. At the same time, we remain fully aware that a lot more needs to be done. The South African authorities must immediately take all necessary measures to start the process of negotiations. Equally important is curbing the continuing violence in certain parts of the country. The pressure that has been brought to bear on Pretoria by the application of sanctions has proved to be useful and must be sustained. The international community must remain vigilant until the complete eradication of apartheid and the transformation of South Africa into a non-racial, unitary democracy.
While apartheid is on the retreat in South Africa, an attempt is being made to institutionalize racism in Fiji. The interim government in Fiji has incorporated into a new constitution certain provisions which are in violation of the internationally accepted principles of democracy and human rights. By institutionalizing oppression and injustice, Fiji appears to be moving backwards in history to a darker age. The Suva regime should abandon such anachronistic policies and join the rest of the world in enlightened democratic governance.
In the economic field, there is an increasing trend of integration of the process of production, consumption and trade in the world economy, brought about mainly by the communications revolution. This has led to an unprecedented enhancement of the interdependence of nations and increasing competitiveness among major operators in the world economy. One of the very significant outcomes of this phenomenon has been the creation and strengthening of regional economic groupings, particularly among developed countries. Western Europe is moving towards an integrated market by the end of 1992. The former East and West Germanys have been united. In a few years Germany is expected to emerge as an even stronger economic Power. While these are significant economic changes, we do not see concomitant moves towards meaningfully addressing North-South development issues.
Responding to the changing realities, many developing countries are making strenuous efforts to carry out structural changes in order to meet the challenges. We in India have also introduced far-reaching changes in our industrial, trade and monetary and fiscal policies. Our aim is to remove unnecessary controls and regulations so as to release the creative forces in the economy and realise its full potential. As a consequence of these policy changes, we envisage sharply increased interlinkages with the world economy. We need the understanding and cooperation of our partners from developed countries to derive the full benefits from the measures we have adopted and as a cushion against the short-run pressures that may build up. We also need an international economic environment which is conducive to ensuring the success of such measures. In various multilateral organizations, it will be our endeavour to work towards establishing an international economic order which is truly multilateral and based on the principle of non-discrimination and the rule of law.
The overall external economic environment for developing countries remains unfavourable. Many of these countries are facing the problem of worsening terms of trade, increasing problems in finding access to advanced technology, and reductions in the resources available for development.
The overall debt situation for the developing countries has assumed alarming proportions and poses a serious threat to their economic viability. A solution to the developing countries' debt problem would need a comprehensive and integrated strategy encompassing all categories of affected countries and all forms of debt.
Against this backdrop, the Secretary-General's proposal for an international conference on the financing of development deserves support. As he further points out in his report on the work of the Organisation:
"A reinvigoration of the North-South dialogue has now become more urgent than ever. Fortunately, conditions exist now for advancing it constructively without a needless overlay of rhetoric or ideological controversy." (A/46/1, p. 12)
India attaches great importance to an early, successful and balanced outcome of the current Uruguay round of multilateral trade negotiations. He are a serious partner in these negotiations, which we approach with an open mind and a considerable degree of flexibility. But we have our own concerns to be met and interests to safeguard. That is why we have been insisting that the overall package that emerges from these negotiations must contain specific and time-bound commitments on issues of concern to developing countries.
The developments of recent years have further validated the disarmament and development linkage and made it a reality. National budgetary policies of some of the major military Powers already provide for the channelling of resources now locked into the arms race into economic growth. The peace dividend now needs to be realized at the international level. The International Conference on Disarmament and Development envisaged mechanisms in this regard which should be put into effect. We notice another disturbing trend in the economic field. Attempts are being made to factor into the calculus of international and bilateral economic cooperation, non-economic considerations such as good governance, observance of human rights, environment, military expenditure, and so on. The Indian polity is firmly anchored on political pluralism and individual freedom. We attach high priority to the preservation of the environment and would very much like to reduce our military budget. But these laudable goals should apply to all countries, developed and developing. What is questionable is the linkage of these issues with development assistance of which only the developing countries are the recipients.
Environmental concerns are fast moving to the top of the world agenda and are rightly at the forefront of international concern and attention. We are convinced that environmental problems cannot be isolated from the general issue of development and must be viewed as an integral part of development efforts. For global environmental problems to be dealt with effectively, we need to forge global partnership which seeks to protect the environment while simultaneously addressing the development requirements of the developing countries.
It is well recognized that the principal sources of pollutants in the environment lie in the developed countries and these countries accordingly bear the main responsibility for combating such pollution. Furthermore, if financial, technical and other capabilities are also taken into account, then it becomes quite clear that the responsibility for undertaking corrective action devolves on the developed countries. Without the provision of adequate, new and additional financial resources and environmentally benign technologies on preferential and non-commercial terms, it would be difficult for the developing countries to adopt environmentally safe and desirable technologies, much as they would like to do so. Such technologies should not become simply another source of commercial profit for the developed world.
India will continue its constructive contribution to the preparations for the 1992 United Nations Conference on Environment and Development. We hope that at the Conference the twin issues of environment and development will be addressed in a balanced way and in their totality.
India is glad to see changes around the world that serve to strengthen fundamental human rights. India's own deep commitment to human rights, true to its democratic traditions and practices, is well known. India's parliamentary institutions, independent judiciary, free press and public opinion provide the necessary checks and balances to safeguard individual as well as collective human rights. I would, however, urge caution in projecting the promotion of human rights in an intrusive manner that militates against national sovereignty. Contexts and situations differ from country to country, and international concern for human rights preservation should not detract from the efforts in the same direction made by the country concerned.
In recent years, terrorism has emerged as one of the most dangerous and pernicious threats to the enjoyment of human rights, peace and stability in many parts of the world. Through killings, kidnappings, extortion and other such means, terrorists and their organisations have effectively usurped the basic human rights of innocent civilians. In a number of cases, they are using brutality and fear to undermine the free functioning of democratic institutions, including the legislative, executive and judiciary branches of government, as well as the press. Such terrorism assumes a particularly pernicious form when it is aided, abetted and sponsored from abroad. Sponsorship of terrorism in another country constitutes a violation of the principles governing relations among States which have been enshrined in the United Nations Charter. This deserves the condemnation of the international community.
Drug abuse control has gained a commendable measure of global co-operation. Drug abuse is a menace calling for concerted and strong action. India welcomes the establishment of the United Nations Global Programme of Action for international drug control. He would stress the need for additional financial resources and technical assistance for crop substitution and other measures to combat drug trafficking and abuse. In conclusion, let me say that we in India wish the recent epochal changes worldwide to be the harbingers of peace, prosperity and an equitable and just world order. The logic of progress in on the side of those who think and act progressively, not of those who wish to remain frozen in an unresponsive status quo. India looks forward to cooperating with other nations in the noble endeavour of strengthening world peace and cooperation.
﻿Let me begin by congratulating Ambassador Shihabi on his election to the office of President of the forty-sixth session of the General Assembly, which I hope will be crowned with success. I also take this opportunity to congratulate the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Peres de Cuellar, on his endeavours and his valuable contribution to the promotion of world peace and understanding among nations.
In this era of heightened expectations of freedom and of peace among nations, the threat of despotism has not yet disappeared from the world. This Assembly convenes in the aftermath of two crises that threatened human freedoms and that aroused profound concern throughout the enlightened international community. Future historians will undoubtedly cast more light on these two grim chapters in the closing years of this century from an appropriate perspective. But we, representatives of Governments, do not have the time to indulge in the luxury of observing events passively, as historians can do.
We are making history, not writing it, making history here and now. It is incumbent upon us as representatives of responsible Governments to mould current events in a spirit of respect for the values our democratic regimes represent, and aspiring to a world order based on universal freedoms.
We must draw the correct conclusions and apply the lessons of the crises of the past year and bequeath to all mankind a code of conduct, thus ensuring that our world will no longer be exposed to insane outbursts of tyranny. Our lesson from the two recent crises is that there is an unequivocal link between the nature of political regimes and the peace and stability of the world.
Democratic government is based on the recognition of civil liberties and on respect for the sovereignty of other nations. Democracy is the natural condition of a healthy society. It would be the preferred system for all mankind, were it free to choose. Man was born to freedom; it is part of his intrinsic nature. He was born to live, not to fight wars; to create, not to destroy. The spirit of freedom is embedded in the human intellect and the law of the jungle is alien to it. Therein lies the superiority of man over creatures that are devoid of the power of choice. "Live and let live" is the voice of human reason. "When one saves a human life it is as if one has saved all of humanity," runs an ancient Jewish saying.
These basic truisms have thrust themselves to the fore during recent years, when a new dawn has broken in the Soviet Union and in the countries of Eastern Europe. Seventy years of an oppressive regime could not suppress man's spirit of freedom. That spirit has arisen anew and broken its chains after three generations of independence denied. Now that the wind of freedom has been liberated no power on Earth can ever return it to captivity.
We saw this with our own eyes in the 70 hours of the abortive coup in the Soviet Union. We could have anticipated the end of that coup from the moment a small group of citizens first appeared in the streets of Moscow to face the approaching tanks. They stood against them unarmed, like a human banner, and the soldiers did not shoot. The army held its fire, faced as it was with the spirit of freedom that had taken root even among its own ranks. When the muse of freedom sang, the guns fell silent.
That is the lesson the world has drawn from the crisis of August 1991. Yet it learned another bitter and rapid lesson from the Persian Gulf crisis of August 1990. It learned how short-sighted it had been in supplying, over the years and without any controls, vast quantities of weapons to a dictatorial regime. It has learned just how terrifying can be the combination of military power and a lack of inhibition regarding its use. The chameleon that had bemused the entire enlightened world turned into a lethal python that wound itself around mankind's neck.
The billows of black smoke that rose from hundreds of oil wells across the Kuwaiti desert are a living and tangible illustration of the evil genie that had escaped from its bottle, throwing a huge pall over entire continents. Tyranny - and the tyrant - displayed an undreamed-of vitality.
Saddam Hussein has not been removed from the world scene. His defeated people have not rejected him. The Kurdish revolt has been brutally suppressed, leaving in its wake hundreds of thousands of homeless refugees. The scale of military strength that Saddam Hussein has retained is now revealed as a renewed and genuine threat to the region.
The Iraqi tyrant continues to scheme against and deceive the rest of the world. The United Nations inspection commissions have, one after the other, uncovered his lies and discovered the hidden stocks of non-conventional weapons he sought to conceal. Saddam Hussein is attempting to keep the world in ignorance of his revived military power, but the world, under the determined leadership of the United States, is not turning a blind eye to the facts, and will not permit the tyranny of Saddam Hussein to survive.
Last September, from this rostrum, I warned that Israel was about to become the target of attacks by Saddam Hussein in a war in which it was not involved, and to which it was not a party. And indeed Israel came under missile attack. It clenched its fists and gritted its teeth in refraining from any counter-attack, so as not to upset the international coalition. The international community has come to understand Israel's position as the bastion of genuine democracy in a dangerous and violent region. The events of the past year have made enlightened States world-wide re-evaluate the character of the Israeli-Arab conflict in the light of this correct political and historical perspective. Many countries realise today that the root causes of this bitter conflict, which has lasted decades, lie in the refusal of the Arab States - excluding Egypt - to recognise the existence of Israel and to accept its independence and sovereignty. It is this intransigence that has been the source of the wars imposed on Israel.
It has been clearly established that Israel is the only country in the world under a permanent tangible, physical threat to its very existence - a threat that has brought upon it six wars in the four decades of its existence. States that were themselves involved in the Gulf crisis have now come to understand, perhaps for the first time, the logic of Israel's insistence on a peace ensuring its security and the well-being of its inhabitants.
In January 1991 we presented a consolidated formula of five principles designed to promote the peace process: first, an end to the state of war between the Arab States and Israel, with a view to the signing of a peace treaty; secondly, reduction and control of the arms race; thirdly, direct negotiations, without preconditions, between Israel and its neighbours, with a view to the signing of peace agreements between Israel and each of the Arab States; fourthly, the simultaneous start of a resolution of the Palestinian problem, to be carried out in stages by us and the residents of Judea, Samaria and Gaza, in a joint framework with Jordan; and, fifthly, the drafting of joint programmes for regional development, with international aid, in areas such as water, the environment, electricity, solar energy, agriculture, health, transportation and the infrastructure. These principles have strengthened the foundations of the peace process in which we have been engaged since the cease-fire in the Gulf.
Since its establishment Israel has tirelessly sought to talk peace with its neighbours. In the aftermath of each of the ware that was forced upon us Israel has appealed to the Arab States to conduct direct talks with it, with no prior conditions, to attain a true and lasting peace. It seems that this appeal will now at last be answered. In a few weeks we shall, I hope, meet in face-to-face discussions with our neighbours in order to lay the foundations of a better future for our peoples and our coming generations. Israel is convinced that the sufferings of our war-torn region will be brought to an end, not as a result of any balance of terror, but of the benefits that peace will bring.
The bitter arms race in the Gulf and the Middle East has brought many tragedies to the peoples of the region. It is responsible for the poverty and misery of millions of human beings and for the wars which have broken out in our region over and over again in the latter half of this century. The arms race has drained the resources of the different States to the detriment of the welfare of their citizens. The potential means of destruction amassed by cruel dictators with limitless ambitions is a proven recipe for the outbreak of wars.
Our region has also known the use of chemical weapons, which Saddam Hussein used against his own people as well as against his Iranian enemy. The elimination of chemical weapons everywhere, and especially in the Middle East, is of supreme importance. This is why Israel has agreed to become a party to the convention to eliminate chemical weapons, while maintaining the principle of universality. For the convention to be effective all States of the region must become party to it.
The term "weapons of mass destruction" is no mere technical phrase. Every type of weapon - including conventional - that entails a threat of the indiscriminate destruction of large numbers of people falls, in our view, into the category of "weapons of mass destruction". Arms control must therefore include conventional weaponry as well.
On the eve of the convening of a regional peace conference, I appeal from this rostrum to the leaders of the Arab States. I say "Stop the insane arms race in weapons of extermination. Abandon all destructive impulses. Put an end to blind hatred. Do not waste your resources. Do not give up the opportunity for progress and well-being for your own countries for the illusory dream of destroying Israel.
"Israel draws its strength from its historic and moral right to a safe existence in its own country. Set out with us on the path of peace. Think of your children, as we think of ours. For they were born not for war, to be killed, but to live."
The far-reaching changes that have occurred in the struggle between blocs in the world have also been accompanied by positive changes in Africa. Some internal wars have ended, and others we hope are about to end. The process of African States' attaining their independence has been completed. The apartheid regime in South Africa is nearing its end. A wind of democracy has blown through many African States, inspiring a progressive evolution.
But in many States of the third world, especially in Africa, hunger, disease and misery are still on the rise. The growing birth rate has led to a population explosion and has aggravated the shortage of essential foodstuffs. In extensive areas the desert has reclaimed arable land and pasture land. Hundreds of thousands of people are falling victim to starvation and epidemics. All this is happening at the end of the twentieth century, a century that has seen unprecedented scientific, technological and medical achievements. In an era in which borderlines between East and West are becoming blurred, the developed countries must seek to bridge the huge gaps between the living standards of the northern and southern hemispheres. We must lend an attentive ear, especially to the heart-rending appeals for help from the African continent.
Israel is a small country, poor in natural resources and material riches, but it has its faith. It faces the tremendous challenge of absorbing every year hundreds of thousands of new immigrants, who flock to it from many countries. 
However, in the process of building a new society and developing its economy, Israel has, over the past 40 years, accumulated considerable knowledge and experience in agriculture, technology, medicine and science, as well as in organisation and management. Israel has for many years placed its knowledge at the disposal of developing countries. The result of this mission which we have taken upon ourselves has been decades of cooperation and assistance to 96 countries.
In Israel, for several generations we have witnessed a revival in the life of a nation which has brought to the world values of peace, liberty and justice. These principles are the essence of the law of the Jewish people and of its universal message.
The Jewish people is the only people ever to have been exiled again and again, with its faith in its return to its homeland remaining unshaken. Bach time, mankind has benefited from the spiritual assets and values of justice which have accompanied the revival of the Jewish people in its ancestral land. The return to Zion in our own times, which has been the objective of the Zionist movement, has resulted in a gathering in Israel of the Jewish people from all over the world. Wherever tyranny has raged and our people have been persecuted, assistance came from Israel, bringing them back to their national homeland in freedom and security. In the aftermath of the Second World War, Israel took in hundreds of thousands of our brethren who had survived in Europe as well as hundreds of thousands from Arab countries and elsewhere, escaping discrimination and persecution.
These very days we are witnessing a phenomenon stirring in its enormity - that of the return of Jews from the Soviet Union and from Ethiopia to their ancestral homeland. The Zionist movement is colour-blind. The distinction between colours is alien to Zionism. That is why it has been proven that Zionism is tolerant and liberal par excellence.
Last week, President Bush appealed to this Assembly to abrogate the cynical and deplorable resolution which equates Zionism with racism. The President aptly described the unique character of the Zionist movement and its spiritual and humanitarian values. More and more representatives of nations are joining his appeal, guided by this great historical truth. This appeal will continue to reverberate both within this Hall and outside it until the repeal, in the near future, of that resolution, which constitutes a calumny on this Organisation and a disgrace to it.
This session stands on the threshold of a new hope. People the world over aspire for an end to hardship and suffering and for the beginning, at last, of an era full of promise and hope. For us, the Jewish people, it is also the beginning of a new year, when we exchange the traditional blessing: "May the outgoing year sweep away its maledictions, and may the new year bring with it blessings for all mankind."
﻿Mr. President, on behalf of the Government and the people of New Zealand let me first congratulate you on your election. It has certainly been a momentous year both for you and for the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
I should like also to pay tribute to the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Peres de Cuellar, who has worked tirelessly over the past 10 years towards the reduction of tension throughout the world. As he comes to the end of a decade of service I offer to the Secretary-General my congratulations, and those of the Government and the people of New Zealand on his personal contribution to the cause of peace.
I am delighted to join you, Sir, in welcoming new Members to this forty-sixth session of the General Assembly of the United Nations. In particular I want to welcome the Federated States of Micronesia - a new member of this body, but a familiar friend to my country as host of the most recent meeting of South Pacific Forum nations. I am delighted that they and their close neighbours, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, are joining us at this time.
It is a source of immense satisfaction that we see here today for the first time the legitimate representatives of Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia. I pay tribute to the courage and determination of these three European nations that have struggled against totalitarian rule for so long. Their international recognition as independent sovereign States brings to an end a chapter in their history when they were forcibly incorporated into the Soviet Union in 1940.
Their independence and membership of this Organisation coupled with the membership of the Republic of Korea, which I warmly welcome, and the membership of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea signal the end of an era, or more importantly the beginning of a new era, in international relations.
New opportunities in politics and trade command our attention. New problems constantly challenge our capabilities. In Yugoslavia, we see a situation that cries out for peaceful resolution. Mediation has been tried. It must be tried again. It will never be successful unless and until the parties to the conflict are prepared to commit themselves fully to the process. So my Government appeals to all other members of the international community that might have some influence - direct or indirect - to use that Influence to persuade the parties to the conflict to commit themselves to mediation if they cannot resolve their differences peacefully on their own.
Today the problems may look intractable but difficult issues can be solved. Already the change in global politics has been rewarded by significant progress in the field of disarmament. The super-Powers have committed themselves to substantial reductions in their arsenals of nuclear weapons. While the world warmly welcomes each new step in the reduction of nuclear weapons agreed to by the super-Powers, this progress is undermined by the actual or potential proliferation of nuclear weapons to other nations. Therefore on arms control nothing is more important than moves to halt the proliferation of nuclear weapons.
New Zealand, as one of the first nations to sign and ratify the United Nations Non-Proliferation Treaty, firmly believes that attempts to halt the proliferation of nuclear weapons must be an agenda item of the highest priority for the Organisation. The dangers from nuclear weapons are such that a failure to halt their proliferation would seriously diminish the recent success in strategic arms reductions.
We welcome the decisions of France and the people's Republic of China to join the Non-Proliferation Treaty. Now that the Treaty will cover all the current nuclear Powers of the world. New Zealand urges all parties to agree to its indefinite extension in 1995.
In singling out nuclear weapons for particular attention, I do not in any way diminish the work needed to control other weapons of mass destruction, such as those using chemical or biological agents.
The importance of the task of stopping the proliferation of all weapons of mass destruction should be firmly embedded in the minds of thinking people everywhere following the fearful possibility that Saddam Hussein would use such weapons during his illegal take-over of the State of Kuwait. That act of aggression tested the strength and commitment of this world body.

We can all take pride in the fact that the leadership shown by the United Nations in the exercise of its undoubted moral authority was successful in facilitating the coming together of a great coalition of nations who were determined that the might of Saddam Hussein would not succeed and that Kuwait would be restored to its independent sovereign status. During the dangerous weeks of the Gulf crisis the United Nations, with strong leadership from the Security Council, showed firmness of judgment and a commitment to the ideals of the United Nations that has reinforced the status and authority of this Organisation. The Security Council was able to reflect accurately the mood of the General Assembly because of its broad representation aerobe regional lines and its inclusion of the small and vulnerable as well as the large and powerful.
I want to pay a warm tribute to Kuwait's Arab neighbours, who were resolute in their support of the rights of a small independent nation and refused to back down to intimidation or threats. Their steadfastness in the early stages of the crisis was a major reason why Kuwait was eventually liberated.
The role of the United States in bringing together the coalition of nations who worked in concert to liberate Kuwait was an impressive display of international diplomacy. United States forces, with their British, French and Arab counterparts, gave an equally impressive display on the ground and in the air. But overriding the achievements of the individual nations was the commitment given by nations, large and small, to the military task force that gathered to halt aggression and to guarantee the independent sovereign rights of the small nation, Kuwait. I am proud that my country played a small part in that coalition and has been able to contribute to the post-war United Nations commissions, such as that on the disposal of weapons of mass destruction.
As a small country in the south-west Pacific, we do not threaten anyone, nor do we peek to impose our will on other countries. But in joining the coalition we honoured a New Zealand tradition to oppose tyranny and support freedom. Luckier than a number, all our military personnel came home safely on this occasion, but many of their forebears in pursuit of the same goals rest alongside the battlefields of the modern world. We have never shirked our responsibilities.
As we opposed a dictator in the Gulf, freedom-loving people around the world have rejoiced as we have witnessed, too, the collapse of totalitarian communism in Europe. That system was defeated not by force of arms but by ordinary people, in their hundreds of thousands, reaching in the streets to reclaim their God-given right to freedom of thought, expression and assembly and their right to democratic government. It has been a glorious victory for the indomitable spirit of the human person.
But let me sound a note of warning: this impressive victory could turn to bitterness, and hope to despair, unless all nations show equal courage in addressing an equally unprecedented economic challenge. The helping hand that both the emerging democracies of Europe and the developing countries of the world need most is the hand of trade. So, today, the barricades we must pull down are not those erected to prevent tanks but those erected to hinder trade.
To sustain and secure the dramatic political changes that have occurred, to deny dictators the excuse for coveting others' territory, to ease the
crushing debt burdens that too many countries face, to provide an economic alternative to the destruction of our environment - to do all these things, and more, we have to realise that a change in the international trading system is essential. Without change, how can the new democracies in Europe do what they want to do for their people if their exports face restrictions in foreign markets? How can debt-ridden developing nations ever pay their way if they face not only similar restrictions but subsidised competition too?
This is not a debate that can be drawn wholly across North-South lines, because trade restrictions occur on both sides, as does subsidisation. This is a debate about giving meaning to the many fine words, about helping those who are struggling to escape poverty, and about securing the democratic freedoms so recently won. This is a debate about complementing aid with trade.
The Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations began nearly five years ago. It was, and remains, the moat ambitious of all the trade negotiating rounds. Yet it is in real danger of faltering if the political commitments that were given in 1986, and have been repeated since then - moat recently at the G-7 meeting this year - are not translated into the substantive decisions that are already overdue.
A country like mine, dependent on trade for its very livelihood, finds it incredible that political and economic leaders who are responsible in so many things, who are participating in, and encouraging, the dawn of a new political era, have not yet broken the log-jam in the negotiations. Certainly the G-7 group of industrialised countries, under the chairmanship of the British Prime Minister, gave us cause for new hope. Certainly the United States has been, and remains, a strong proponent of a liberalised international trading system. Thoughtful leaders In the European Community, and many leaders in the developing world, have all called for greater progress.
But it seems to be a case of words, words and more words, but little action. If we are to succeed, action must now take the place of words. Time is running out. The alternative to a successful and substantive conclusion to the Uruguay Round is often said to be a series of trade blocs - groups of countries turning in on themselves, failing to realise their full competitive advantage) surviving, perhaps, but at a lower and more unstable level than would be possible in a liberal world trading system.
All this is quite possible, but I suggest that it is not the worst-case scenario. The worst-case scenario is those countries that have found new freedoms having those freedoms taken away by regimes who use the excuse of the need for economic control of disintegrating economies as a cover for political oppression; it is having stable countries being made less stable because they cannot earn the foreign exchange necessary to provide for the legitimate aspirations of their people; it is turning the clock back rather than forward.
With a view to avoiding that - and avoid it we must - I make a plea from this rostrum that the barricades that prevent fair trade be taken down. And if the powerful will not do it to help the weak, then they should do it for the selfish reason that it is the only way the world will secure a lasting peace. Trade between nations is what breaks down fear, and the sharing of resources by trade is what prevents ware of acquisition. If the selfish win, if the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade fails, then today's leaders will have planted the seed of future conflicts. That is a strong message, but it is no more so than the seriousness of the situation warrants. 
Let us achieve a milestone in the progress of international trade this year, so that we can move forward with confidence to the United Nations Conference on Environment, and Development next year. A free and fair trade system is central to our efforts to conserve and enhance the environment. We have already made progress on issues such as driftnet fishing and with the Montreal Osona Protocol) but we need to maximise these gains by ensuring that States fully observe the measures that have been adopted in such fields. Next year's United Nations Conference in Brazil will be the real test of our ability to cooperate in the endeavour to find the proper balance between development and environmental protection. My country is the first anywhere to enshrine the concept of sustainable development in legislation on natural resources.
Just before I departed from New Zealand seven students from seven continents of the world lit a candle for peace in front of Maori tukutuku panels symbolising the seeking of knowledge. They were greeting the dawning of this new session of the United Nations General Assembly. The students participated in this ceremony in New Zealand because ours is one of the first countries to see the sun rise, and a ceremony at dawn is the traditional Maori way to acknowledge a new beginning.
We in this Assembly can all rejoice in that we are seeing new beginnings in many parts of the world: in Europe, in Cambodia, in South Africa. We must not let this moment in history pass; we must now replace an understanding of how to destroy each other with a new understanding of how to live and trade with each other. It is my most fervent hope and prayer that this great assembly of nations has the moral courage to do not only what is necessary but what is right.
















﻿Mingling with the other people taking part in this General Assembly debate and looking to their faces makes one almost physically aware of fact that, today, the representatives of the Soviet Union, which is transforming itself into a union of sovereign States, are viewed - and rightly so - as envoys of a new nation. It is a nation on the threshold of an entirely new era in its centuries-old political, philosophical, international, legal and day-to-day history.
We have just experienced a purifying storm - the defeat of a criminal coup, and everything that took place in connection with the recent Congress of People's Deputies. Today I extend the words of deep gratitude to all those who associated themselves with our resistance to the coup. Those days in August have convinced us finally of one thing - that the quest for freedom has become the main thrust in our own development and in the development of the entire world community. Only a society that gives full protection to individual freedoms and rights can be prosperous and dynamic.
The longing for freedom and democracy has always been present in the minds and hearts of our people. It has survived despite decades of despotism and lawlessness, and the years of perestroika brought it to life with renewed vigour and translated it into concrete deeds. The courage of unarmed people stemming the advance of political monsters who opposed the new thinking proved that the peoples of our country will no longer bow the knee to diktat. In essence, the defeat of a coup aimed at restoring totalitarian rule led to a revolution that changed the face of the nation, sweeping away the last remaining pillars of a bankrupt regime.
The failure of the coup was also a world-wide victory for the forces of good. Together, we managed to avert the threat of a return to the cold war. To remove the obstacles to progress towards a new state of interaction and partnership, towards democracy and a new era of peace-making.
	The political developments of the first half of this year created the major prerequisites for this change. There have been breakthroughs in two central areas of disarmament - conventional arms in Europe, and strategic nuclear arms. Armaments are being reduced, although only recently it was held that an arms build-up was precisely what guarantees national security. As President Bush pointed out in his address to the General Assembly yesterday, this proves that relations between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States, between East and West, are no longer relations between adversaries. Such drastic cuts are possible only between partners who have recognized that they have shared, rather than conflicting, security interests.
	A decisive step towards the end of the cold war has been taken in an area that is most resistant to new trends - the economy. The London meeting between the Soviet President and the G-7 leaders and subsequent contacts between the Seven and the leaders of our Union and its republics sec the stags for overcoming the economic division of the world and restoring its integrity, its economic interdependence and its market and financial fabric.
	Iraq's aggression against Kuwait put the nascent global unity to a serious test. The world community's concerted efforts to resist the aggressor, including the efforts of the five permanent members of the Security Council, were truly unprecedented. The consensus that emerged in the United Nations around the central idea that breaches of the peace are inadmissible remained intact even after the crisis in the Gulf was over. Indeed, this consensus led to practical steps to resolve other burning issues, including the formidable challenge of the search for a Middle East settlement, and the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems. Today, there remains hardly a single regional conflict where there is not a glimmer of light, at the end of the tunnel.
Europe - once the epicentre of two world wars and an arena of confrontation - is becoming n laboratory for new forms of interaction. In fact, the process of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe already transcends regional frontiers. A new transcontinental community is coming into being - a "belt" of trust, cooperation and security that spans the countries of these parts of the world: the entire northern hemisphere.
Political dialogue is getting under way in Asia and the Pacific, as nations and international associations in that region join in a search for mechanism for the discussion and collective solution of common problems. Latin America as a community of mutually tolerant and democratic nations is becoming a political reality. On the African continent, negotiations are replacing hostilities and, at times, barbaric methods of force.
This global change is inextricably linked with perestroika in the Soviet Union. Before the events of August the progress of perestroika inside the country lagged far behind its international impact. Now that that gap has been closed, internal and external activities can proceed at a single and accelerating pace. The steadfastness of the President of the USSR, Mr. Gorbachev, the courage and initiative of Mr. Yeltsin, the Russian President, the vigorous popular movement and the overwhelming solidarity of the rest of the world enabled us not only to defeat the coup but also to dismantle the braking mechanisms that hindered the country's progress towards the rule of law and a civic society.
To a certain extent the coup and all the risks involved are precisely what brought about a strong centrifugal trend in our country as, between 22 August and 9 September, eight republics declared themselves independent from the union. That is how they reacted to the threat posed by the putsch, the aim of which was the restoration of a totalitarian society.
The extraordinary Congress of People's Deputies at the beginning of September met the challenge of the time, establishing for a period of transition a structure whereby the republics - to use the words of the President of Russia - would obtain as much sovereignty as they could take. Now that the element of coercion is behind us and the sovereign republics are able to take stock of the situation, there has developed a centripetal trend, which is gaining momentum.
This is evidenced by the intensive activity of the State Council, chaired by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, and comprising the leaders of the Republics. The first decision of this body was the recognition of the independence of the three Baltic States. At the second session of the Council the basic forms of an economic union - which will be open for participation by any Republic, including the Baltic States, should they so desire - were addressed and endorsed.
The State Council is working on measures to overcome the rather critical problems - to say the least - of food and medical supplies in the coming winter and spring months. The Inter-Republican Economic Committee has been very active in this regard.
All-union government agencies constituted by the Congress continue to function in the four key areas: foreign policy, defence, law enforcement and security. Profound military reforms are taking place, these will lead to a radical cut in military expenditures, which for many years have placed such a heavy burden on the budget of our State.
The Extraordinary Congress of People's Deputies, the State Council and the President of the USSR have thus answered the questions that had been causing world-wide concern. It can now be seen that the answers were constructive and sent a positive signal to the world community. As a dynamic, although still fragile, balance emerges between the centre and the Republics, we can see that we are now on the right course - despite the deviations or set-backs that may occur - and we look with renewed expectations to the international community for all the support it can lend us in making a rapid transition and taking a respected place in the family of nations. By stating this publicly I am fulfilling one of my important tasks at this session of the General Assembly,
The new Union, at this decisive stage of its formation, needs the support of the world community, but it is precisely the world community that has an interest in the success of our efforts, since the prospects for creating a stable, democratic and civilised world order on our planet. Earth - which may be the only one in the universe - depend on this.
The President of the USSR and the leaders of all sovereign States and Soviet Republics are aware of their responsibilities under the Soviet Union's existing international agreements and obligations. I should like to reaffirm that the union of sovereign States will be the direct successor of all such commitments, including those we have assumed as a nuclear Power. Our country's nuclear weapons remain under effective centralised control.
"New challenges" is a favourite subject of political scientists. Not so long ago this term came to denote such things as international terrorism, international drug and arms trafficking, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), degradation of the environment, and the problems of human psychological adaptation to new parameters of progress. The depth and danger of these new risks have forced the world community - and did so even back in the days of the cold war - to begin formulating adequate responses to these transnational challenges. And although the bulk of the work still lies ahead, negotiating mechanisms are already emerging and international legal instruments are being put into place.
However, let us admit, both to ourselves and to the whole of mankind, that virtually none of us was prepared to face the risks of the new, historic period. Cleansing storms have thundered over the expanses of eastern and central Europe, bringing with them all the promise that freedom holds out, bringing back the sense of dignity, self-esteem and faith in man's lofty mission on Earth. And it is not freedom's fault if the flames of ethnic strife have suddenly engulfed the world like the outbreak of a long-forgotten disease. Age-old and seemingly subdued instincts have come alive - instincts which have no place in the new environment. And all this is accompanied by the threat of economic chaos, flaring social contradictions, refugees and disease.
Europe, which had seemed the least vulnerable of all the continents, has suddenly shown its susceptibility to the virus of nationalism. After the division of Europe had been overcome without confrontation or instability and Germany had been peacefully and democratically reunited, Yugoslavia faced a crisis and is now on the brink of civil war.
Why this un-preparedness for new risks? We were too busy eliminating the deformations of the cold-war era to formulate in good time a positive agenda that would meet national aspirations. Regrettably, the energy released as a result of East-West reconciliation has not only served constructive purposes but also fuelled a resurgence of national egotism. Nationalism is becoming the main breeding ground for terrorism. The mortar attack on Downing Street, the villainous assassination of Rajiv Ghandi, the bloodshed which is still going on in Nagorny Karabakh, and elsewhere, are convincing evidence of that.
There is a danger that the ideological division of the world may be replaced by attempts to divide and antagonize countries, peoples and nations on national, ethnic or religious grounds. The result may be the nineteenth century revisited, albeit it with significant new features, such as global interdependence and weapons of mass destruction.
The problem is how to make the growing national self-awareness serve the cause of progress, freedom and the prosperity of people; to keep national identity slogans from becoming vehicles of separatist policies leading away from the mainstream of world integration to absurd autarchy in either economic or cultural life.
Whenever national egotism spills over State borders as was the case with Iraq's aggression against Kuwait, the international community must remain true to its position of principle and take the necessary steps, including enforcement measures, in keeping with the United Nations Charter. Of course, military force - or using it in appropriate measure - should be the last resort. Using it even to maintain international law and order necessarily means a set-back for the new thinking, a reversal of the trend towards establishing a new type of international relations. Today, the international community and the United Nations have sufficient capabilities to curb an aggressor, whoever he may be, and to restore justice without the use of military force - or using it in appropriate measure and on a collective basis.
There is also a certain degree of understanding with regard to ethnic conflicts of a purely domestic nature. The golden rule in this respect is to do no harm.
Problems arise also in the grey zone between internal jurisdiction and international responsibility. Basically, it is a question of the further development of the sovereignty principle in international law, as applied to the new realities and risks and to the need for universal interaction between States.
Consensus must be achieved on a set of basic rules, criteria and principles for international response by the world community to emergency situations, a kind of code of responsible conduct for States, in an era of an interrelated and integral world. Such a consensus should combine the principles of sovereignty, self-determination and non-interference in the internal affairs of States with the need for States to fulfil their obligations under the United Nations Charter and other international legal instruments, and for the United Nations to pursue its goals in all the spheres prescribed by its Charter.
The principal objective hare is to harmonise national, regional and global interests, to assert a single universal scale of democratic values providing for freedom of choice, a variety of forms of social development, economic and political pluralism and the supremacy of international law and human rights.
The problem of individual freedom in all its dimensions is becoming central in world politics today. Providing for all basic human rights has become an imperative both of national development and international relations.
The gravest challenges arise in the world economy. Imbalances and deformations are the inevitable companions of economic progress. On the one hand, the end of the cold war has put an end to bloc rivalry in dealing with the third world. Against the background of interdependence, development ceases to be a one-dimensional notion and assumes a universal character. This is the key to a balanced world economy and to providing a solid basis for resolving global issues. On the other hand, there are growing fears that the new East-West relationship will leave many developing nations on the periphery of the world economy. At the same time, the third world is becoming increasingly polarized. Economic success in a number of countries is accompanied by worsening crises, poverty and hunger in the poorest nations. To prevent accumulated contradictions from exploding is a priority task. Moving away from ideologically motivated assistance should not mean forgetting those who simply cannot survive without outside help.
The same applies to the factors which hamper progress towards environmental security. Chernobyl became a world-wide disaster. Yet, it is also a symbol of international solidarity in a struggle for survival and the triumph of humanism in relations between States. The United Nations Chernobyl Pledging Conference, which was held here recently, demonstrated this once again.
One of the lessons to be learned from Chernobyl and other environmental catastrophes is that there can be no effective way of avoiding disaster without overcoming the inertia of old industrial practices. The objective is to readjust the whole structure of the world economy to make it environmentally safe. This can only be achieved through concerted efforts.
New international relations should be universal. Within generally recognised norms of civilised behaviour, a11 nations, regardless of their ideological or political preferences and dislikes, should maintain normal and proper relations. Lingering hostility, let alone the lack of elementary dialogue between a number of States, objectively generates tension within the very fabric of international relations.
The USSR is paying its last diplomatic debts inherited from the cold war. We have normalised our relations with the Republic of Korea and launched a comprehensive process of restoring normal relations with Israel.
The new world realities of today require institutionalised security and cooperation structures, the modernization of existing mechanisms and the creation of new ones where necessary. At the same time, we should not hesitate to abandon certain previously established structures which are inherently incapable of evolution. The Co-ordinating Committee for East-West Trade Policy (COCOM) is at the top of that list.
The activities of newly established as well as restructured international organizations should be integrated in order to add stability to the pillars of comprehensive security.
The general outlines of this process were defined by the international community in a resolution adopted at the forty-fourth session of the General Assembly on enhancing international peace, security and International cooperation in all its aspects in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. It was at that time - two years ago - that conceptual agreement was reached to begin drafting the fundamental principles of civilised international communication at the current stage of history - sometimes referred to as the new world order.
Members may recall that that resolution was the joint initiative of the USSR and the United States. When I met President Bush today, we reiterated the commitment of our two countries to broader cooperation in strengthening the United Nations as well as in all other areas. This commitment rests on a new foundation in the Soviet-United States relationship - no longer one of confrontation or even rivalry, but cooperation and friendship for the good of the world community as a whole.
The philosophy of new international solidarity, which is finding its way into practice, signifies a de-ideologization of the United Nations. In renewing our Organisation we should once and for all leave behind us the legacy of the ice age - like the obnoxious resolution equating Zionism with racism.
A transition to partnership and collective action bears the promise of United Nations universality, both in terms of its membership and in terms of its areas of activity. The process has already been set in motion. At this session of the General Assembly new Members have joined the ranks of the Organization. These include States of differing size and population. Our support for their admission to the United Nations mirrors the overall Soviet foreign policy of developing relations with all States, including small and medium-sized States.
It is with a special feeling that I wish to congratulate our colleagues, the plenipotentiary representatives of new sovereign and independent States - the Latvian Republic, the Lithuanian Republic and the Estonian Republic.
I see special symbolism in the fact that one of the first foreign policy steps of the country which began its new political calendar recently was to recognize the full independence of the Baltic Republics and provide immediate support for their joining the United Nations end associating themselves with the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) process. That took place in Moscow at the beginning of the Conference on the Human Dimension. At the present time the process of establishing diplomatic relations and exchanging embassies between the USSR and the Baltic States has started. We are going to hold large-scale talks on vital issues affecting the destinies of millions of people.
Adapting the entire United Nations system to the new realities of international life is an item on our agenda. Progress has already been achieved in such adaptation and great credit for this goes to the Secretary-General. Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, who is a confident leader of the Organization at this juncture which is perhaps most decisive. We hope that the line he so strongly supports will be duly continued.
There is a wealth of promising ideas on this subject. It would appear to make sense to agree upon launching practical exploration of approaches to reforming the United Nations. We are open to any fruitful ideas; we are also working on our own proposals. A concerted and essentially collective regulation of international relations in the areas of security and disarmament crucial for the destiny of the world has become a priority in the activities of the United Nations end the world community.
Supremacy of law is the main point of reference on the way to shaping a new model of international security. A system of political and legal deterrence should be its cornerstone - a system based not on mutual deterrence but rather on confidence that mutual threat does not exist and also on a high level of trust and openness in the military and other spheres. To achieve thin, it is important to establish, with active United Nations involvement, an atmosphere of general aversion to aggression throughout the world community. Any act of aggression must, from the very start, be regarded as doomed, not only militarily but also politically, economically and morally. An international boycott is the first step to deter and warn the aggressor.
Next in line is a joint elaboration and implementation of the concept of the next stage of disarmament to absorb the experience gained and make the disarmament processes stable, comprehensive and universal.
Priority tasks include making military potentials exclusively defence-oriented and working out the guidelines States could follow while restructuring their armed forces in conformity with the doctrine of reasonable sufficiency. That now is taking place in the Soviet Union.
The General Assembly could recommend initiating, as an intermediate stage, consultations to work on specific quantitative and qualitative parameters for minimum nuclear deterrence in all its aspects. It is becoming an urgent task to conduct negotiations on the total elimination of tactical nuclear weapons in as short as time as possible. 
A reduction in the number of nuclear tests, with a view to phasing them out altogether as soon as possible, is one means of halting the nuclear arms race. A broad movement in support of this idea has materialized in the political and scientific communities and among the public in various countries of the world. The time has come to establish a United Nations register of conventional arms sales and supplies and to identify jointly its technical parameters with a view to arriving at agreed principles of restraint in arms sales.
The development of a long-term concept of the use of United Nations forces in accordance with the Charter of the Organization, including the refinement of rapid response mechanisms for countering threats to international peace, legally codified procedures for deterring a potential aggressor and optimal strategies for defusing conflicts, would facilitate more comprehensive utilization of United Nations capacities. Major tasks in this area include efforts to make United Nations peace-keeping operations more effective and institutionalized, broader use of the preventive capacities of the United Nations and efforts to find ways to correlate global and regional security structures. There is proof that conflicts can indeed be settled through national reconciliation, a balance of interests and responsibility among all the parties involved and the expression of the will of the people in democratic free elections. I am particularly pleased to note the important role that is to be played by the United Nations in implementing the settlement in Cambodia as a truly unique instrument for maintaining international peace.
Today a unique chance is at hand to set in motion the process of a Middle East settlement. It is essential to lock in the significant pi ogress that has been made in solving the Afghan problem. This session must take action to support efforts in these areas.
The ultimate beneficiary of the movement towards stable peace with maximum guarantees is the human being. The domestic policies of States and the practice of international communication should rest on uniform rules applied across the entire range of human rights as an inseparable set of equal categories of a political, civil, social, economic and cultural nature defining the status of the individual and his relations with the State and society. Substantive discussion of specific human rights issues and matters of compliance with international commitments in this area can no longer be dismissed under the artificial pretext of interference in internal affairs. By signing appropriate international instruments, every State, as it were, delegates a fraction of its sovereignty to the international community. The criterion is the primacy of human rights over the rights of nations and other bodies.
At the Moscow meeting of the CSCE conference on the human dimension, we focused on the problem of strengthening not only the national, but also the international basis of guarantees for democracy, political pluralism, the supremacy of law and human rights.
We might provide for far-reaching collective procedures that would ultimately include binding and mandatory elements. Non-governmental and human rights organisations should be actively encouraged to participate in their verification. In other words, after the Moscow conference, the concept of confidence-building measures, which has been put to work so successfully in the political and military fields since the conferences held in Madrid and Stockholm should, we firmly believe, become the cornerstone and driving force of the new turn to human rights within the all-European and the global context.
	Much has been done in the United Nations, but there are still greater tasks ahead, reflecting the risks and challenges that face the international community today. Our common and inseparable destinies largely, if not decisively, depend on whether the United Nations will be able to succeed in renovating itself and become a true multilateral guarantor of peace and security.
Today all of us, politicians and diplomats alike, constantly find ourselves with the word "space" on our tongues. We speak of a single economic, legal and ecological space. This has become an extremely up-to-date and fashionable expression. Yet, half a century ago, in the heyday of Stalin's tyranny, the great Russian poet, Boris Pasternak, used it to describe an artist's calling!
"We have to live without vainglory Live in such a way that after all A love that space bestows upon us Would let us hear the future's call."
The call of the future! The author of Doctor Zhivago and the winner of the Nobel Prize heeded this call. Let us also heed it.
﻿I am honoured to speak with you as you open the forty-sixth session of the General Assembly. I should first like to congratulate the outgoing President, Guido de Marco of Malta, and salute our incoming President, Samir Al-Shihabi of Saudi Arabia.
I also want to salute especially Secretary-General Javier Peres de Cuellar, who will step down in just over three months. But let me say, Secretary-General Peres de Cuellar has served with great distinction during a period of unprecedented change and turmoil, and for almost 10 years we have enjoyed the leadership of this man of peace, a man that I, along with many Members, feel proud to call friend, and so today let us congratulate our friend and praise his spectacular service to the United Nations and to the people of the world, the Secretary-General.
Let me also welcome new Members in this Hall, two delegations representing Korea, particularly our democratic friends, the Republic of Korea, the Republics of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, and new missions from the Marshall Islands and Micronesia. Twenty years ago, when I was the Permanent Representative here for the United States, there were 132 United Nations Members. Just one week ago, 159 nations enjoyed membership in the United Nations, and today the number stands at 166. The presence of these new Members alone provides reason for us to celebrate. 
My statement today will not sound like any you have heard from a President of the United States. I am not going to dwell on the super-Power competition that defined international politics for half a century. Instead, I will discuss the challenges of building peace and prosperity in a world leavened by the cold war's end and the resumption of history.
Communism held history captive for years. It suspended ancient disputes; and it suppressed ethnic rivalries, nationalist aspirations and old prejudices. As it has dissolved, suspended hatreds have sprung to life. People who for years have been denied their pasts, have begun searching for their own identities, often through peaceful and constructive means, occasionally through factionalism and bloodshed.
This revival of history ushers in a new era teeming with opportunities and perils. Let us begin by discussing the opportunities. First, history's renewal enables people to pursue their natural instincts for enterprise. Communism froze that progress until its failures became too much for even its defenders to bear, and now citizens throughout the world have chosen enterprise over envy, personal responsibility over the enticements of the State, prosperity over the poverty of central planning.
The United Nations Charter encourages this adventure by pledging to employ international machinery for the promotion of the economic and social advancement of all peoples, and I can think of no better way to fulfil this Mission than to promote the free flow of goods and Ideas, frankly, ideas and goods will travel around the globe with or without our help. The information revolution has destroyed the weapons of enforced isolation and ignorance. In many parts of the world technology has overwhelmed tyranny, proving that the age of Information can become the age of liberation, if we limit State power wisely and free our people to make the best use of new ideas, inventions and insights. By the same token, the world has learned that free markets provide levels of prosperity, growth and happiness that centrally planned economies can never offer.
Even the most charitable estimates indicate that in recent years the free world's economies have grown at twice the rate of the former communist world. Growth does more than fill shelves; it permits every person to gain, not at the expense of others but to the benefit of others. Prosperity encourages people to live as neighbours, not as predators. Economic growth can aid international relations in exactly the same way.
Many nations represented here are parties to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). The Uruguay Round, the latest in the post-war series of trade negotiations, offers hope to developing nations, many of which have been cruelly divided, cruelly deceived, by the false promises of totalitarianism. Here in this Hall, we hear about North-South problems. But free and open trade, including unfettered access to markets and credit, offers developing countries means of self-sufficiency and economic dignity.
If the Uruguay Round should fail, a new wave of protectionism could destroy our hopes for a better future. History shows all too clearly that protectionism can destroy wealth within countries and poison relations between them. Therefore, I call upon all members of GATT to redouble their efforts to reach a successful conclusion for the Uruguay Round. I pledge that the United States will do its part.
I cannot stress this enough: Economic progress will play a vital role In the new world. It supplies the soil in which democracy grows best. People everywhere seek government of and by the people, and they want to enjoy their inalienable rights to freedom and property and person. Challenges to democracy have failed. Just last month, coup plotters in the Soviet Union tried to derail the forces of liberty and reform, but Soviet citizens refused to follow. Most of the nations in this Hall stood with the forces of reform led by Mikhail Gorbachev and Boris Yeltsin, and against the coup plotters.
The challenge facing the Soviet peoples now, that of building political systems based upon individual liberty, minority rights, democracy and free markets, mirrors every nation's responsibility for encouraging peaceful, democratic reform, but it also testifies to the extraordinary power of the democratic ideal. As democracy flourishes, so does the opportunity (or a third historical breakthrough, international cooperation. A year ago, the Soviet Union joined the United States and a host of other nations in defending a tiny country against aggression and opposing Saddam Hussein. For the very first time on a matter of major importance super-Power competition was replaced with international cooperation. The United Nations, in one of its finest moments, constructed a measured, principled, deliberate and courageous response to Saddam Hussein. It stood up to an outlaw who invaded Kuwait, who threatened many States within the region, who sought to set a menacing precedent for the post-cold-war world.
The coalition effort established a model for the collective settlement of disputes. Members sat the goal - the liberation of Kuwait - and devised a courageous, unified means of achieving that goal. Mow, for the first time, we have a real chance to fulfil the United Nations Charter's ambition of working "to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war ... to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men and women and of nations large and small ... to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom". Those are the words of the Charter.
He will not revive these ideals if we fail to acknowledge the challenge that the renewal of history presents. In Europe and Asia, nationalist passions have flared anew, challenging borders, straining the fabric of international society. At the same time, around the world many age-old conflicts still fester. We see signs of this tumult right here. The United Nations has mounted more peace-keeping missions in the last 36 months than during its first 43 years, and although we now seem mercifully liberated from the fear of nuclear holocaust, these smaller, virulent conflicts should trouble us all.
We must face this challenge squarely - first, by pursuing the peaceful resolution of disputes now in progress; secondly, and more importantly, by trying to prevent others from erupting. No one hare can promise that today's borders will remain fixed for all time, but we must strive to ensure the peaceful, negotiated settlement of border disputes.
We must also promote the cause of international harmony by addressing old feuds. We should take seriously the Charter's pledge to practise tolerance and live together in peace with one another as good neighbours. United Nations General Assembly resolution 3379 (XXX), the so-called "Zionism is racism" resolution, mocks this pledge and the principles upon which the United Nations was founded, and I call now for its repeal. Zionism is not a policy; it is the idea that led to the creation of a home for the Jewish people, to the State of Israel, and to equate Zionism with the intolerable sin of racism is to twist history and forget the terrible plight of Jews in the Second World War - and indeed throughout history. To equate Zionism with racism is to reject Israel itself, a Member in good standing of the United Nations. This body cannot claim to seek peace and at the same time challenge Israel's right to exist. By repealing this resolution unconditionally the United Nations will enhance its credibility and serve the cause of peace.
As we work to meet the challenge posed by the resumption of history, we also must defend the Charter's emphasis on inalienable human rights. Government has failed if citizens cannot speak their mind, if they cannot form political parties freely and elect governments without coercion, it they cannot practice their religion freely, if they cannot raise their families in peace, if they cannot enjoy a just return from their labour, if they cannot live fruitful lives and at the end of their days look upon their achievements and their society's, progress with pride. Politicians who talk about democracy and freedom but provide neither eventually will feel the sting of public disapproval and the power of peoples yearning to live free.
Some nations still deny their basic rights to the people, and too many voices cry out for freedom. For example, the people of Cuba suffer oppression at the hands of a dictator who has not got the word, the lone hold-out in an otherwise democratic hemisphere, a man who has not adapted to a world that has no use for totalitarian tyranny. Elsewhere, despots ignore the heartening fact that the rest of the world is embarked upon a new age of liberty.
The renewal of history also imposes an obligation to remain vigilant about new threats and old. He must expand our efforts to control nuclear proliferation. We must work to prevent the spread of chemical and biological weapons and the missiles to deliver them.
It is for this reason that I put forward my Middle East arms initiative, a comprehensive approach to stop and, where possible, reverse the accumulation of arms in that part of the world moat prone to violence. We must remember that self-interest will tug nations in different directions, and that struggles over perceived interests will flare sometimes into violence. We can never say with confidence where the next conflict may arise. And we cannot promise eternal peace - not while demagogue peddle false promises to people hungry with hope; not while terrorists use our citizens as pawns and drug dealers destroy our peoples. He, as a result, must band together to overwhelm affronts to basic human dignity. It is no longer acceptable to shrug and say that one man's terrorist is another man's freedom fighter. Let us put the law above the crude and cowardly practice of hostage-holding.
In a world defined by change, we must be as firm in principle as we are flexible in our response to changing international conditions. That is especially true today of Iraq. Six months after the adoption of Security Council resolutions 687 (1991) and 688 (1991), Saddam continues to rebuild his weapons of mass destruction and to subject the Iraqi people to brutal repression. Saddam's contempt for United Nations resolutions was first demonstrated back in August 1990, and it continues even as I am speaking. His Government refuses to permit unconditional helicopter inspections, and right now is refusing to allow United Nations inspectors to leave inspected premises with documents relating to an Iraqi nuclear weapons programme. It is the view of the United States that we must keep the United Nations sanctions in place as long as he remains in power. This also shows that we cannot compromise for a moment in seeing that Iraq destroys all of its weapons of mass destruction and the means to deliver them. And we will not compromise.
This is not to say - let me be clear on this point - that we should punish the Iraqi people. Let me repeat: our argument has never been with the people of Iraq. It was, and is, with a brutal dictator whose arrogance dishonours the Iraqi people. Security Council resolution 706 (1991) created a responsible mechanism for sending humanitarian relief to innocent Iraqi citizens. He must put that mechanism to work. Ma must not abandon our principled stand against Saddam's aggression. This cooperative effort has liberated Kuwait. Now it can lead to a just government in Iraq. And when it does - when it does - the Iraqi people can look forward to better lives, free at home, free to engage in a world beyond their borders.
The resumption of history also permits the United Nations to resume the important business of promoting the values that I have discussed today. This body can serve as a vehicle through which willing parties can settle old disputes. In the months to come, I look forward to working with Secretary-General Peres de Cuellar and his successor as we pursue peace in such diverse and divided lands as Afghanistan, Cambodia, Cyprus, El Salvador, and Western Sahara. The United Nations can encourage free market development through its international lending and aid institutions. However, it should not dictate the particular forms of government that nations should adopt. It can, and should, encourage the values upon which the Organization was founded. Together, we should insist that nations seeking our acceptance meet standards of human decency.
Where institutions of freedom have lain dormant, the United Nations can offer them new life. These institutions play a crucial role in our quest for a new world order, an order in which no nation must surrender one iota of its own sovereignty, an order characterized by the rule of law rather than the resort to force, the cooperative development of disputes rather than anarchy and bloodshed, and an unstinting belief in human rights.
Finally, you may wonder about America's role the new world I have described. Let me assure you, the United States has no intention of striving for a pax americana. However, we will remain engaged. We will not retreat and pull back into isolationism. We will offer friendship and leadership. In short, we seek a pax universalis, built upon shared responsibilities and aspirations.
To all assembled: We have an opportunity to spare our sons and daughters the sins and errors of the past. We can build a future more satisfying than any our world has ever known. The future lies undefined before us, full of promise, littered with peril. We can choose the kind of world we want: one blistered by the fires of war and subjected to the winds of coercion and chance, or one made more peaceful by reflection and choice. Take this challenge seriously. Inspire future generations to praise and venerate you, to say, "On the ruins of conflict, these brave men and women built an era of peace and understanding. They inaugurated a new world order, an order worth preserving for the ages."
Good luck to each and every one of you.






