May I begin 
by warmly congratulating you, Sir, on your election to the presidency of the 
current session of the United Nations General Assembly. I believe that, given 
your talent and experience, you will guide this session to a successful 
completion of the noble mission entrusted to it by the Charter of the United 
Nations. I would also like to express my appreciation and thanks to your 
predecessor, Mr. Shihabi, for the contribution he made to accomplishing the 
tasks of the last session. 
I would like to take this opportunity to extend my warm welcome and 
congratulations to the 13 States that have been admitted to the United Nations 
this year: the Republic of Armenia, the Azerbaijani Republic, the Republic of 
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Republic of Croatia, the Republic of Georgia, the 
Republic of Kazakhstan, the Republic of Kyrgyzstan, the Republic of Moldova, 
the Republic of San Marino, the Republic of Slovenia, the Republic of 
Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and the Republic of Uzbekistan. 
Since the last session of the General Assembly, profound changes have 
taken place in the world, with events of major consequences occurring one 
after another, from East to West and North to South. The international 
community has finally shaken off the old pattern whose main feature was the 
confrontation between the two military blocs. The world has now entered a new 
historical phase of development towards multipolarity. 
We in China have a saying: "Past experience can serve as a guide for the 
present". The tortuous course that mankind has traversed in this century, 
particularly since the end of the Second World War, has revealed a historical 
truth: any Power, however strong it may be, is bound to decline if it goes 
against the people's will for peace and development. It has always been a 
shared aspiration and objective of the people of all countries to work for 
world peace, national stability, social progress, economic growth and a better 
life. This is a historical trend which no force can resist. 
The genuine peace that the people of the world have longed for has not 
come with the end of the cold war. On the contrary, the world remains uneasy, 
with new problems added to the old ones and armed conflicts erupting one after 
another as a result of disrupted equilibrium. Hegemonism and power politics 
continue to exist. The attempt of some big Powers to control developing 
countries politically and economically has become more and more obvious. 
Long-hidden ethnic conflicts have surfaced with a vengeance and the 
North-South contradictions have further intensified. The road to peace and 
development before the people of the world is covered with thorns. 
As we can all see, a dangerous "seismic belt" extending from the Balkans 
to the Caucasus and to Central Asia is taking shape. In some regions, people 
have once again been plunged into war and turmoil, with millions of refugees 
fleeing in all directions. These conflicts have occurred in those areas where 
different ethnic groups have traditionally lived together, with age-old 
antagonisms suddenly coming to the surface under the new situation. These 
conflicts are interwoven with historical feuds, territorial disputes, 
political rivalries, clashes of economic interests, and religious intolerance. 
They have been further complicated by the involvement of outside forces. 
In our view, force should not be used even as a last resort in the search 
of the settlement of a problem, however complicated it may be. The 
fundamental solution lies in a reconciliation of various ethnic groups through 
dialogues on an equal footing and peaceful negotiations. We sincerely hope 
that the parties' to the conflicts will, proceeding from the overriding 
interest of maintaining the peace and in the interests of the people, abandon 
the threat or use of force and seek a political settlement of their conflicts 
through friendly consultations and negotiations on an equal footing in the 
spirit of mutual respect, good-neighbourliness and common progress. 
We support the United Nations in its positive efforts to avoid an 
escalation of conflicts and seek peaceful settlements. Outside intervention 
and mediation can be resorted to when necessary, provided that they are based 
on a strict observance of the principles and objectives of the United Nations 
Charter and the basic norms of international law. Only mediation or 
intervention in such a manner can contribute to a peaceful settlement of 
conflicts, the stability and unity of sovereign States, and the amicable 
coexistence of different ethnic groups. 
The Middle East peace process has taken a favourable turn thanks to the 
joint efforts of the Arab countries and Israel and the support of the rest of 
the international community. We hope that the parties concerned will seize 
the opportunity, take a flexible and practical approach, and conduct serious 
negotiations in order to remove obstacles and seek a comprehensive and fair 
solution to the Middle East issue, including the restoration of the national 
rights of the Palestinian people on the basis of the relevant United Nations 
Security Council resolutions. 
The Asia-Pacific region has enjoyed political stability and a sustained 
economic growth. In Cambodia, the striving for peace and rehabilitation has 
become the order of the day. Political settlement of the Cambodian issue is 
irreversible, though difficulties and twists and turns are hardly avoidable. 
The implementation of the Paris Agreements in their totality requires not only 
determination but also patience. In Afghanistan, the resistance forces have 
taken control. We hope they will end the bloodshed so as to create suitable 
conditions for the election. On the Korean peninsula, the North and the South 
have intensified their dialogue, resulting in a further relaxation of tension 
there. The recent establishment of diplomatic relations between China and the 
Republic of Korea will have a far-reaching impact on stability and peace in 
North-East Asia. 
The turbulent and complicated international situation has further 
awakened countries and peoples of the world to the urgency and necessity of 
establishing a new international order. The world of the future should not be 
a place where only the interests and privileges of big Powers or power groups 
are protected, nor a place where international affairs are monopolized and 
manipulated by the big, strong, and wealthy countries only. The old world 
order based on unequal relationships no longer works. 
A new international order should be based on the universal observance of 
the five principles of mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial 
integrity, mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each other's internal 
affairs, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence. This is in 
conformity with the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter. 
All countries, big or small, strong or weak, rich or poor, should have the 
right to choose a social system and a road to development suited to their 
actual conditions. Countries should respect each other, treat each other as 
equals, and resolve their disputes through peaceful negotiations. Only when 
all countries undertake to observe these principles can there be genuine 
democracy in international relations. We are convinced that as the world 
moves towards multipolarity, an equitable and rational international order of 
peace and stability will come into being. 
The United States and the former Soviet Union or Russia have reached some 
new agreements on nuclear-arms reduction in recent years. These agreements 
have been well-received by the international community, which hopes that they 
will be earnestly implemented by the countries concerned. At the same time, 
it is clear to people that even after the aforementioned disarmament 
agreements are fully implemented, the major military Powers will still be in 
possession of the largest arsenals of the most sophisticated nuclear and other 
high-tech weapons, and the capabilities to develop space weapons. 
After years of negotiations, the chemical weapons convention has finally 
been concluded. It has laid an international legal basis for a world-wide 
elimination of such weapons of mass destruction. Though some of its 
provisions are not fair and balanced, the purposes and objectives defined in 
the convention have nonetheless won the unanimous endorsement and support of 
the international community. We hope that these purposes and objectives will 
be observed and carried out effectively in the interest of the security of all 
countries. 
China has all along stood for the complete prohibition and thorough 
destruction of all weapons of mass destruction. Pending the realization of 
this goal, it is necessary for the international community to take, as a 
transitional step, appropriate measures to prevent the proliferation of 
weapons of mass destruction in the interest of regional and world security and 
stability. We maintain that international non-proliferation should be pursued 
in a fair, reasonable, comprehensive and balanced manner without prejudice to 
the legitimate security interests of any country, to its socio-economic 
development, or to international cooperation in the application of science 
and technology for peaceful purposes. 
We oppose the attempt of a country to interfere in and obstruct the 
normal cooperation between sovereign States under the pretext of preventing 
arms proliferation. We strongly condemn the blatant violation of one's own 
commitment to an international agreement by selling large amounts of advanced 
weapons and equipment, in gross interference in another country's internal 
affairs. 
We would like to make the following suggestions in the field of 
disarmament and arms control. First, all nuclear-weapon States should 
undertake not to be the first to use nuclear weapons or to resort to the 
threat or use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear weapon States in any 
circumstances whatsoever. Secondly, all nuclear-weapon States should support 
proposals for the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones, respect the 
status of the existing nuclear-weapon-free zones, and undertake corresponding 
obligations. Those countries which have deployed nuclear weapons abroad 
should withdraw all of them to their own territories. Thirdly, all countries 
with space capabilities should follow the principle of the peaceful use of 
space and immediately stop their research, testing, production, and deployment 
of space weapons and refrain from extending their weapons systems into space. 
In today's world, the gulf between the rich and the poor is further 
widening. The population of the richest countries and that of the poorest 
countries each accounts for 20 per cent of the world's total, but their income 
gap has grown wider, from 30-fold in the 1960s to 90-fold in the 1990s. The 
question of North-South relations has become more acute. Development and 
peace are matters of equal urgency and importance. 
The sluggish growth of the world economy, unequal and unfair trade, the 
plummeting prices of many primary products and crushing debt burdens are among 
the unfavourable external conditions which have continued to place severe 
constraints on the economic development of developing countries. Quite a few 
of them have suffered a constant drop in the growth rate of their per capita 
gross national product (GNP). Some have even registered negative economic 
growth rates. Their terms of trade continue to deteriorate, which hampers 
their export efforts. They have found it even more difficult to attract 
foreign investment and technology. 
Peace and development are mutually supportive. They can promote or 
hinder each other, but they cannot supersede each other. It is impossible to 
preserve world peace without development. There can hardly be durable 
stability and prosperity in the world in the absence of economic development 
and social progress in developing countries. A protracted economic stagnation 
or even decline in developing countries will also affect further economic 
growth in developed countries. 
Developing countries should mainly rely on themselves to achieve real 
economic growth. While restructuring their economies to speed up their 
economic development, many of them are reviewing their experience and 
earnestly exploring paths of development suited to their national conditions. 
No one can deny that the old international economic order, being 
irrational and inequitable, is an important external cause of the poverty and 
backwardness of developing countries. First and foremost, developed countries 
have the responsibility and obligation to take effective measures, including 
the following. 
First, developed countries should set aside 0.7 per cent of their GNP for 
assistance to developing countries in accordance with the relevant resolutions 
of the United Nations; increase official development assistance, and address 
the debt question and work to rectify the anomaly of the flight of capital 
from developing to developed countries. 
Secondly, they should observe the basic principles of the generalized 
system of preferences devised by the United Nations Conference on Trade and 
Development; dismantle discriminatory trade barriers; further open their 
markets to developing countries; and endeavour to keep the prices of primary 
products at rational levels. 
Thirdly, they should resume and increase official and non-governmental 
technical assistance and the concessional transfer of technology to developing 
countries in order gradually to narrow the North-South gap in science and 
technology and to facilitate the economic restructuring and technological 
progress of developing countries. 
It must be stressed that political stability is an important prerequisite 
for the economic growth of developing countries. Assistance for the purpose 
of applying pressure on the recipient countries will cause turbulence and 
instability in these countries, which will be even more detrimental to their 
economic development. 
It is obviously one-sided and harmful to make irresponsible comments 
about the human rights situation in developing countries in disregard of the 
differences in 'historical backgrounds and cultural traditions as well as the 
actual conditions in these countries. For the people of developing countries, 
the right to subsistence and the right to development are undoubtedly the 
fundamental and the most important human rights of all. In those areas hit by 
severe natural disasters year after year, people are starving; in war-ridden 
areas, millions are turned into refugees. How can people living in such 
conditions enjoy human rights? 
Establishing an equitable and rational new international economic order 
based on equality and mutual benefit will be a reliable guarantee of balanced, 
healthy and sustained growth in the world economy, and an important 
precondition for gradually narrowing the North-South gap as well. The 
achievement of this goal calls for serious dialogue between the North and the 
South and joint efforts by both. As long as the two sides adopt a positive 
approach, seek common ground on major issues while putting aside minor 
differences, seek mutual benefit and actively look for ways to cooperate 
effectively, the North-South dialogue will make headway. 
The important documents adopted at the United Nations Conference on 
Environment and Development and the Conventions on climate change and 
biological diversity open for signature during the Conference reflect the 
consensus and understanding that countries at different stages of development 
have reached on environmental protection and economic development. We hope 
that the obligations and rights in respect of environmental protection will be 
fulfilled or exercised fully, and that global cooperation in this field will 
provide scope for improved North-South relations. 
The Chinese Government actively supports the proposals for a World Summit 
for Social Development, under United Nations auspices. It warmly welcomes the 
convocation of the fourth World Conference on Women, to be held in Beijing in 
September 1995. The Chinese organization committee was set up in August this 
year, and China will begin preparing in earnest to ensure that arrangements 
for the conference in Beijing run smoothly. 
The historic changes in the international situation have also presented 
formidable challenges to the United Nations. The people of the world have 
high expectations of this world Organization. How the United Nations will 
adapt itself to the new international situation, address major international 
issues in a more positive, balanced, just and reasonable manner, promote world 
peace and development and play its role in the efforts to establish a new 
world order has become a major concern of the international community. 
The Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, has submitted a 
detailed and extensive mid-year report (A/47/277) on the role of the United 
Nations in maintaining international peace, which merits our careful study. 
We appreciate his efforts. 
The reform of the United Nations is now on the agenda, and its success 
depends on sound principles and on choosing the right direction. We should 
like to offer for consideration the following thoughts, which we think conform 
to the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter. 
The reform should contribute to maintaining the sovereignty of Member 
States. Sovereign States are the subjects of international law and form the 
basis of the United Nations. Safeguarding State sovereignty should be a 
fundamental principle of a new world order. 
The reform should facilitate the peaceful settlement of international 
conflicts. The United Nations should be an international organization 
dedicated to preserving peace and promoting cooperation. Only when it abides 
by the basic norms governing international relations, persists in settling all 
international disputes through peaceful means and opposes the threat or use of 
force will the United Nations be able to maintain international peace and 
security. The arbitrary use of military intervention by the United Nations or 
the indiscriminate and wilful imposition of mandatory measures on Member 
States would not be helpful to the resolution of conflicts, and, worse still, 
would impair the credibility and role of the United Nations. 
The reform should contribute to the balanced, healthy and sustained 
economic development of countries. Economic development is a major concern of 
the vast majority of the 179 States Members of the United Nations. In today's 
world, the North-South economic gap keeps widening, and the gulf between rich 
and poor is getting greater. The United Nations should attach great 
importance to the question of development, as it does to the settlement of 
international conflicts and crises. Only by so doing can it win support from 
the overwhelming majority of Member States. 
The reform should embody the basic principles of democracy, justice, 
objectivity, rationality, efficiency and balance of interests. It is not a 
matter that concerns solely a few big Powers, nor only the strong and the 
rich. The balanced approach should not be discarded in disregard of the 
reality. The reform should serve the general objective of establishing an 
equitable and rational new world order of peace and stability. The reform 
efforts will not receive understanding and support from Member States unless 
their opinions on this matter are earnestly sought and discussed, and studied 
fully and thoroughly. 
From 1981 to 1990 China's GNP grew at an average annual rate of 
8.9 per cent. In the 1980s significant changes took place in China. We enjoy 
political stability, economic prosperity, national unity and harmony. The 
Chinese people are enjoying their lives and work. 
Since the beginning of the 1990s people in China have been working hard 
to accelerate economic development and the reform and opening-up programme. 
Spurred by Deng Xiaoping's remarks at the beginning of the year, this 
programme and economic development have entered a new phase. The GNP growth 
rate this year is projected to reach and even exceed 9 per cent. China's 
economy has great vitality and its prospects are bright. 
China has expanded its open areas. As a result, a new pattern of general 
opening up has gradually taken shape, extending from coastal to border areas, 
from areas along the Yangtze river to the provincial capitals. China has 
further expanded the scale on which it can absorb foreign investment. In the 
first half of this year contracted foreign investment reached $14.6 billion, 
2.2 times what it was in the same period last year. During the same period 
China's imports and exports reached $33.06 billion and $35.61 billion 
respectively, up 23.4 per cent and 17.3 per cent over the same period last 
year. The total volume of foreign trade for the year is expected to exceed 
$150 billion. 
China's reform and opening-up programme is by no means a matter of 
expediency; rather, it is a long-term strategy, for it conforms to the popular 
will and benefits the people. Therefore, it enjoys their support and is bound 
to succeed. China is a force working steadfastly for world peace; its 
political stability and the success of its reform and opening up will 
contribute significantly to peace and development in Asia and the world at 
large. China will, as always, support the United Nations in its constructive 
efforts to promote peace and development. It will, together with the 
Governments and peoples of other countries, work for the establishment of a 
new world order conducive to world peace and common development. In electing you to your high office last week, Mr. President, 
the General Assembly also identified itself with the victory of freedom and 
democracy throughout Europe. I should like to congratulate you on this and 
greet you as the representative of a country with which we have a close and 
long-standing friendship. 
For you, Mr. Secretary-General, this is the first session of the General 
Assembly since you took office. For the determination and energy with which 
you have set about the huge tasks ahead you deserve the appreciation of us all. 
I extend a special welcome to the representatives of those countries that 
have been admitted to our Organization since the last session of the General 
Assembly. 
The world breathed a sigh of relief when the East-West confrontation 
ended at long last. There was an almost tangible euphoria of peace. Since 
then we have come back down to earth. Freedom has opened the door not only to 

historic opportunities but, unfortunately, to the old demons as well: blind 
nationalism and hegemonic aspirations, xenophobia and religious fanaticism. 
In this process, the dramatic changes to the political map are far from having 
settled down. The impact of the quake cannot yet be fully assessed, nor can 
we rule out further tremors. But despite all our new problems we must not 
forget that hardly any previous generation had such opportunities to live in 
peace, harmony and prosperity with its neighbours. We can therefore look to 
the future with confidence. 
And this opportunity extends beyond Europe. The termination of the 
East-West conflict has paved the way for the settlement of conflicts in the 
southern hemisphere as well, conflicts which for decades seemed insoluble. In 
the Middle East, in southern Africa and in Cambodia the parties involved are 
moving towards each other in a manner that would have been inconceivable in 
the days of the ideological proxy wars. 
Thus my message is: let us continue to be guided by the vision of a 
better, a more equitable world. With great perseverance, we have ended the 
East-West confrontation. We now need the same commitment, the same stamina, 
to build a new order. We must keep in mind the new energies that have been 
released and harness them for peace and for mankind. 
By establishing European union, the European Community is trying to seize. 
the chance of the century for the entire continent. It is the vision of a 
truly united Europe. The affirmation of this union by our French friends has 
kept alive the chance to make that vision a reality. 
 
However, Governments must also take their citizens along with them on 
this road to Europe. Europe does not grow out of treaties; it grows from the 
hearts of its citizens or it does not grow at all. Strengthening their 
confidence in Europe's common future remains the principal task of Community 
policy in the months ahead. Although the dissatisfaction, uncertainty and 
lack of understanding that have become apparent in nearly all countries cannot 
simply be dismissed, no changes to the Treaty of Maastricht are needed to 
cushion some of the effects. 
The European Community is not only a model of hope and prosperity for 
Eastern Europe; it has also developed new forms of cooperation and partnership 
with the developing countries. Its path towards integration has inspired many 
regional initiatives in Asia, Africa and Latin America. In the light of this 
global responsibility, too, Europe must come to speak with one voice here at 
the United Nations as well. 
In these times of change, when so much of what was valid yesterday is 
being challenged, when many people in the West see their standard of living, 
their personal security and their national and cultural identity threatened, 
when even more people in the East and in the South do not know today what they 
are going to live on tomorrow, when an army of refugees from war and poverty 
threatens to become a new migration, we shall have to find an answer to the 
question of whether the international community, through its new spirit of 
common endeavour following the cold war, will be capable of mastering the 
challenges of our time. 
There is doubt as to the ability of the political establishment as a 
whole to find solutions, and this applies not only to Europe. There is a huge 
gap between people's expectations and the actual achievements of Governments, 
 
both internally and externally. Governments are under an obligation to 
achieve again greater consistency between verbal commitment and action. 
The historic process of European unification is currently being 
overshadowed by something that was considered inconceivable only a few years 
ago: the return of barbarity to the European house. A war of destruction and 
expulsion is raging in Bosnia and Herzegovina, a conflict which conjures up a 
terrible past. What is happening there and we cannot be clear enough about 
this is genocide. 
The London Conference has underscored the resolve of the community of 
nations to silence the weapons. It has initiated the Geneva negotiating 
process as a common, major effort of the United Nations and the European 
Community probably one of the last chances to secure a political solution in 
the foreseeable future. The co-Chairmen of the conference, Cyrus Vance and 
Lord Owen, have our full support. Germany will play its part in this peace 
conference. But one thing must remain clear: the community of nations will 
never recognize borders that have been changed by force. Those who hope to 
receive assistance from the family of nations later must stop fighting now 
at once. 
Despite cautious signs that the Serbian leaders are perhaps after all 
becoming aware of the consequences of being outlawed by the international 
community, murder and expulsion continue. We have been shocked by the report 
of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) mission on the 
crimes and atrocities perpetrated in the detention camps. We Europeans 
especially must be honest: each day on which innocent civilians are fired at 
and prisoners tortured undermines the credibility and authority of the new 
Europe we aim to build together. 
 
War also prevails in Somalia, the Sudan, Liberia, Afghanistan, Georgia 
and Nagorno-Karabakh. Greed, anarchy and human suffering have assumed 
heart-wrenching dimensions, especially in Somalia. The community of nations, 
though late in doing so, has turned its attention to the starvation, misery 
and want of the people there. It is to be hoped that the efforts of the 
Secretary-General and his Special Representative Mr. Sahnoun will be able to 
restore peace to this sorely tried country and put it back on a sound economic 
foundation. 

What are the conclusions for the international community that must be 
drawn from this situation? Respect for international law and human rights as 
the foundation of peace and international order was one of the main lessons of 
the Second World War. That experience led to the creation of the United 
Nations and the European Community. The aim of overcoming nationalistic 
hegemony, the use of force and violations of human rights by means of 
international and supranational cooperation is still valid. Even setbacks 
must not be allowed to divert us from this just path of law and respect for 
human dignity. There is no reasonable alternative, unless we want to revert 
to the law of the jungle. 
Only if the United Nations or the regional organizations prove capable of 
protecting individual States from external aggression and minorities from 
domestic persecution will it be possible, now that the East-West conflict is 
over, to make the desired transition from policies of national hegemony and 
armament to the rule of law, collective security and economic and social 
development. 
What will this require? Firstly, the system of collective security of 
the United Nations, and of regional arrangements such as the CSCE, must be 
made a powerful instrument of a new world domestic policy. Conflicts are, 
unfortunately, emerging faster than the instruments to contain them. You, 
Mr. Secretary-General, have made extensive proposals with the correct aim of 
making the United Nations, for the first time in its history, what the Charter 
intended it to be: the world community's chief custodian of peace; and that 
aim, I say here, can be achieved. 

"Nip it in the bud!" This must be the golden rule of conflict 
prevention. Diplomatic activity must start before an acute threat to security 
occurs. Such activity must, where necessary, be reinforced by the preventive 
deployment of peace-keeping forces. This proposal has our full support. It 
must be made absolutely clear to a potential aggressor, right from the start, 
that he must expect to be confronted with the whole range of political, 
economic and military sanctions provided for in the United Nations Charter. 
Anyone who holds a protecting hand over the aggressor must expect to be 
isolated, and anyone who breaks sanctions will likewise have sanctions to 
contend with. 
Crucial for collective security is close cooperation between institutions 
such as the United Nations or the CSCE on the one hand and collective defence 
alliances such as the North Atlantic Treaty Organization or the Western 
European Union on the other. Initial steps have been taken in this direction 
in recognition of the fact that, even though the East-West conflict has ended, 
democracies must, firstly, remain capable of defending themselves and the new 
architecture must, secondly, become capable of defending itself. What is 
beyond dispute domestically must also be applied to international security if 
there is to be real order. If all other means fail, the law must, if 
necessary, be protected by military force against those who violate it. This 
is also a lesson from a past that was, for us Germans in particular, a 
disastrous one. This is anchored in the United Nations Charter. 
Germany's contribution to international stability will continue to focus 
on peacemaking, through economic cooperation, protection of human rights, 
humanitarian aid, and international measures to protect the environment. 

However, we must also establish the constitutional basis to enable us to make 
our armed forces available to the United Nations, with the approval of 
Parliament, for peace-keeping and peacemaking assignments. As a reunited and 
sovereign country we must assume all the rights and obligations of a Member of 
the United Nations to avoid any discrepancy between our verbal commitment to 
peace and human rights and our active involvement in their defence. 
The Government and the Parliament of my country will not forget that our 
history commands us to show particular restraint and judgment; but, while 
remaining aware of the past, we must derive the strength and courage to find a 
better future. 
Within the framework of its constitution Germany has already participated 
in United Nations operations for example, in Namibia, Angola, Central 
America, Cambodia and Iraq by providing logistic and organizational support, 
election observers, verification teams and medical personnel. Our relief 
flights to Sarajevo and Somalia have broadened the range of our commitment. 
The reforms you have vigorously initiated, Mr. Secretary General, have 
our full backing. We encourage you to pursue them with determination. The 
appointment of a coordinator for humanitarian assistance has shown, despite 
all the scepticism, that this Organization is capable of change. Further 
reforms should, in our view, focus principally on three areas: 
rationalization of the Secretariat, streamlining its committees and 
procedures, and strengthening the position of the Secretary-General in 
relation to the subsidiary bodies and specialized agencies. This is urgently 
needed, especially in the central area of environment and development. 

The Security Council is the guardian of international peace. Its 
efficiency and credibility are of equal importance. A debate on reforming the 
Council is under way. We Germans will not take the initiative in this 
respect, but if a change in the Council's composition is actually considered 
we too shall make known our intention to seek a permanent seat. 
Secondly, States and regional organizations must assume greater 
responsibility. The United Nations must not be overstrained: the idea that 
it can protect and feed all people afflicted by external or internal war is a 
Utopian. 
Thirdly, we must further develop the international legal system with the 
aim of further protecting mankind and nature. This can now take place in a 
process of fair partnership, free from bloc ideology. This too represents a 
great opportunity in the wake of the East-West conflict. In this process, we 
must bring out the special dimension of law: it demands participation and 
consensus. All are equal before the law. It protects the weak and 
legitimizes the use of force where force is unavoidable. 
No cultural region should try to force its own system of values on 
others. On the other hand, there is a body of human rights universally 
binding under international law which no one should seek to erode, not even on 
grounds of differing cultural traditions. This must be the central message of 
the Conference on Human Rights to be held in Vienna next year. 
Under the Nazi regime, the gravest crimes against humanity were committed 
in the name of Germany. In 1945, the Germans in the western part of our 
country had the good fortune to be able to establish a free, democratic 
society based on the rule of law. Those in the other part of Germany had to 

bear another totalitarian regime until 1990. So we Germans have well and 
truly suffered in this respect. We know from our own experience that a life 
of dignity and fulfilment is not possible without respect for human rights. I 
therefore never tire of repeating my belief that policy, including foreign 
policy, must focus on the individual. It is he who counts. It is he who must 
be protected and saved from injustice. The defence of human rights remains a 
central aim of German foreign policy. 

An effective international legal system must enable people to exercise 
their human rights, afford protection to those whose human rights have been 
violated, and consistently bring the perpetrators to account. Together with 
our partners in the European Community we call for the appointment of a High 
Commissioner for Human Rights. Those who commit genocide, those who commit 
serious violations of human rights - and this, unfortunately, is happening all 
the time all over the world - ask Amnesty International must be brought 
before an international crimes tribunal. I am gratified to note that 
Germany's proposal for such a tribunal is now receiving broad support. The 
International Law Commission should be given a mandate to draw up an 
appropriate statute. 
We shall strive to ensure that the perpetrators of atrocities, no matter 
who they are, are brought to justice. No one should be able to rest in the 
assurance that the matter will be forgotten. This is another reason why we 
need a High Commissioner for Human Rights. His investigations and other 
information should be collated in a register to serve as the basis for 
subsequent criminal proceedings. Our experience with the regime in the former 
German Democratic Republic shows that the fear of such misdeeds being recorded 
is not without effect. Violation of human rights is one of mankind's great 
scourges. We should not spare ourselves the effort needed to expose, denounce 
and prevent them. 
Although the massive East-West confrontation is a thing of the past, 
disarmament, confidence-building and the control of arms exports remain 
essential preconditions for enhancing peace. After an arms race spanning 
decades the new era has made considerable progress in the field of disarmament 
as well. 

Yet the world is still bristling with weapons. We in Europe are the 
first to have begun destroying tanks. The pacification of the North must not 
lead to the South being armed to the hilt. The developing countries do not 
need more tanks and guns but more schools and hospitals. The United Nations 
Register of Conventional Arms must be seen as the point of departure for 
reducing the present irresponsible level of international trade in weapons. 
Preventing the spread of weapons of mass destruction is the most urgent 
task in the field of disarmament today. Germany is determined to play a 
pioneering role in this respect. We are the only country in the world to have 
unilaterally and unconditionally renounced nuclear, biological and chemical 
weapons. 
The Convention imposing a global ban on chemical weapons, which was 
prepared by the Geneva Conference on Disarmament under our chairmanship, is a 
milestone along this road. I call upon all Members of the United Nations to 
signal their support of this Convention during the present session of the 
General Assembly and to sign it without delay. 
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons must be extended 
indefinitely in 1995. If we fail to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons, 
mankind will become exposed to a nuclear threat no less frightening than that 
of the cold war. We cannot put the nuclear genie back in the bottle, but we 
must keep it under strict control. This also calls for an international 
convention for the enhancement of reactor safety. 
All these are tasks enough, but the biggest of all is that of 
establishing a new partnership for development and environmental protection 
between poor and rich nations which will make the Earth a fit place for the 
present and future generations to live in. 

The world is grossly unjust. From the day of their birth countless 
people do not have the slightest chance whatsoever of living in conditions 
that could even remotely be described as worthy of the human race. About a 
billion people live in abject poverty and can neither read nor write. Almost 
20 million refugees are trying to escape from want. One fifth of the world's 
population consumes four fifths of all resources and earns 60 times as much as 
the poorest fifth. 
We in the industrialized countries, on the other hand, concerned with our 
own problems which I do not deny exist - forget that, compared with many 
regions of the third world, we live on an "island of bliss". Many of us think 
only of our entitlements, about defending our standards of living. As a 
result, we tend to forget the values of humanity and solidarity. 
Our free system in the West may have won the struggle with 
totalitarianism, but we must now prove that our economic system, our way of 
life, is able to secure lasting development in the eastern and southern 
regions of the globe as well. 
In the third world countries, on the other hand, the recognition must 
continue to grow that they cannot simply make demands on others but are 
themselves primarily responsible for keeping their house in order. The 
Jakarta Conference has confirmed the clear change of attitude in this 
respect. This is an encouraging trend. 
What is the essential requirement? It is to develop a global partnership 
and forms of coexistence in the North and the South which will ensure mutual 
survival. For this we shall have to find a reasonable middle way between the 
completely unrealistic attitude that everything must be achieved at one fell 
swoop and that of resignation, the attitude that it is already too late. 

The North must open its markets to give the weaker economies a genuine 
chance of development. By eliminating protectionism we must strengthen the 
economic foundations of those countries currently fighting for democracy and 
human rights. That is why it is so important to bring the negotiations of the 
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) to a successful conclusion. 
Stabilizing the economy of Eastern Europe and the Commonwealth of 
Independent States must not be done at the expense of development aid. 
Bringing the new democracies in the East and the developing countries into a 
global partnership together was the general objective of the economic summit 
meeting in Munich. Germany, too, has kept its word in this respect. In spite 
of our exceptional domestic situation and our enormous contribution to the 
process of economic recovery in the new democracies between Bug and 
Vladivostok, our development aid budget has continued to grow - even since 
1990. And we shall continue to provide substantial support for measures to 
bridge the poverty gap between North and South. Our offer to make Bonn the 
location for some United Nations development activities should be understood 
in this sense. 
What is required is a radical technological transformation in the fields 
of transport, energy, industrial production, housing and agriculture and a new 
generation of environment-friendly technologies. To implement the results of 
the Rio Conference there will have to be standard reduction levels for carbon 
dioxide emissions as well as effective measures for the protection of forests. 
The most difficult task is at the same time one of the most important 
that of implementing a responsible population policy. This calls for changes 
which considerably affect the rights of the individual. The first step must be 
to improve the social status of women in the developing countries. People 

have a right to determine the size of their family themselves. Family 
planning must be given greater prominence in development strategy. The 
importance of the International Conference on Population and Development 
to be held in 1994 and of the World Conference on Women scheduled for 1995 
cannot be emphasized enough. 
The help provided by the industrialized countries can never be more 
than help towards self-help. One must also draw the necessary conclusion 
from the collapse of communist ideology: totalitarianism renders a 
country incapable of development. 
In a nutshell, what is needed is a departure from short-sighted 
egoism and over-exploitation of nature towards measures to safeguard the 
future, towards more social justice, as well as a balance between ecology 
and economy. In this age of growing individual freedom we must also 
remain capable of demonstrating solidarity and showing consideration for 
the community as a whole. The responsible use of freedom is the real 
challenge at the end of this century. In order to meet this challenge, 
and for the sake of our children's future, the world - East and West, 
North and South must learn together. We must learn to survive together 
in a new world. 
No institution is more suited to be the central authority of this 
learning community than the United Nations. In 1995 it will celebrate its 
fiftieth anniversary. Let us by that date together strengthen this forum 
to make it capable of fulfilling the hopes of people all over the globe. 
Let us not forget: We, the nations, will get the world Organization we 
deserve! 

Hardly any country can have been more affected by the dramatic upheavals 
of our time and by the disparity of opportunity and risk, of hope and anxiety 
about the future, than has Germany. We have been reunited, and for that we 
are grateful very grateful. Our prime task now is to complete the internal 
unification of our nation, and this task pushes us to the limits of our 
resources. None the less, we have contributed more to the economic recovery 
of central and eastern Europe and the members of the Commonwealth of 
Independent States (CIS) than have all other countries together. 
In Europe, our liberal legislation on foreigners has enabled us to take 
in by far the largest number of asylum-seekers probably 400,000 this year; 
220,000 refugees from Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina have found refuge in 
our country. We are the biggest attraction in Europe and in the world for the 
massive social migration from East to West and from South to North. In view 
of our still-high level of unemployment and our housing shortage, especially 
in the eastern part of the country, this places an exceptional burden on the 
population. This has to be appreciated if one is to make a fair judgement of 
our people's attitude towards foreigners. 
In emphasizing this point I am not trying to tone it down. The hatred 
demonstrated and the terror perpetrated by a radical minority against 
asylum-seekers in our country brings disgrace on Germany. This I deeply 
regret, but let me add that this is not the attitude of the great majority of 
Germans towards other nationalities. In my country 6.3 million foreigners 
live harmoniously with their German neighbours. Year in, year out, the 
Germans demonstrate their solidarity with other nations through extensive 

relief campaigns, through their generous donations for the benefit of people 
in the former Soviet Union, and through their considerable aid for the Kurds 
and the starving people of Somalia. 
Germany owes its unity to the dismantling of confrontation in Europe and 
to the trust we have gained through our European policy and through our not 
having pursued a national course. We derive from this a responsibility. We 
shall continue to give our full support to European unification and global 
cooperation based on partnership, especially within the United Nations. We 
shall use all our energy in favour of human rights and against oppression, in 
favour of global solidarity and against excessive nationalism. This is the 
essence of the foreign policy of the united Germany for which I stand. 
Allow me to 
congratulate you. Sir, on your election as President of our General Assembly. 
Your outstanding abilities earned a unanimous vote, which is a tribute both to 
your country and to the example it sets in its newly regained freedom. 
Speaking from this rostrum last year, I welcomed the extraordinary winds 
of freedom which were sweeping oppressive regimes away everywhere in the 
world. I recalled the support that my country had always given to peoples' 
right to self-determination. I rejoiced at the promises of independence which 
arose on the ruins of empires. 
The distance covered since then gives us grounds for hope. While in 
Europe the barriers around blocs tumbled, in Africa the chains of apartheid 
were removed and in Asia Governments contested by their people fell, new 
sovereign entities were established. Let us therefore welcome the delegations 
of the new Member States that have joined us. 
These successes are also successes for our Organization. More than ever, 
the principles and rules of our Charter prove their immutable value; more than 
ever, let us show our commitment to them. 
I should like to turn to Mr. Boutros-Ghali and commend the example he 
sets us: the example of his energy, of his entire action focused on the aims 
of our Organization and the application of our Charter's principles. He 
succeeds someone who has brought honour to our Organization. But rarely will 
a Secretary-General have succeeded in overcoming so many crises and challenges 
in the first year of his mandate. Let us therefore thank him for his efforts, 
his imagination and his determination. 
 
In spite of freedom's victories, peace has not always been the child of 
liberation. Rivalries between neighbours, ethnic tensions and border disputes 
fan discord and foment insecurity to the point of provoking the return of war 
in all its cruelty and savagery. Yugoslavia, Liberia, Somalia: the names 
ring sadly in our ears, and the examples are, unfortunately, legion. 
Universal peace, our absolute principle, is still only an ambition. It must 
become our primary mission. 
To ensure that the paths of freedom become paths to peace everywhere, 
France proposes three lines of action: peace through the organization of 
security that is, peace-keeping operations and collective security and 
disarmament measures; peace through the affirmation of justice - that is, 
economic and social development to bring about greater fairness and equality 
among nations and peoples; peace through solidarity among States which know 
how to use their independence to establish beneficial cooperation. 
 
Let us speak first of peace through the organization of security. 
The immediate need is to halt the conflicts which are causing bloodshed 
in Europe, the border regions of Asia and Africa. They cast a sinister shadow 
over the successes of freedom and independence. The United Nations, 
strengthened by its new influence, reacted by mounting in the space of a few 
months peace-keeping operations on an unprecedented scale. Never before have 
so many men from such a large number of countries assembled under our flag, 
that of the international community. 
Stopping the expansion of a neighbour or faction, protecting populations, 
helping to deliver humanitarian aid, providing reassurance and at times 
renewing dialogue between the parties involved such are the many sensitive 
missions undertaken by the United Nations and our "Blue Helmets". 
Though peaceful, these operations are dangerous. It is not a question of 
making war; our mission is a mission of peace. The task, always the same yet 
always different, must be given all possible support at the local level and 
all available means of suitable protection and defence. 
There are cases in which we must intervene even though the cease-fire in 
question is neither complete nor lasting. There are cases in which, to impose 
respect, we must have clear rules of engagement binding on everyone. We need 
to define, for specific situations, a right of emergency, comprising measures 
for warning and protection. My country has several reasons for wanting this, 
as I am sure you will agree. Having become the leading participant in the 
peace-keeping forces, with what will soon be 6,000 men under the United 
Nations flag in former Yugoslavia, Cambodia, Lebanon, Western Sahara and 
El Salvador, France has paid a heavy price. Since the start of the year. 

eight of its sons have lost their lives, the last ones murdered in cowardly 
fashion. And they have not been the only ones. From this rostrum, I should 
like to pay a solemn tribute to all the soldiers of peace who have sacrificed 
their lives for the cause we all uphold. 
In the face of the increasing number of crises and the human tragedies 
resulting from them, our world is searching for new stability. It is adapting 
its instruments for peace and solidarity and devising others for the new 
times. It is essential that everyone be mobilized, most particularly the 
regional organizations. The Western European Union (WEU) and the North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) are in the process of shaping their 
future. The Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) is 
establishing its jurisdiction. In the wake of the Helsinki summit, France is 
now proposing to the CSCE member States the adoption of a code of conduct 
which would encompass and define the norms governing our collective security. 
This idea, which was also set out by Germany, could lead to the adoption of a 
treaty on security. France is also continuing and will continue to advocate 
establishment of a court of arbitration and conciliation to prevent conflicts. 
It is fortunate, moreover, that Chapter VIII of the Charter has at last, 
in the space of a few months, taken on its full meaning. I applaud the action 
of our Secretary-General, who has recommended precisely that the States 
members of regional organizations contribute to peace-keeping operations. His 
thinking concurred with that of the CSCE at the Helsinki summit and with that 
of France. 
Indeed, the United Nations remains the necessary recourse in all these 
instances, as the case of former Yugoslavia has shown us only too well. Our 

Organization confers universal legitimacy on peace-keeping operations. It is 
the United Nations which shoulders, if need be, the overall responsibility. 
Hence, what is at stake today is not to relieve the United Nations of its task 
but to help it perform it in the most effective manner. 
Yes, our peace mission is above all a matter of prevention: preventing 
conflicts, or preventing them from worsening and spreading. France therefore 
welcomed with keen interest the Secretary-General's proposals in his "Agenda 
for Peace". These set forth in outline form a charter for preventive 
diplomacy which is urgently needed. 
Once the Gulf War was over, the President of the French Republic 
underlined the need for new thinking. I am glad to see that this new thinking 
is now well under way and that France's proposals are being considered. I am 
also pleased that the European Community is offering specific assistance. 
I should like to confirm today, from this rostrum, France's commitment to 
make available to the Secretary-General, at any time, a contingent of 1,000 
men for a peace-keeping operation. I hope that this example will be followed, 
for our Organization must be sure that it can react quickly and forcefully as 
soon as there is a threat of a conflict or a conflict flares up. 
Reinforcement of preventive action should also encourage us to continue 
thinking about the reactivation of the United Nations Military Staff 
Committee. It is important, in any case, to strengthen the links between the 
Member States and the Secretariat Department of Peace-Keeping Operations, 
every aspect of whose work is deserving of praise. 
Preventive diplomacy, along with the development of peace-keeping 
operations, and the greater role for regional organizations: these are two 
indispensable pillars of the collective security system the world needs today. 

But there is a third one: disarmament. 
At their summit meeting on 31 January 1992, the members of the Security 
Council recalled that disarmament is one of our Organization's priorities and 
how essential it is for all Member States to fulfil the obligations they have 
undertaken with respect to arms control and disarmament itself. The progress 
achieved in two years has been spectacular: a reduction in stockpiles in 
Europe thanks to the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE) and 
the CFE 1-A; the commitment by the two super-Powers to genuine nuclear 
disarmament, which will be spread over a period of many years; and the 
convention banning chemical weapons, which for the first time will eliminate 
an entire category of weapons of mass destruction. This disarmament effort is 
accompanied for the first time by a move for transparency: all treaties are 
coupled with stringent verification procedures, and in Europe we have signed 
an "open sky" treaty providing for free over-flight. Monitoring is the mother 
of all assurances. 
But the illegal spread of these same weapons threatens to break the 
momentum for peace. The war against proliferation must be stepped up and 
waged relentlessly. In this area, as in others. United Nations decisions must 
be fully respected. New measures will no doubt be necessary, particularly 
given the risk of the uncontrolled proliferation of ballistic missiles. To 
avert the danger, let us therefore strengthen international cooperation 
without delay. 
My country has in the past put forth proposals from this rostrum to stop 
the development of an arms race in space. France will shortly propose a 
measure to enhance confidence by making it mandatory to give advance notice of 

firings of ballistic missiles and rockets carrying satellites or other space 
objects. This notification measure, if adopted, would be complemented by the 
establishment of an international centre, under United Nations auspices, 
responsible for collecting and using the data received. 

In deciding to suspend its nuclear tests until the end of 1992, France 
has shown that it is ready to help further the disarmament process. The 
suspension is temporary and its extension will be subject to reappraisal. Let 
us act so as progressively to reduce the number and power of such experiments 
in a lasting way. France has also made a contribution to disarmament by 
ratifying Additional Protocol No. 1 of the Treaty banning nuclear weapons in 
Latin America. In other parts of the world, it supports proposals to 
establish denuclearized zones, especially in South Asia, the Middle East, and 
Africa. My country is ready to provide guarantees for security, in 
conjunction with other nuclear Powers, to countries committed to establishing 
such zones. 
This year, the General Assembly begins preparing for the conference on 
extending the non-proliferation Treaty, to be held in 1995. The indefinite 
extension of this Treaty without renegotiation is an important event for 
international security. France, which is now a signatory of the 
non-proliferation Treaty, realizes that the nuclear Powers have a special 
contribution to make to this goal. France is ready to do its part. 
Collective security is the guard-rail of peace. Its development on an 
equitable basis will be the guarantee for all peoples. 
I shall now touch upon the subject of peace through greater justice by 
means of economic and social development. France has consistently said that 
there can be no lasting peace so long as some peoples are faced with extreme 
poverty and famine. There can be no peace so long as we seem to tolerate 
unacceptable discrepancies in standards of living. There can be no peace 
without hope for justice and for progress towards greater equality. 
 
Responsibility for real progress in this direction above all rests with our 
Organization and its Members, who are continuing to focus their efforts in 
this direction. 
The United Nations family in the broadest sense the World Bank, the 
International Monetary Fund, and all the specialized agencies is ready to 
assume this responsibility. However, I would like to see the nucleus of the 
family, the Secretariat, resume its proper role as a prime mover. What agency 
better than the Secretariat can appreciate and evaluate the order of 
priorities, provide the impetus, and avoid duplications and waste? 
But there can be no sustainable development in a deteriorating 
environment. The future of our planet requires ever closer solidarity between 
the North and South. Such solidarity should enable us to succeed in bringing 
about equitable development with due respect for the natural gifts of the 
Earth. The success of Rio is encouraging. But let us begin by respecting our 
commitment to devote at least 0.7 per cent of our gross national product to 
official development assistance. France will do so. It has already doubled 
the amount of its financing to the World Environment Fund and contributed to 
the establishment of a 20-billion franc programme agreed upon by the European 
Community. 
The General Assembly will shortly take up the Secretary-General's report 
on the results of the Rio Conference. It will have to decide among other 
things on the establishment of a commission for sustainable development that 
will be the central mechanism for following up the Conference's decisions. 
France, which was one of the first States to back the establishment of such a 
commission, hopes that it will convene at an early date, if possible in 1993, 
 
and that it will begin by examining how the pledges at Rio are to be 
implemented. Development and the environment remain the two major issues of 
the years ahead. 
Finally, the social dimension should not be absent from our concerns. 
The President of the French Republic, on 31 January 1992, gave his full 
support to convening a world summit on social development. Let us not forget 
that man must remain central to our concerns. It is for humanity, through the 
necessary solidarity among humans, that lasting peace will drive away the 
hatred and wars which still cast a pall over its future. 
I now turn to the subject of peace through solidarity. An important step 
forward has been taken with the progress of humanitarian activities that has 
been encouraged and supported by the United Nations. My country, which can 
take credit for having been a pioneer in this field, therefore welcomes the 
impetus which has thus been given to humanitarian action. 
The High Commissioner for Refugees, the Under-Secretary-General for 
Humanitarian Action, and United Nations forces are cooperating in providing 
assistance to populations exposed to violence, be they in Iraq, Yugoslavia, or 
Africa. A new principle of humanitarian law is taking shape which meets the 
aspiration of humanity, including the most unfortunate among its members. It 
will be to the credit of our Organization, as the end of the century 
approaches, to have helped in this decisive and historic progress transcending 
the barriers of national jurisdictions and regulations. It was precisely to 
make such a point that the President of the French Republic went to Sarajevo 
to open the way for the arrival of relief to that martyred city. To lay down 
the law in this matter is essential; to act is better still. 

France never tires of repeating that human rights are inalienable. So 
long as they are not respected, no peace is legitimate. Today still, in too 
many places, populations are terrorized and minorities maltreated. The World 
Conference on Human Rights will be one of the important events and rendezvous 
in 1993. It will be the occasion for us to reaffirm the universality of human 
rights and to strengthen the effectiveness of mechanisms to ensure 
compliance. Humanitarian action and peace-keeping are necessary functions, 
but they are needed in specific circumstances. Sooner or later, peoples will 
have to address the necessity of renewing the ties of their solidarity and 
rebuilding together a space for exchanges and cooperation. Lasting peace 
depends on this. It is clearly inconceivable that the movement for 
self-determination, which was so earnestly desired, should be judged guilty 
after the fact of the worst regressions. 
The example of Yugoslavia is on everybody's mind. Can we tolerate a 
return to the most barbaric practices, the very names of which are an insult 
to the human race: the massacre of civilians, detention camps without 
humanitarian monitoring, "ethnic cleansing"? A solution can only come about 
from two distinct measures: on one hand, the establishment of a higher 
framework for arbitration and conciliation; on the other, the protection of 
minorities. The latter, living within recognized borders, should have the 
benefit of guarantees, equitable representation being one and not the least 
such guarantee. 
 
Hopes have been raised in places where once everything still seemed to be 
impossible. I would like here to pay a tribute to men of good will, including 
Prime Minister Panic of Yugoslavia. This is yet another reason to intensify 
our efforts and help the Yugoslav peoples out of their tragic impasse. Let us 
conceive, let us decide, and then let us impose. 
In Cambodia, a long-suffering people has been making its return to the 
international community since the Paris Agreements reached under United 
Nations auspices. This progress embodies a great deal of hope for the 
Cambodian people and for Asia as a whole, and must not be jeopardized as a 
result of the refusal of the Khmer Rouge to open up its zone and demobilize 
its forces. There is always room for discussion among partners of good will. 
No one should use the pretext of his own complaints to try to block a peace 
plan which is binding on all the signatories of the Paris Agreements and, 
beyond that, upon the entire international community. 
After so many years of war in the Middle East, the prospect of a 
settlement based on justice and security for all is beginning to emerge thanks 
to the courage and clear-sightedness of all the parties. When the time comes, 
the international community, through the Security Council, will have to give 
its guarantee to a settlement. There is still a long way to go. The European 
Community is contributing to this future construction. France is doing its 
part in this. 
In South Africa, in spite of the terrible traces left by the hateful 
system of racial discrimination, the resolve to end apartheid and build a new 
open city has at last won the day. I would like to express from this rostrum 
today France's concern at the rising violence in South Africa and tell the 
leaders of that country: do not destroy the enormous hope you so recently 
inspired. 

I shall mention only briefly our old Europe, since its trials and 
tribulations are widely known, as are its bursts of hope. I can say much, 
however, in only a few words. The peoples of Europe wish to speed up their 
march toward peace, unity and prosperity. Such is the ambition affirmed by 
the signatories of the Maastricht Treaty - to create a genuine union of 
democratic States having the redoubled strength that comes from the 
combination of cultures, economic means and political resolve, as 
Mr. Douglas Hurd said so well when he spoke previously on our behalf. I am 
pleased and proud that the French people voted in favour of ratifying the 
European unity treaty. My fellow citizens chose the only future of any value, 
a future which will build peace on solidarity political, economic, and human. 
The European Union will not be inward looking, self-centred, and closed. 
On the contrary, the citizens of the European Union will be patriots of the 
old continent become the new world. They will have a sense of solidarity 
among themselves, be responsive to their brothers on the rest of the 
continent, attached to their respective nations yet firm in the face of any 
heightened national sentiments which invoke nationalism only the better to 
divide humanity and serve designs of domination and exclusion. 
The collapse of the wall which separated our continent spurred the 
efforts toward union. Today the difficulties of this Europe, separated from 
us for too long, then liberated, but weakened and troubled, are yet further 
encouragement to us to create this pole of stability on which all Europe will 
be able to build its peace and prosperity. That Europe will not be 
self-centred. When the time comes, it will welcome its neighbours from 
Central and Eastern Europe as brothers. Setting the example and opening the 
way are the first steps of true solidarity, that same solidarity which it is 
incumbent on our Organization to implement. The Union will undertake to serve 
 
the very ideals of our Charter: "We, the peoples of the United Nations" and 
now, we, the peoples of the European Union. 
I shall now conclude. It is incumbent on Governments, as it is on 
peoples, to set the example. Let us not hide from the fact that peace, like 
life, has no price but does have a cost. It is unacceptable for the United 
Nations to be foundering in an increasingly severe financial crisis. 
Certainly, our Organization has the necessary ambition to express at the 
global level that general resolve which Jean-Jacques Rousseau said is more 
than the simple addition of individual interests. But the sum total will be 
all the greater and all the more universal as the contribution of each and 
every one is significant and generous. The United Nations will have value 
only in so far as each State, in compliance with the Charter, fulfils its 
responsibilities. 
There can be no better service nor better example to humanity than to 
enable the duty of solidarity to prevail. Let us discharge this duty, first 
of all, by honouring our obligations. Peace is not a gift from heaven; it 
depends, above all, on human resolve. Thus a new era is opening for nations 
as for peoples. Today, as I speak, it is still in a state of confusion. 
Tomorrow, it will shine with the fires of justice, peace and solidarity. 
I am privileged to speak this morning on 
behalf of the European Community and its 12 member States. It is a pleasure 
to do so under your guidance, Mr. President under the guidance of a fellow 
European Foreign Minister whose country has made such great progress in recent 
years and whose foreign affairs, under your leadership, have also made a very 
substantial step forward. 
It is also a pleasure to speak in the presence of the Secretary-General. 
I do not wish to heap compliments upon you at this stage, 
Mr. Secretary-General, but I hope that the contents of what I have to say and 
what we offer you in terms of support for your practical policies you will 
accept as an adequate compliment. 
As my colleagues from other regions of the world have no doubt noticed, 
we in the European Community are conducting a lively discussion on how to 
achieve the ever closer union to which we are all committed. I am not going 
to speak about that subject today because I want to speak about Europe and the 
wider world, but I do want to emphasize on behalf of us all that so far from 
turning away from that wider world, we in Europe are increasingly active in 
it. And I want to make it clear that the European Community and its member 
States are determined to build up the place and the role of the Community and 
its 12 member States in world affairs. We intend to work together for the 
better world order in which we all believe and we intend to carry that work 
forward with greater impetus and greater effectiveness. 

Two years ago, when I first came to speak at the Assembly, the world was 
celebrating the end of the cold war, the beginnings of freedom. Everyone was 
optimistic, because everything had changed - it appeared for the better 
since I had first attended a session of the General Assembly, at the height of 
the cold war back in the 1950s. 
At the end of 1992 we see things differently. The world after the cold 
war is a better place, but it is also less stable. We have seen both a 
democratic spring and a demagogic spring, an outpouring of hope but also, in 
places, an outpouring of hate. 
International order is threatened in the short term by the unleashing of 
extreme nationalism, of challenges to the rule of law. In the medium term we 
have to reinforce the system of collective security based on the United 
Nations. Respect for good government, respect for human rights must move to 
the centre of our stage. In the long term we face the threat to international 
peace and security posed by poverty, posed by environmental degradation. We 
cannot afford to postpone action on the longer-term problems while we wrestle 
with the short-term problems. I should to look, very briefly, at each of 
these three challenges in turn. 
The short term the immediate. Nationalism, of course, is not a fault 
in itself; it is a natural instinct of man in society. We see its benign 
manifestations in many places in the former Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia, 
though even there, there are problems. Yugoslavia is the worst example of the 
bitterness of nationalism producing intolerable results. That is why both 
Europe and the United Nations have to work strenuously for peace with justice, 
for the relief of suffering in those tortured lands of the former Yugoslavia. 

Since last autumn the European Community and the United Nations have 
indeed been working closely, the United Nations leading on peace-keeping and 
the European Community on peace making through Lord Carrington's Peace 
Conference. This cooperation has helped stop the killing in, for example, the 
Serb Krajina in Croatia, where the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) 
and the European Community monitoring mission have achieved a good result. 
As conflict escalated, particularly in Bosnia, the United Nations and the 
European Community decided with wide international support to harness their 
efforts more closely together through the process launched by the London 
Conference last month. The International Conference on the former Yugoslavia 
is now working in Geneva under the co-chairmanship of Mr. Cyrus Vance for the 
United Nations and Lord Owen for the European Community. It is powered by the 
determination of the international community to bring an end to the violence 
in the former Yugoslavia. 
The Conference has two main objectives: humanitarian and political; to 
alleviate the suffering of the victims of the conflict and to bring that 
conflict permanently to an end by negotiating a political settlement. This 
is, of course, difficult work, requiring a deep understanding of the problems, 
requiring the respect and cooperation of the parties, requiring the unstinting 
support and, when necessary, the mobilizing of pressures from the 
international community. 
In this context, I believe that Prime Minister Panic's new approach shows 
great courage and I salute that courage. It offers a different way forward 
which we believe should be supported. But while the killing and suffering 
continue, as they did yesterday and as they do today, we cannot relax our 
efforts. We have to measure progress by deeds and not promises. 

We have to continue to deal with other problems left by the rolling back 
of the cold war. In Cambodia, we must not let the peace process drift. The 
Khmer Rouge have not joined phase II of the cease-fire arrangements. They are 
delaying the implementation of the comprehensive political settlement. On the 
positive side, the military deployment of the United Nations Transitional 
Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) is now fully complete and the civilian component 
is beginning to take control of the key ministries. We have to make every 
effort to hold to the timetable for elections next April. 
Some States still show a willingness to challenge the rule of 
international law and, indeed, to resort to terrorism. The invasion of Kuwait 
by Iraq was the first test of the post-cold-war era, and the liberation of 
Kuwait was one of this Organization's great successes. Unfortunately, we have 
to note that Saddam Hussein continues to defy the United Nations, that his 
Government is failing to meet Iraq's obligations under Security Council 
resolution 687 (1991), that he continues to repress his own population, 
particularly in northern and in southern Iraq. That is why pressure must 
and will - continue until he implements the resolutions of the United Nations 
in full. The message has to be that all States must comply with Security 
Council resolutions. We still wait for Libya to implement Security Council 
resolution 731 (1992). 
Those are just some of the short-term challenges that we have to meet. 
There are long-running problems which we must not forget, and one of 
particular concern to the European Community is Cyprus. This year, 
Mr. Secretary-General, you have made an energetic effort. It is not yet 
decisively successful. You are renewing the effort next month. There is a 

need for fresh impetus, it seems to us, on the key issues of territory and 
displaced persons. There must be a willingness to negotiate on all sides; 
otherwise there will be no lasting settlement. 

You have our full support, Mr. Secretary-General, as you renew your 
effort. Not only does it deserve to succeed, but it is in the crucial 
interest of Europe and the international community that it should succeed. 
In the medium term we have to build a stronger system of collective 
security. And here, everybody looks, rightly, to the United Nations. But as 
the Secretary-General has pointed out, we are in danger of loading the 
Organization with too heavy a burden: a burden of intervention and a burden, 
in effect, of partial administration. 
"Something must be done." That phrase is on many lips; it is the impulse 
which we all feel as we read about or as we watch on television screens some 
fresh evidence of man's inhumanity to man. But we have to realize where that 
impulse, that phrase "Something must be done", leads us. We should not wander 
down that road without serious thought because it would involve a 
restructuring of armed forces so that they could take a full part in the 
growing number of peace-making and peace-keeping exercises of the United 
Nations. It would mean a massive increase in the funds which the United 
Nations and its humanitarian agencies would require from Member States from 
us: from all of us in regular contributions and in aid, in times when many 
Member States face severe budgetary problems. These are just two of the 
implications of the course on which the world is beginning to propel the 
United Nations because "something must be done". 
How do we prevent these demands from getting out of hand? The best way, 
of course, is to prevent those conflicts which give rise to the demands - in 
short, diplomacy: preventive diplomacy. I know that diplomacy is 
unfashionable in the world of the knee-jerk reaction and the dogmatic 
sound-bite on television. Diplomacy lacks news value; it lacks glamour; it 

involves compromise; it takes time; it is easy to mock. It just happens to be 
indispensable. 
That is true, to take one example of many one could take, of conflicts in 
the Middle East. There the parties have from time to time tried to cut the 
knot; they have tried to resolve their disputes by force, but in vain. This 
is a critical moment in the Arab-Israel peace process, which we in Europe 
strongly support. We in the Community know that all concerned must seize this 
opportunity; the tide must be caught. The negotiation of a final settlement 
based on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) will take time 
yet, will take hard work yet. What is important in the immediate future is 
for all parties to work towards visible progress, building step on agreed step. 
Diplomacy is partly a matter of institutions and strengthening them. 
Speaking as a European on behalf of Europeans, I hope that one day the 
Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) will be effective in 
the prevention of conflict throughout Europe. With the adoption of the 
Helsinki document the CSCE has begun to give itself the tools to tackle 
problems by conciliation before they slide into violence, and to manage crises 
once they develop. That document shows that the CSCE is a regional 
arrangement according to Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter. That 
makes a crucial link between European and global security. 
But of course the United Nations is the centre of this thinking, and 
reform of the United Nations is crucial to its performance. Early this year 
the Secretary-General made a determined start on administrative reform. I 
believe that will turn out to be a decisive step. This is being followed up 
both in the Secretariat and in the vast superstructure of intergovernmental 
bodies which have grown up over the past 40 years in the economic, social and 
other fields. 

We welcome the work of the General Assembly to which I know that you 
personally, Mr. President, are devoted to rationalize its agenda. All this 
is welcome; all this has to be carried forward. 
A summit of the Security Council met last January at the initiative of my 
Prime Minister to consider next steps. We asked the Secretary-General to 
prepare a report on the ways in which the United Nations could help tackle the 
new challenges of which I have spoken. On 17 June, you, 
Mr. Secretary-General, published your ideas on preventive diplomacy, 
peace-keeping, peace-making and what you called peace-building. This 
collection of ideas is going to turn out to be a turning-point in the history 
of our Organization. You tried to address a need which is not some distance 
ahead, but which is here and now. I believe you are in the extraordinary 
position of someone who is being asked to manufacture a vehicle while he is 
driving that vehicle on the road. It is not easy, but it is necessary. 
The general debate should be a genuine debate on the ideas advanced in 
the report. All United Nations bodies, notably the Security Council and the 
General Assembly, should follow up swiftly in the light of the debate. 
Preventive diplomacy I have already mentioned. Obviously, it is 
quicker. It is more helpful to peoples about to be embroiled in conflict than 
even the most successful peace-keeping operation which comes after the 
outbreak of violence. It is also less costly in terms of lives and in terms 
of cash. The Secretary-General should be ready to make full use of his powers 
under Article 99 of the Charter to draw the attention of the Security Council 
to any matter which in his opinion may threaten international peace and 
security. Greater use is already being made of fact-finding missions; we 
would like to encourage this trend. 

Preventive deployment of troops might take place to deter aggression or 
conflict between States, possibly involving deployment to only one side of an 
international border. Of course there may be difficulties about timing the 
dispatch of such a force in a given crisis, but we believe this is essentially 
a sound idea that could be applied case by case. 
I warmly welcome what President Bush said yesterday on his initiatives to 
strengthen the peace-keeping work of the United Nations. 
In the European Community we want to follow up the idea of preventive 
deployment in the event of an internal crisis, where the Government concerned 
requests help, with humanitarian assistance or conciliation. No two cases 
would be the same. There would need to be careful discussions with 
Governments and the parties concerned before the international community could 
usefully deploy monitors. 
Recognizing that, the European Community and its member States have 
already decided in principle to send civilian monitoring missions to States 
which want them where this could avert a crisis and possible bloodshed. In 
South Africa, for example, with the agreement of all the parties, established 
during a recent visit of the troika, the United Nations will be joined by the 
European Community and by the Commonwealth in sending observers to reinforce 
the national peace accords there. 
Of course, part of this prevention of conflict must involve prevention of 
the proliferation of armaments, especially weapons of mass destruction. We 
welcome the agreement on a global convention on chemical weapons. This is a 
step towards a safer and more secure world. 

We recognize that peace-making brings pain to some. Bringing pressure -
even peaceful pressure, say, of sanctions on warring parties, means 
sacrifice for innocent third parties. We understand the economic difficulties 
often caused to third parties by the imposition of sanctions under 
Chapter VII. Countries which need balance-of-payments help, countries which 
may also at the same time be carrying out prudent adjustment programmes, can 
be badly affected. The international financial organizations are in the best 
position to assess and then take into account the effects of United Nations 
mandatory sanctions when the;_' design support packages for the countries 
concerned. 

The Secretary-General's report contains a number of proposals for Member 
States to earmark forces for enforcement action and for peace-keeping. All 12 
States members of the European Community have responded to his questionnaire 
on this and all Members of the United Nations should, we believe, keep it 
under regular review. 
Then there is money, financial contributions. The Secretary-General 
rightly, continuously underlines the importance of financial as well as 
military contributions to peace-keeping. The figures speak for themselves. 
The 12 States members of the European Community are supposed, under the rules, 
to contribute one third of the cost of peace-keeping operations financed 
through assessed contributions. At the end of August we, the Twelve, had in 
fact given not 33 per cent but over 40 per cent of total contributions 
actually collected so far for the various new operations launched or expanded 
since the end of the last session of the General Assembly. Those European 
Community member States, of which mine is one, joining in the new operation in 
Bosnia, will bear all their own costs. We believe we are doing our bit so far 
as this is concerned in Europe, and look to others to do the same. The 
Secretary-General is quite right: the financial problems of the United 
Nations must not be allowed to slide, must not be allowed to fester. We 
support the proposed peace-keeping reserve fund, subject to negotiation on the 
detail, and we believe the General Assembly must follow this up. 
The role of the United Nations does not stop once a conflict is over. 
That is why the Secretary-General's study entitled "An Agenda for Peace" 
rightly looks at how we can build peace after a conflict. Take El Salvador, 
an illustration that has already been used by His Excellency the President of 
the Republic of Korea. The promotion of free elections and democratic 

institutions is a key part of such peace-building, and so, to take a very 
different example, is de-mining. Is it not a sad commentary on the state of 
the world that the removal of mines in the aftermath of conflict has to be 
high on our agenda, whether in Cambodia, northern Somalia or Angola? 
But we of the European Community welcome the emphasis the 
Secretary-General gives to human rights, democracy and development. Perhaps 
during the cold war some of us tended to concentrate exclusively, or almost 
exclusively, on abuses of human rights in the Soviet bloc. Elsewhere there 
was lip-service when there should have been action. But all people are 
entitled to full human rights. We want the World Conference on Human Rights 
at Vienna in June 1993 to take real steps in that direction. 
We warmly welcome as part of that effort what we see as the tide of 
political reform now flowing in the continent of Africa. We are helping to 
promote good government and sound human rights and electoral practices. Both 
at the national and the Community level, we have already shown that we are 
ready to meet requests for help in election monitoring, notably in Ethiopia, 
the Congo and, later this year, in Kenya and Ghana, and also in the 
inter-parliamentary work going on in Namibia. 
But of course in the longer term collective security can be undermined by 
deeper economic and social forces, such as poverty and environmental 
degradation. Relief must be followed by recovery or else the countries 
afflicted will be overwhelmed by despair. Is that not what we see in 
Somalia? This appalling tragedy is a warning of what could happen elsewhere, 
of what could become widespread, because Somalia is just the most extreme form 
of a problem now affecting large parts of sub-Saharan Africa. 

I say this all the more strongly because at the beginning of this month I 
led a European Community Troika visit to Mogadishu. What we saw there is what 
many colleagues have spoken of, and I echo their voices. We saw the 
disintegration of a society. We marked the absence of all legitimate 
authority. We witnessed the collapse of a State and of all services connected 
with a State. Instead of order, instead of law, teenage gangsters roam the 
streets, toting their Kalashnikovs and offering protection at a price. 
Instead of a distribution system, whether capitalist or socialist, there is 
blackmail and looting. 
Against that background we saw the new humanitarian relief arrangements 
being put into place by Mr. Eliasson and many other devoted people. We saw 
how the United Nations has to work naturally, intimately and without rivalry 
with non-governmental organizations. We saw how urgently the Somalis need a 
reconstruction of civil authority. We fully support Ambassador Sahnoun's 
efforts in Mogadishu, in Somalia. He is an outstanding civil servant on 
behalf of us all. Last month the Security Council rightly voted to strengthen 
the United Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM) so that its security units 
will be better able to distribute aid. Among the States Members of the 
European Community, Belgium, with the support of all of us, plans a 
substantial contribution to that security. 
Of course not all disasters are man-made, though it looks as if an 
increasing proportion are. There is the drought in the Horn of Africa and 
southern Africa, which will require a major international effort over the 
coming year. 
For the first time, over the last two or three years, the environment has 
become a priority for all countries. I have to say that the road from Rio de 
 
Janeiro may be harder than to the road to it. The United Nations Conference 
on Environment and Development in Rio attracted the world's leaders, the 
world's media and the world's imagination. But sustainable development has to 
stay at the top of the international agenda. That is why, immediately after 
his return from Rio de Janeiro, Prime Minister Major proposed an eight-point 
follow-up plan picking up the key elements agreed upon at Rio de Janeiro. 
That initiative was broadly endorsed at our European Council in Lisbon and at 
the Economic Summit in Munich. 
The Sustainable Development Commission, which is to be set up by the 
General Assembly, will be crucial to the follow-up. The Assembly must create 
an effective instrument to ensure that the impetus built up at Rio is not 
dissipated and lost. 
To conclude, for the medium and long term we need to turn hope into 
reality. In the short term, time after time, in place after place, we must 
bring hope to what is already a grim reality. The legacy of the cold war is a 
mixed one. In facing it, the international community must be realistic, 
because history cannot be denied, cannot be uprooted. The solving of problems 
which have their roots deep in the centuries is a slow, frustrating business. 
After the brief gleam of optimism in 1989 and 1990, when all seemed easy, 
we are now more realistic. Progress towards a more decent, orderly world will 
never be without effort. Our best hope is to take two steps forward for each 
step back. Even that imperfect progress will require the rapid strengthening 
of our institutions and in particular of the family of institutions called the 
United Nations - not essentially by more conferences and more speeches, but by 
the practical effort which the United Nations, under the guidance of the 
 
Secretary-General, mounts today in Somalia, Yugoslavia, Cambodia and countless 
other troubled places. 
The trucks of our agencies, painted white, and the blue berets of our 
United Nations contingents do not bring magic or instant happiness, but they 
bring a glimmer of hope where till then there may have been despair. In the 
effort of bringing hope, in the short term and in the longer term, the 
European Community and its member States will take a persistent, energetic and 
worthy part. 
May I, at the outset, congratulate you. Sir, 
on your assumption of the presidency of the General Assembly at this session. 
I should also like to express our appreciation for the stewardship of the 
forty-sixth session of the General Assembly by your predecessor. 
Ambassador Samir Shihabi of Saudi Arabia. 
This is the first session of the General Assembly since 
Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali assumed the office of Secretary-General of the 
United Nations, and I take this opportunity to pay tribute to his dynamism, 
diplomatic skills and zeal for reform. 
I should also like to welcome into our midst the new Members of the 
United Nations and wish them success in their multifarious efforts and tasks. 
There have been dramatic changes world wide since the Assembly last met, 
in 1991. Some of these changes augur well, while others present uncertain 
prospects. While the cold war and the East-West confrontation are now, 
happily, but aberrations of the past, the shadow of conflict and suffering 
looms large in Yugoslavia, in Somalia and, indeed, in many other parts of the 
world. 
We cannot, therefore, be complacent or euphoric. What should have made 
the world safer has at the same time unleashed tendencies ethnic, sectarian 
and other - that threaten to keep it unsafe. The efforts of developing 

countries to improve their socio-economic conditions remain hamstrung by the 
inequities of the present international economic order. 
Therefore, what we need to work for is a new international order free 
from war, poverty, illiteracy and injustice. In this great endeavour the 
United Nations has a central role to play. Some eight and a half months ago, 
in this very city of New York, at the summit of the Security Council, 
Prime Minister Narasimha Rao pointed out that 
"Lasting peace and security necessarily require comparable levels of 
human happiness across the globe. It is impossible to think of a United 
Nations functioning usefully or harmoniously while humankind continues to 
be riddled with ever-increasing disparities". (S/PV.3046. p. 96) 
That is the concern that animates and reinforces our commitment to a United 
Nations dedicated as much to peace and stability as to progress and prosperity. 
The international community's efforts in this direction are none the less 
haunted by the shadow of continuing violence and conflict around the world. 
India has been deeply concerned at the conflict in Yugoslavia. The tragedy of 
Bosnia and Herzegovina demands redress. Its people must be given the chance 
to lead their lives in peace. India believes that the good work the United 
Nations is doing in that region deserves all our support. We also trust that 
decisions taken here will not complicate either the search for peace or the 
functioning of the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) in a difficult 
and dangerous situation. 

Somalia's tragedy is equally heart-rending. The wretchedness of its 
people, caught in a seemingly endless cycle of violence and misery, cries out 
for redress. The United Nations has instituted a valiant and generous 
operation there to provide relief to those affected. India believes that all 
the Somalian parties should work together to bring the conflict to an end so 
that tranquillity can be restored and the people of Somalia can be given the 
chance to work out their own destinies in peace. 
After years of suffering, the people of Cambodia aspire to build a 
sovereign, independent, non-aligned nation for themselves. The United Nations 
cannot falter in Cambodia, and the parties concerned in that country have a 
responsibility to ensure the success of the United Nations efforts. 
India has consistently supported the sovereignty, territorial integrity 
and non-aligned status of Afghanistan. We hope that all the parties there 
will work to restore peace and harmony so that the people of Afghanistan can 
have the opportunity, free of violence and conflict, to work for their own 
well-being. 
A glimmer of hope is visible on the West Asian horizon, with Israel and 
its Arab neighbours settling down to a dialogue. The numerous resolutions 
adopted by the Security Council and the General Assembly provide the necessary 
goals for those negotiations. The occupation of Arab lands should be vacated 
and the restitution of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, 
including their right to establish an independent State, as well as the 
security of all States in the region, should be assured if a genuine 
settlement with lasting peace is to be achieved in that part of the world. 
What the United Nations was able to do in restoring to Kuwait its 
independence and sovereignty was a singular achievement. India has 

traditionally enjoyed the warmest of relations with Kuwait, and we trust that 
following the restoration of its sovereignty Kuwait will also be able to 
recover the prosperity that it formerly enjoyed. 
I should like to add here that India feels sympathy for the civilian 
population of Iraq, and we believe that its needs should be looked at with 
generosity. Iraq's sovereignty as a State and its territorial integrity 
should be respected. 
The recent unfortunate violence in South Africa and the setback to the 
negotiations there for the elimination of apartheid will, we hope, be 
temporary. It is encouraging that the parties concerned have welcomed the 
catalytic role of the United Nations, which is fully committed to the 
objective of establishing a democratic, non-racial and united South Africa. 
As the country that first brought the question of apartheid to the United 
Nations in 1946, India is hopeful that the presence of United Nations 
observers will help to end the violence there and to get the negotiating 
process going once again. 
India has noted the recent changes in Fiji. I hope that the Government 
of Fiji will eschew racial and ethnic discrimination and revert to democratic 
governance at an early date. 
The Secretary-General has been able to record some progress on the issue 
of Cyprus. The acceptance by the parties concerned of the Secretary-General's 
"set of ideas" is significant. We share the Secretary-General's hope that the 
next round of direct talks in October will be the conclusive one. 
At this session the Assembly will take up the matter of the recently 
negotiated chemical-weapons Convention. The Convention opens up possibilities 
for similar action in other areas of disarmament. In this context, India in 

1988 proposed an action plan for nuclear disarmament within a specified 
time-frame. As an immediate step, the United Nations should envisage the 
following: a convention on the non-use of nuclear weapons, a verifiable 
freeze on the production of fissionable material for weapons purposes, a 
suspension of nuclear-weapon tests and negotiations on general and complete 
disarmament. 
Non-proliferation is a laudable objective, and India's commitment to it 
has been affirmed time and again. But there should be no distinction between 
nuclear-weapon States and non-nuclear-weapon States when it comes to rights 
and obligations. The geographical spread of nuclear arsenals has, as it were, 
nuclearized the globe. Therefore, the international community's efforts 
should be directed against that global menace. As part of them, regional 
non-proliferation should be considered only within the context of a properly 
specified region, taking into account the security concerns of the countries 
of the region, whose prior agreement should be obtained. 
Human rights have gained emphasis in recent times, and deservedly so. 
India welcomes the changes around the world that have strengthened human 
rights and fundamental freedoms. In line with our democratic traditions, 
independent judiciary and press and alert public, India has decided to set up 
a national human-rights commission further to safeguard and promote 
fundamental human rights in India. 
I should like to point out here that one of the most vicious forms of 
human-rights violations today is the violence unleashed by terrorists. And 
terrorism assumes a particularly pernicious character when it is aided, 
abetted and sponsored from abroad. Such sponsorship is against the principles 
of the United Nations Charter, and should be vigorously opposed by all. 

The United Nations recognizes its responsibilities for providing 
humanitarian assistance to Member States facing grave humanitarian crises. 
The newly created capacity of the United Nations to deal with such situations 
has performed creditably. It is important in this context that we mobilize 
the United Nations to address the root causes of many such disruptions: 
poverty, illiteracy and lack of development. It is equally important for the 
United Nations to be seen to be acting correctly and impartially in this field 
and at the request of the country concerned. 
The report of the Secretary-General entitled "An Agenda for Peace" 
(A/47/277) articulates the wealth of experience that the United Nations has 
gained in recent years in peacemaking and peace-keeping, and is an important 
and welcome input into our study of how the role of the United Nations in the 
maintenance of international peace and security can be strengthened. India, 
given its traditional and long-standing contribution to United Nations 
peace-keeping forces, takes a special interest in the matter. I trust that we 
shall be able to respond positively and constructively, in keeping with the 
United Nations Charter, to the Secretary-General's ideas. It should be 
ensured that the measures envisaged do not lead to the abridgement of the 
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States. They should also respect the 
cardinal tenet of non-interference in the internal affairs of States. 
Just as international activism should not violate accepted norms of 
international relations, the principle of self-determination has to be seen in 
the context of respect for national sovereignty. Self-determination can apply 
only to peoples under colonial or alien domination or foreign occupation, and 
not to integral parts of sovereign nations. 

The implementation of the proposals made by the Secretary-General will 
mean a more vigorous Security Council. An enhanced mandate for the Council 
requires matching transparency and democracy in its functioning. This cannot 
be done without an expansion of the membership of the Council to reflect the 
increased membership of the United Nations over the past few years, as well as 
the realities of the many changes in the international situation. And here I 
would submit that along with economic criteria, other relevant criteria should 
be given due weight in this context. 
The expansion in membership that I referred to is all the more essential 
if the Council is to ensure its moral sanction and political effectiveness. 
As the Secretary-General points out in his report on the work of the 
Organization 
"Democracy within the family of nations means the application of its 
principles within the world Organization itself." (A/47/1, para. 169) 
Similarly, the General Assembly has to be made more effective so as to 
represent not only the changes in its membership, but also the significant 
character of its universal composition. 
An agenda for development is as important to the United Nations as an 
agenda for peace. Any effort to assign to the United Nations only a 
complementary role in the economic and social field is, in fact, contrary to 
the letter and spirit of the Charter. The United Nations should continue to 
have a central role in macroeconomic policy formulation and implementation, 
because this is the only forum for reaching an international consensus on 
development. Developing nations around the globe, including India, are 
engaged in major reforms of their internal economic policies and mechanisms 
with a view to integrating their economies with the global economy. These 

reforms will have very limited meaning unless the external economic 
environment becomes conducive to the growth and development of developing 
countries. 
The Secretary-General, in his report on the work of the Organization, 
makes it clear that 
"the Organization's responsibilities and commitments in the political and 
security area should not be carried out at the expense of its 
responsibilities in the development field ..." (A/47/1, para. 66) 
This underpins and reinforces the continuing commitment of the United Nations 
in the field of development, particularly of the developing countries. 
The world economy is integrating both globally and regionally. But in 
the process, the needs of the developing countries are not finding the 
attention and response that they deserve. Hence, it becomes imperative that 
certain international events succeed such as the Uruguay Round of 
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, whose early, successful and balanced outcome 
would inject growth impulses into the world economy as a whole. The 
North-South dialogue is languishing and deserves reactivation. There are 
various other inequities in global economic interaction - such as poor 
commodity prices, monetary imbalances and others that call for urgent 
redress. The developing countries look to the United Nations for correctives 
in these fields. Socio-economic progress in developing countries will, in 
turn - I have no doubt about it enrich the prosperity of the developed world 
itself. 
Here, may I mention a disquieting aspect in this field, namely the 
tendency to impose non-economic conditionalities in international development 
assistance. They should be avoided so that the effectiveness of development 
assistance may not be impaired. 

My delegation sees merit in a number of proposals in the area of the 
developmental activities of the United Nations put forward by various groups, 
particularly the Nordic countries. In our view, one of the principal 
objectives of the exercise should be to decentralize the operational 
activities of the United Nations system so that countries and regions with 
their special characteristics and levels of development may be able to 
implement programmes suitable to them. Also, adequate resources should be 
found to promote development in the developing countries. 
The process of the restructuring of the United Nations should take into 
account the additional responsibilities assigned to the United Nations by the 
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) that was held 
this year. The concept of sustainable development has to be translated into 
workable strategies and policy measures. In the pursuit of sustainable 
development, developing countries need resources and, what is more, technical 
assistance, as well as environmentally sound technologies on preferential and 
concessional terms. I do hope that the establishment of a Commission on 
Sustainable Development in the course of the present session will lead to 
effective follow-up of UNCED. The creation of a Planet Protection Fund, which 
places on all countries, except the least developed, an obligation to acquire 
and develop environment-friendly technologies, will facilitate universal 
participation in the collective effort to attain sustainable development. 
The non-aligned countries, meeting at the level of Heads of State or 
Government in Jakarta earlier this month, issued the Jakarta message, which 
states: 
"A shift in focus of international relations to strengthen multilateral 
cooperation based on genuine interdependence, mutuality of interests and 
shared responsibility, has become indispensable." 

If we, in the international community and here at the United Nations, are to 
cooperate to combat global menaces and inequalities, we will need to forge a 
global partnership. And here, I am reminded of what the Prime Minister of 
India stated at the recent summit of non-aligned countries to which I have 
referred: 
"We are happy to note that the United Nations, at last, is coming into 
its own in the fifth decade of its existence. While even today there is 
a tendency to subordinate the global agenda to narrow national concerns, 
we are happy to note that the United Nations is more effective than ever 
before. The question now is to make it even more effective." 
Let us also hope that the Assembly as its present session will promote 
the effectiveness of the United Nations even further by shaping it as an 
instrument of international consensus and action and of common benefit in all 
matters of international concern. 
Let me begin by congratulating you, Sir, and 
the nation of Bulgaria, on your assumption of the presidency of the United 
Nations General Assembly. May I also congratulate the Secretary-General, 
Mr. Boutros-Ghali, on his leadership in the struggle for peace. I wish him 
success in his endeavours. 
Today I speak for an Israel that has chosen to step out of the shadows of 
the past to prepare for the invitation of a new future. The world is alive 
with the impulse for change. The end of conflict is no longer a Utopian 

fantasy. It is the dictate of realism and of universal self-interest. We 
look to the future in a world that wants peace. 
Like a hidden Samson, the forces of change have pushed aside the pillars 
of conventional wisdom, which proclaimed that military power is the source of 
national strength and prestige. This is no longer true. The cost of 
maintaining a significantly large army can deplete the resources of the 
richest countries, even if the weaponry remains unused. Around our changing 
world, the flow of knowledge has superseded military might as the source of 
real strength and social stability. 

The flow of knowledge no longer stops at national frontiers. It is not 
possible in the age of modern communications to shield peoples from truth and 
reality. Eventually, even dictators must face the fact that the best censors 
cannot block the free flow of ideas. But knowledge cannot be acquired without 
the right to doubt, the readiness to change. Knowledge is not available 
without freedom, and so democracy is prevailing throughout the world. 
In this new era, the era of knowledge, the governing principles are those 
of democratic structures, market-based economies, open borders, demilitarized 
international and regional relations, and respect for human rights. But while 
all nations should embrace these new principles, national traditions and 
identities retain their power. Nation-States will remain the focus of 
allegiance and social pride. 
To reconcile national identity, regional cooperation and universal 
solidarities is the central issue of contemporary life. 
The United Nations was established in an era that no longer exists. Yet 
its ideals and structures can meet the challenges and dangers of this new 
age. We support the "Agenda for Peace" offered by the Secretary-General. We 
support and will participate in the attempt to build a global protection 
system. 
The United Nations must be the headquarters for an all-embracing struggle 
to safeguard the environment against new threats. It must be a powerhouse to 
arrest starvation. It must develop the institutions and the ability to 
intervene when necessary to stop otherwise insoluble civil wars. The United 
Nations must reorganize to face these problems in a global capacity. 
In our own region, we must understand that even if our geography and 
people have not changed, the world has changed. No longer can we live on 

disappearing premises. For generations, the conflicts in the Middle East were 
nurtured by global conflicts by the cold war and hot competition. Within 
the context of super-Power rivalry, the belligerents in the Middle East were 
generously supplied with shining armour. But where there were once evil 
empires, we now see only the desire for a peaceful world. Russia has 
changed. The United States has emerged from the cold war with renewed respect 
from the world for its democratic drive for peace. The third world is 
changing, with many nations ending old hostilities and building new 
economies. In Africa, the forces of racism are being gradually driven out. 
In the Middle East itself let's face it the peace between Israel and Egypt 
is attaining the respect of age. There is a fresh atmosphere in our time. 
The time is now upon us for the nations of the Middle East to come to 
terms with the new realities, to make a living on their own. We can learn to 
benefit from peaceful coexistence. If we are to survive, we must understand 
that the dangers and opportunities we face are regional rather than national. 
In an age of long-range missiles, national defence must be a collective 
effort. To provide our people with modern standards of living we must have 
open borders and mutually beneficial exchanges. 
For too long the Middle East has been caught up in national conflicts and 
national rivalries for the glorification of national leaders. We need to 
build a new Middle East of, by and for the people. In our effort to build 
this new future for the Middle East, Israel does not ignore its still existing 
disagreements with our neighbours. The record shows that we are working to 
solve them humanely, honourably and, wherever possible, permanently. We are 
currently engaged in bilateral negotiations to bring an end to the conflicts 
of the past and multilateral negotiations to lay the foundation for the future. 

In the bilateral negotiations, we are negotiating with the Jordanians, 
the Palestinians, the Syrians and the Lebanese. The committed leadership of 
the United States has played a central role in bringing all the parties into 
face-to-face negotiations. 
With the Jordanians, the solutions are awaiting the parties. We face 
common problems we must confront together, including the possible Jordanian 
connection to Palestinian self-government and beyond. Our relations with the 
Hashemite Kingdom have seen open hostilities but also tacit efforts to 
overcome these hostilities. We look forward to a complete peace with the 
Kingdom of Jordan in the near future. 
With the Palestinian people, our conflict has been long and painful. We 
seek to end this conflict. We are looking for a bridge to cross the gulf of 
bitter memories, painful hatreds and emotion-laden suspicions. We have 
offered to negotiate an interim or transitional goal. There is no difference 
between the two. In fact, one can note with satisfaction that the 
Palestinians have agreed to this gradual approach. The direction is clear, 
even if the bridge will be built slowly. 
The suggested path is an interim self-government arrangement, as 
conceived at Camp David. We know that this proposal is imperfect in some 
respects. Self-government is less than independence. But it offers the 
flexibility of an arrangement that will last no more than five years. During 
this limited period of time, Palestinians in the territories will enjoy 
self-government. The opportunity to select, through democratic political 
elections, a Palestinian administrative council will enable the Palestinian 
people to exercise a double measure of freedom: the freedom to govern their 
own lives and to do so politically and democratically. 

But instead of attempting to draw a map of a self-governing territory 
and it is doubtful that this could be achieved now we have suggested a 
definite timetable. So, while this proposal lacks the clarity of a map, it 
provides the commitment of a calendar. This proposal is clearly a departure 
from the present situation. It has the dynamics of a voyage to a new destiny, 
a bridge which begins at one shore and reaches another. 
I know it will not be an easy choice for either side. But neither the 
existing situation nor the foreseeable future contains a more promising 
alternative. I am speaking for an Israeli Government that has firmly made up 
its mind and seeks the expeditious implementation of this proposal. 
In negotiations, the parties tend to scrutinize every letter, every dot. 
I hope that the Palestinians will also perceive the spirit of our intent, 
which is to extricate ourselves from the position of domination over another 
people. We have never in our history as a people sought domination over 
others. We wholeheartedly seek a future where the children of both peoples 
will escape the agonies of a distorted past and live under a clear sky of 
security and hope. 

With the Syrians, we have begun a dialogue in full daylight for the first 
time in 44 years. It is necessary now to translate the change in the mood 
between our two nations into viable and carefully constructed accords 
expressing a mutual interest in security and cooperation. 
We call for a departure from old dogmas and all-embracing dictates, and 
we hope the Syrians will adopt the same approach. We understand the need to 
safeguard the security and freedom of both nations, theirs and ours. It is 
our responsibility to ensure that those who have survived the wars of the past 
will have the opportunity to open a new peaceful chapter in the history of the 
two peoples. 
The leaders of both countries should be directly involved in these 
negotiations, which are in need of a new approach and creative thinking. I 
call on the President of Syria to set aside his reservations and meet with the 
Prime Minister of Israel. 
We have made clear to the Syrians that Security Council resolutions 
242 (1967) and 338 (1973) contain a territorial dimension, combined with other 
components of peace and security which must be equally respected. 
We believe in a comprehensive solution involving all issues and all 
parties. Yet we do not consider it wise to link one negotiation to another, 
or to postpone an agreement with one country because of delays elsewhere. One 
negotiating process should not be handcuffed to another. 
With respect to Lebanon, Israel holds no territorial claims; nor does it 
seek to influence the political destiny of that country. We recall peaceful 
relations with Lebanon at a time when it was internally balanced and 
tranquil. We hope that such a time will return again. The moment Lebanon 
finds peace within itself and independence from outside intervention, Lebanon 
and Israel will live in peace again. 

Looking at the bilateral negotiations, we recall that the success of our 
negotiations with Egypt stemmed from dialogue at many levels of society: 
decision makers, leaders, businessmen, academicians. We appeal to all our 
Arab neighbours to establish the same dialogue today. There is no room for 
timidity, reluctance or boycotts in a peace process. Peacemaking should not 
be a hideaway operation. 
I hope our neighbours realize that Israel has implemented unilateral 
confidence-building measures. We have drastically changed our settlement 
policies, altered our policies towards the Palestinian people, offered new 
proposals for self-government and suggested target dates for the 
implementation of this process. We have done these things unconditionally. 
Yet confidence-building measures call for reciprocity. We seek an end to the 
unjustified economic boycott and the cessation of terror. 
We shall not allow ourselves or our adversaries to escape this chance for 
peace. Yet we cannot turn our region into a new Middle East by just 
negotiating old disputes. Our new challenges are on our horizons, not only in 
our frontiers. 
We say to our Arab neighbours: the real danger is not Israel. The real 
danger is poverty. The real danger is poverty that creates protest, even if 
it is occasionally cloaked in a religious mantle. Poverty and protest 
endanger both the Arab nations and Israel. Israel does not want to become an 
isolated island in an ocean of resentment. 
Two hundred forty million people live today in the Middle East. The 
majority of them live in a state of want. In 30 years, there will be 
500 million people in the region, two thirds residing in Africa, one third in 
Asia. 
 
The poverty of the Middle East has nothing to do with geography. It has 
to do with the use and misuse of available and potential resources in the 
region. The gap between wealthy and poor nations is wide: the more 
prosperous nations enjoy a per capita income 10 times greater than their 
poorer neighbours. The earth beneath us will continue to tremble if the 
wealthy remain oblivious to the needy, both within and beyond national borders. 
The multilateral negotiations are composed of five areas: economics, 
arms control, refugees, ecology and water. Progress in these areas will more 
likely be attained if we can restructure the multilateral talks, which 
initially created two advantages: the cluster of issues and the participation 
of many Arab countries. But the talks suffer as well from loose organization, 
which has resulted in seminars rather than negotiations, and from the lack of 
a concentrated thrust to coordinate their work. We suggest the following 
changes. 
First, the separate negotiations should be conducted in a coordinated 
manner. 
Secondly, participation in the steering committee should be raised to the 
ministerial level. 
Thirdly, the multilateral negotiations should be intensified through more 
frequent meetings for longer periods of time. 
Fourthly, the Syrians and the Lebanese should participate. 
Fifthly, discussion of human rights and pluralistic values should be made 
part of the talks so as to combine the discussion of well-defined practical 
issues with the pursuit of common values very much akin to the Helsinki 
accords. 

And finally, the parties should agree not to postpone progress in the 
multilateral talks until the conclusion of the bilateral negotiations. Early 
planning can save crucial time for all parties without forcing irreversible 
commitments. And lost time cannot be regained. 
The bilateral negotiations are essentially political. The multilateral 
negotiations are essentially economic. We live in an age when financial 
assistance in itself is no longer the answer to the economic needs of the 
Middle East. In the past, belligerency created dependence upon the financial 
assistance of other nations. By diminishing the need for arms and building 
the right economic structure, we will be able create wealth of our own. There 
is no need to impoverish the wealthy in order to enrich the poor. Opening 
borders, paving roads, introducing modern communications, and exchanging 
technology will generate economic growth in the Middle East. 
Trade across borders is essential for economic growth. Markets transcend 
national boundaries. Water, tourism and commerce do not subjugate themselves 
to political maps. The Middle East should follow the example of the "seven 
tigers" in Asia, the European Common Market and the North American Free Trade 
Agreement. Let us understand: these regions are our competitors and they are 
far ahead of the Middle East in facing the new realities of the international 
economy. We have to build an open regional economy, for the same reasons and 
with the same promise that led others to do so. We have to build a common 
market in the Middle East. 
 
We have to set out upon the long and complicated road to arms control. 
That we can learn from the East-West negotiations and other attempts at arms 
control. We have to follow the patient path of confidence-building measures 
in the geographical and technical domains until we are able to rid the Middle 
East of the terror presented by weapons of mass destruction, both conventional 
and non-conventional. Israel has proposed the creation of a nuclear-free zone 
in the Middle East numerous times, and we stand ready to pursue this goal 
today. 
We should address the problems of refugees, not by threatening to destroy 
the existing demographic balance, but by exploring a range of possibilities 
for restoring the dignity of refugees and offering them a new life. 
We should act to save our fresh air and historic landscape. Ecological 
pollution does not respect borders, and so we have to marshal forces to save 
our region from the danger of uncontrolled deterioration. 
Finally, the Middle East possesses vast desert land but meagre water 
resources. The land is static, the population is increasing and water 
resources are declining. Available water should be reused, and new fresh 
water produced from the sea. Either the land will be salinized by the sea or 
the sea water will be desalinized through available technology. The 
technology is available, and the necessary credit is attainable. We can 
satisfy the needs of man and land. The Middle East can be made green. It 
depends upon us. 
Here, I believe, are the pillars of wisdom for a new Middle East: 
economic growth, arms control, dignity for the refugees, environmental 
protection and water resources, coupled with religious freedom, pluralistic 
values and human rights. The nations of the Middle East must work 
individually and collectively to meet these challenges of a changed world. 

The agenda is ambitious. Is it merely a dream? No. It is a blueprint, 
and the necessary elements are within our grasp. Will these goals be achieved 
in our lifetime? We dare not hesitate, because the world will not wait for 
the Middle East. We are tragically late in making peace. If we do not face 
our economic challenges, we will be left hopelessly far behind. 
The agenda is new. The vision was already mentioned in Proverbs: 
"Wisdom builds the house. 
"Good judgment makes it secure." (The Holy Bible. Proverbs 24:3) 
"Wisdom prevails over strength; knowledge over brute force." (The Holy 
Bible. Proverbs 24:5) 
We have to go to work. For us, the Jewish people, this is Rosh Hashanah, 
the New Year. We pray that the year to come will bring peace, freedom and 
prosperity to build a new Middle East for all of its people Muslim, 
Christian, Jewish, Arab, Israeli for us, and for our children. 
Mr. President, New Zealand congratulates 
you on your election to lead the Assembly and offers you its support in your 
task. 
One year ago I stood on this rostrum and spoke about the Gulf crisis and 
the way in which the United Nations, with strong leadership from the Security 
Council, had shown a firmness of judgement and a commitment to the ideals of 
the founders of the United Nations that reinforced the status and authority of 
the Organization. 
I spoke of my own country. New Zealand, a small nation in the south-west 
Pacific, which supported the United Nations, in keeping with our tradition of 
opposing tyranny and supporting freedom. 
This year I have returned to this Organization even more confident of the 
vital role of the United Nations in today's world, of the important 
contribution each nation, be it large or small, can make to the achievement of 
its ideals. Most important, however, I want to affirm the commitment of New 
Zealand, a founder member of the United Nations, to ensuring that this 
Organization adapts to meet the challenge of a world that has changed, is 
changing and will continue to change in the years ahead. To do that, the 
 
United Nations requires a vibrant, active General Assembly and a Security 
Council that truly reflects the different regions and the different peoples of 
the world. 
The Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros-Ghali,, has made his views clear in 
putting before this Assembly his report, "An Agenda for Peace". His message 
is summed up in paragraphs 75 and 76, where he says: 
"With the cold war ended we have drawn back from the brink of a 
confrontation that threatened the world and, too often, paralysed our 
Organization. 
"Even as we celebrate our restored possibilities, there is a need to 
ensure that the lessons of the past ... are learned and that the 
errors ... are not repeated. For there may not be a third opportunity 
for our planet ... ." (A/47/277, paras. 75-76) 
New Zealand endorses that conclusion. 
We can also take hope from the fact that at last both the Security 
Council and the Assembly have the chance to work as they were originally 
intended, free from crippling ideological competition. Through the Security 
Council, and with the support of all the Members of the United Nations, we 
have seen decisive action to implement collective security measures on a scale 
never before possible. 
There is much still to be done, but no longer need the people of the 
world despair about impotence and inaction on the part of the United Nations. 
In Cambodia, in Somalia, in the Balkans, in the Middle East, the United 
Nations has moved to assist in the vital battle for human survival where 
before there was only the prospect of continued death and destruction. 
 
In our view, the Agenda for Peace will succeed only if we support an 
agenda for action. This is no time for complacency. The heavy cloud of the 
cold war has lifted. But over the years that cloud concealed many smaller 
conflicts and tensions regional, national and ethnic. Freed from being 
bottled up by the cold war, a growing and frightening tendency is exposed to 
settle ancient differences by the use of force. 
The Agenda for Peace also reminds us that there are other critical issues 
which threaten not only the security of Member States but also the future of 
the planet itself. 
Poverty, disease, malnutrition, crippling levels of debt and negligible 
economic growth are scourges in themselves. They can unleash despair and 
anger that will destabilize political and social institutions. 
Environmental degradation does not threaten only our immediate 
surroundings and livelihoods; problems such as the depletion of the ozone 
layer, the spread of toxic chemicals, climate change and the overfishing of 
the seas put at risk the well-being of whole communities, and even the very 
survival of certain small island countries. 
Weapons of mass destruction continue to proliferate. We must take a 
stand against those who are blind to the lessons of the past and remain 
determined to acquire or expand their stocks of nuclear or other weapons of 
mass destruction. 
The Secretary-General reminds us, too, that 
"social peace is as important as strategic or political peace". 
 
It is clear that a root cause of insecurity and conflict at the international 
level is the existence of social structures, policies and systems within 
States which marginalize minorities or other groups. Such tension will be 
resolved only when the social needs of the underprivileged are addressed. The 
proposed United Nations social Summit could have a catalytic role to play in 
this area. I suggest that it is only through tolerance and through talking to 
one another that we can all encourage and achieve full respect for human 
rights and implement the international standards as they were intended. 
 
The other very important issues raised by the Secretary-General must be 
considered thoroughly. This session of the Assembly provides the first 
opportunity to debate them and I wish to outline New Zealand's views. 
First, let me refer to peace and security. New Zealand stands very 
firmly behind the United Nations as an instrument for collective action when 
security is threatened. The situations which the world wants the United 
Nations to respond to today are not the same as those of the cold-war era. 
New Zealand supports concepts such as preventive diplomacy, peace-keeping and 
peace-building. As a world body we know that consensus is important but 
collectively we must be bold, we must be innovative. 
New Zealand believes it is vital that the United Nations respond to 
situations which threaten the peace or cry out for global action, wherever in 
the world they may occur. We cannot, we must not, allow parts of the world to 
be marginalized or thought less important than others. The tragedy in Somalia 
is different from, but of equal horror to, that in what was Yugoslavia. 
Secondly, I want to endorse strongly the conclusion that there is an 
inextricable link between security and economic development. This is not a 
new or radical idea. Every political leader knows from domestic experience 
that a nation feels more secure when its economy is performing strongly. 
People in every country have rapidly growing expectations, but with the global 
economy very sluggish leaders are finding it difficult to satisfy these 
ambitions. 
Further, we need major sustainable growth in the global economy if the 
development concerns identified at the Earth summit at Rio are to be achieved. 
One fact, though self-evident, must be repeated: sustainable and 
equitable economic growth and development will be possible only if there is an 
open and fair international trading system. 

As a world community we need the courage to pull down the artificial 
barriers to economic growth. The solution is in our hands. We need leaders 
to say "Yes" to fair trade and "No" to their protectionist lobbies. If we 
knock out the selfish and inward-looking tendencies to protectionism and 
subsidization, we will create a surge in global trade and real growth in the 
global economy. It will provide the opportunities we all want - so let's do 
it. 
The alternative is bleak. History shows only too clearly what can happen 
if there is a deep and prolonged global recession. Political extremists come 
to the fore and begin to manipulate desperate people. Disintegrating 
economies fall into the hands of dictators, and international peace and 
security are quickly put at risk. 
But this need not be so. It is not inevitable. A breakthrough in the 
multilateral trade negotiations, the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on 
Tariffs and Trade (GATT), is achievable, given the right degree of political 
will. There is a risk that the political will may ebb away, that the focus 
may be lost, that excuses for delay may become more important than reasons to 
press on. Should that prove true, then the bold reform set out in the Dunkel 
text will go down as one more lost opportunity. We cannot afford that so we 
New Zealand - continue to urge the European Community and the United States to 
resolve their differences and to put the GATT talks back on track for a 
successful conclusion. For world economic growth, it is not an optional 
extra; it is essential. 
Just as economics and security are closely linked, the world seems to 
have accepted, just in time, that there is a third element to this equation. 
It is the environment. Everything we do has an impact on the environment. If 

we cripple the environment, it will affect our economies, our societies and 
our security. Moreover, these impacts will not respect national boundaries. 
Before the Earth summit, some important first steps were taken. The 
Montreal Protocol proved that the world had the political will to deal with 
the problem of ozone depletion. The General Assembly itself responded to the 
challenge of drift-net fishing and has secured a moratorium on that 
ecologically-destructive technique of fishing. 
The Earth summit, under the auspices of the United Nations, has given us 
a challenging work programme, "Agenda 21", to match the Secretary-General's 
proposals, "An Agenda for Peace". But international agendas only work if 
nations are committed to their success. 
New Zealand went to the Earth summit committed to working for consensus 
solutions to the problems of environment and development which ultimately 
threaten us all. 
New Zealand is a country endowed with a rich environmental inheritance. 
But we understand that our good fortune does not give us the moral right to 
point the finger at other countries which are struggling for their very 
survival. At the same time, our considerable experience in sustainable 
resource management - for example, in the development of new forests can be 
helpful in the search for practical solutions to problems of resource 
depletion. 
As part of New Zealand's commitment to environmental protection and to 
providing sustainable resources, we have just agreed to go ahead with the 
planting of another 200,000 hectares of forest. 
At the Earth summit, we accepted a commitment to augment our aid 
programme as soon as possible in order to assist in the prompt and effective 
 
implementation of Agenda 21. Our development assistance projects, based on 
consultation with our partner countries, particularly in the South Pacific, 
have always had a strong focus on the environment and on sustainable 
development. 
But aid alone is not enough. New Zealand, like many countries which 
depend on agricultural exports, has been severely disadvantaged by a world 
trading system which handicaps non-subsidized and efficient producers. We 
therefore strongly support the call in Agenda 21 for an open, transparent and 
non-discriminatory trading system that reveals the real environmental costs of 
unsustainable production and enables all countries to pursue truly sustainable 
development on a secure and equitable basis. 
To achieve that would be to achieve a real foundation for peace and 
progress. I am not making these observations from an ivory tower. For its 
part. New Zealand already has one of the most open economies in the world. 
Yes, there was a short-term cost in achieving that, but now we are reaping 
rewards through higher productivity and international competitiveness. 
Despite the progress made from the ending of the cold war, we have not 
yet removed the threat from weapons of mass destruction. 
New Zealand warmly welcomed the agreement reached by President Bush and 
President Yeltsin in June. The two largest nuclear arsenals are to be reduced 
by some 70 per cent. That is remarkable progress and both leaders deserve and 
have our thanks. They have made historic progress but we must keep the 
momentum up. Unless we take decisive action, the dangers from nuclear 
proliferation will increase. 

Therefore we must build on the leadership shown by two nuclear-weapon 
States in declaring moratoriums. We must advance the goal, which New Zealand 
has unwaveringly pursued, of a comprehensive test-ban treaty. We must 
strengthen the International Atomic Energy Agency's safeguards regime. And we 
must secure an indefinite extension of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons in 1995. 

France's decision to suspend testing has been widely welcomed by New 
Zealand and Pacific island countries in the South Pacific Forum region. It 
has opened the way for significantly more positive relations between France 
and the region, which I welcome. We hope the moratorium will be maintained, 
and copied by others. 
Another milestone approaches, with the presentation to this session of 
the General Assembly of a treaty banning another class of weapons of mass 
destruction: chemical weapons. Patient and persistent efforts over 20 years 
will have their reward. New Zealand has strongly supported those efforts and 
intends to be an original signatory to the treaty. We urge other countries to 
take the same step. 
And we must not ignore the continued proliferation of conventional 
armaments. There are legitimate concerns about the levels and availability of 
highly destructive conventional weapons. The implementation of the United 
Nations Register of Conventional Arms would be a useful first step on the way 
to greater accountability in this area. 
Finally, I want to touch on the institutional issues the 
Secretary-General has raised. We strongly endorse the role that is envisaged 
for the United Nations to work with, and on occasions through, regional 
organizations that have some special contribution they can make. Already in 
South Africa we see cooperation between the United Nations and the 
Commonwealth beginning to bear positive fruit. In Somalia the Organization of 
African Unity (OAU), the League of Arab States and the Organization of the 
Islamic Conference have contributed positively to the United Nations mission. 
In the Americas the Organization of American States (OAS) has played an 
increasingly effective role. 

The United Nations role in Cambodia is of particular importance in this 
regard. The operation is unique and deserves the highest praise. But the 
countries of the region - which include New Zealand, with 100 men and women in 
the United Nations force have also played a major part in bringing about the 
conditions necessary for a successful United Nations involvement. Regional 
organizations such as the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) have 
been indispensable in this process. 
The fact of the matter is that the United Nations cannot do everything. 
Neither do I expect it to do everything - but free from the shackles of the 
past it now has a new authority which it must exercise wisely. To maintain 
its authority we must ensure that democratic principles are applied to the 
workings of the United Nations itself. That means that the small must be 
represented in major United Nations decision-making as well as the large. 
It means that there must be fair and regular rotation among Member 
States. And it means we must evolve processes that will allow constructive 
communication between the Security Council and the wider United Nations 
membership so that broad coalitions in support of Security Council action can 
be forged while preserving room for quick and decisive actions where necessary. 
New Zealand's commitment to a strong, effective and democratic United 
Nations has never wavered. At the beginning, at the San Francisco Conference 
in 1945, New Zealand championed the broadest possible participation in 
decision-making. Over the years we have backed up our words with a real 
commitment to United Nations peace-keeping efforts. We have participated thus 
far in 15 such operations: New Zealanders have worn the blue beret in Croatia 
and Bosnia, Lebanon, Cyprus, India, Pakistan, Iraq, Iran, Namibia, Angola, 
Cambodia, the Congo and Yemen. In addition. New Zealand supplied personnel to 
assist the United Nations with mine removal in Afghanistan. 

In conclusion, I want to return to the two agendas which are before this 
Assembly and which seek to achieve a new partnership of nations. Nothing is 
more important than the Agenda for Peace and the Agenda for the Environment 
and Sustainable Development. The United Nations Secretary-General and the 
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development have both identified 
monumental challenges for the General Assembly for several years to come. 
They also highlight the reality of global interdependence. The way ahead has 
to lie in cooperation rather than confrontation, in a recognition that the 
future of each of us is tied up with the future of us all and that no agenda, 
no matter how noble its goals, will succeed unless first and foremost we are 
prepared to work for them. New Zealand is. 

First, I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your election to this 
important post. The fact that a representative of Bulgaria has assumed this 
post at the head of the Assembly at precisely this time is a sign of the 
importance that the world community attaches to the peaceful democratic 
revolution in Eastern Europe. And we are proud that our countries, linked by 
ties of traditional friendship, are treading this path together. 
The democratic movement has prevailed in the cold war. For the first 
time in history unprecedented opportunities have opened up for the 
implementation of the principles proclaimed by the United Nations. 

The post-confrontational and post-communist world is not a 
pax Sovietica. a pax Americana, a pax Islamica or a pax Christiana, nor is it 
a monopolistic system of any kind, but rather the multipolar unity in 
diversity that the United Nations has symbolized from the very outset. 
For the present, such a world is only a possibility yet to be realized 
through our joint efforts. Realism leaves no room for euphoria. A difficult 
period of transition lies ahead. But realism compels us to reject any 
alternative to the democratic choice. 
Russia, which has rejected communism, has, perhaps more than any other 
country, learned from its own experience that there can be no alternative to 
democratic development; our country voted for democracy during the first 
nation-wide presidential election in its history, and defended it at the 
barricades around the Moscow White House. Neither the President, nor the 
Government, nor the majority of Parliament, nor the country at large will turn 
aside from the path of reform, no matter how difficult it may prove. 
Totalitarianism robbed Russia both of its unique identity and of the 
possibility of self-fulfilment in its relations with other nations. Through 
its self-imposed isolation, the richest country of Eurasia became the sick man 
of Europe and Asia. In contrast, only an open society and a policy of 
openness will enable Russia to find and play to the fullest extent its unique 
and historic role. 
This policy has its roots in an age-old Russian idea. Back in the 
thirteenth century Saint Alexander Nevsky, one of the founders and defenders 
of the Russian State, said: "God is to be found not in power but in truth". 

Today this is the policy of the true national interests of the Russian 
State as a normal rather than an aggressive great Power, as one that 
recognizes and shoulders its responsibilities as a permanent member of the 
Security Council. 
The basic elements of this policy are as follows: partnership and 
alliance for democracy and a dynamic market economy with countries that share 
these values; good-neighbourly relations with all neighbouring States; 
comprehensive strengthening of the Commonwealth of Independent States, 
strategic partnership with Ukraine, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan and all 
other countries created in the place of the former Soviet Union; and 
solidarity and mutually advantageous cooperation with all the members of the 
world community. 
Russia intends to act in support of United Nations efforts to address 
the twofold task of the democratization of societies and the renewal of 
international relations. This is consonant with the concluding statement of 
the summit meeting of the Security Council, with Secretary-General 
Boutros Boutros-Ghali's report "An Agenda for Peace" and with the first 
statements already made from this rostrum. Russia is ready to give practical 
support to the proposals made yesterday by George Bush, President of the 
United States. 
First of all, it is necessary to extinguish armed conflicts. 
The Russian Federation will increase its efforts to eliminate conflicts 
inherited from the past in the territory of the former USSR, bearing in mind 
the special interest and responsibility of Russia in strengthening the 
civilized principles of the United Nations and the Conference on Security and 
Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) in this part of the world. 

Russia supports the participation of the new independent States in these 
two organizations and other international forums. We welcome their 
representatives in this Hall. 
We categorically reject imperialistic ambitions, diktat and violence, 
both in the area of the former USSR and in other parts of the world. Should 
political means fail, force can and should be used to separate the warring 
sides, to protect human rights and humanitarian missions and to restore peace 
in strict conformity with the Charter of the United Nations. 
Agreements for cease-fires and for the establishment of peace-keeping 
forces, concluded with Russian participation, are already in effect in 
Ossetia, the Dniester region and Abkhazia, where Russian soldiers are carrying 
out their peace-keeping duties. Together with CSCE, we will strive to end the 
war and bring peace to Karabakh and to secure the integrity of Tajikistan and 
bring national reconciliation to that country. In all those efforts we count 
on continued active cooperation with the United Nations. 
We support efforts aimed at forcing Iraq to implement the decisions of 
the United Nations and ensuring at the same time the territorial integrity and 
the peaceful nature of that State. For that purpose, Russia has sent two 
naval vessels to the Persian Gulf. 
We also must ensure that the demands of the Security Council are 
complied with by all the Yugoslav sides and must enable them to maintain 
contact with the United Nations. A Russian infantry battalion is serving 
honourably with the United Nations forces in Yugoslavia. 
I agree with the preceding speaker concerning the need to support the 
efforts of Mr. Panic for the practical implementation of the intentions he has 
declared. 
 
Russia will continue to cooperate actively with the other permanent 
members of the Security Council and with all the parties concerned in 
order to seize the opportunity for a peaceful settlement in the Middle 
East, Cambodia, Angola and other areas of conflict. 
We have no doubt that it is the task of the United Nations to combat 
violence with force based on law, with its potential for enforcing peace. 
The Blue Helmets should take action in response even when they are fired 
upon. 
It is time to strengthen the capacity of the Security Council to 
take swift and decisive action in humanitarian emergency situations 
arising from mass violations of human rights and inter-ethnic clashes, 
including those within national borders. 

It is important to strengthen the preventive component of United Nations 
activities. This includes the establishment of hot lines to United Nations 
Headquarters, the submission of intelligence information to the 
Secretary-General and the further development of fact-finding. 
Enhanced United Nations efforts to safeguard human rights and the rights 
of national minorities are also a priority. In the past it was chiefly the 
victims of totalitarian regimes and ideologies who needed protection. What is 
increasingly needed now is to combat the aggressive nationalism that is 
emerging as the new global threat. 
The replacement of ideological intolerance with national and religious 
intolerance would threaten the world which is increasingly becoming one 
world - with rifts just as serious and with national, regional and global 
catastrophes. Democratic Russia categorically rejects any form of chauvinism, 
be it Russophobia or anti-Semitism. 
We feel special concern at the growing discriminatory practices against 
Russians, Ukrainians, Jews and all other non-indigenous nationalities in some 
of the new States that have emerged in the territory of the former USSR, 
particularly in Estonia and Latvia. A situation in which 42 per cent of the 
population of the Estonian Republic are disenfranchised is totally 
inconsistent with international law. 
We have raised and will continue to raise these issues in the United 
Nations and other forums. We have the right to do so, among other reasons, 
because the countries in question won their independence, to a substantial 
extent, through the triumph of the democrats in Russia. The practices I have 
referred to can in no way be justified by invoking the problem, inherited from 
the USSR, of the withdrawal of armed forces from the Baltic States. We are 

already working together to resolve that problem, and we intend to resolve it 
as soon as possible; however, due regard must also be given to the rights of 
those who are in military uniform. 
It would be appropriate to give thought to a joint interpretation of the 
international trusteeship system set forth in the Charter of the United 
Nations, particularly since one of its basic objectives is and I quote the 
Charter - "To encourage respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms 
for all without distinction as to race, sex, language, or religion". That 
system has brought many nations to independence. Today national minorities 
desperately need the trusteeship of the world community. 
The fate of former Soviet servicemen taken prisoner in Afghanistan 
remains one of the gravest humanitarian problems. We call upon the General 
Assembly to proclaim its support for the urgent resolution of this problem. 
The rejection of the game of "nuclear roulette" in favour of cooperation 
in the interests of strategic stability for all and with the participation of 
all States concerned is reflected in the agreements on further drastic cuts in 
strategic offensive arms and on a global defense system reached in Washington 
by the Presidents of Russia and the United States of America. 
Reaffirming its commitments under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons, the Russian Federation invites all countries that have not 
yet done so to join the Treaty as non-nuclear-weapon States. It is our belief 
that all the former Republics of the USSR, including Ukraine, Belarus and 
Kazakhstan, will do so. This step should be taken as soon as possible, since 
the entry into force of the treaty on strategic offensive arms depends on it. 

We expect that a sense of high responsibility and a readiness to reach 
compromise solutions will prevail in the decisive phase of the approval of the 
Convention on the banning of chemical weapons. 
Russia is in favour of control, including control through the United 
Nations, over international arms transfers, especially over offensive and 
highly destructive weapons. The approach taken with respect to regimes that 
disregard the standards of international law should be particularly strict. 
There is an obvious need for the development of concrete 
military-industry conversion programmes, not only through the efforts of 
individual countries but also through the combined action of the international 
community. The United Nations and its specialized agencies could play a 
pioneering role in this endeavour. In the long run, real disarmament and the 
conversion of military industries to peaceful production will make it possible 
to release additional resources for the needs of development. 
But development cannot be achieved without ensuring full political and 
economic rights and freedoms, without releasing human creative potential in a 
market environment. Russia has learned this from its own experience. 
For a successful solution of the problems of development, it is extremely 
important to strengthen the interaction between the United Nations and the 
Bretton Woods institutions. Herein lies the key to the harmonization of the 
world community's efforts in such areas as support of macroeconomic reforms 
and technical assistance and the provision of help in resolving social 
problems. Both developing and developed countries will benefit from this. 
The United Nations Conference at Rio de Janeiro reinforced the consensus 
on the need to integrate development policies and environmental protection. 

The task of renewing international relations calls for the 
rationalization of the United Nations itself and of the United Nations 
system. The desire of some States to play a more active role in the United 
Nations is quite natural. The Charter provides ample scope for this. In 
particular, the Charter permits the Security Council to establish auxiliary 
bodies in which many States would participate. We are convinced that the 
United Nations and other international organizations will play a growing role 
in regulating international relations. 
In conclusion, I should like to address you, Mr. Secretary-General. 
Russia supports your efforts to bring about the settlement of international 
crises, to improve the efficiency of the United Nations Secretariat and the 
coordination of the activities of all international agencies. 
Support of the United Nations presupposes the fulfilment of financial 
obligations to the Organization. Despite its economic difficulties, in the 
period from September of this year to March 1993 Russia will pay $130 million 
as partial payment of our arrears to the United Nations and an additional 
$30 million to other agencies. 
Your recent statements in Moscow, Mr. Secretary-General, have confirmed 
the similarity of our vision of the great future of the United Nations. 
Forty-seven years ago I was a young man of 21, and, 
like thousands of others of my generation, I had gone off to war to help keep 
freedom alive. Forty-seven years ago this month the war was finally over, and 
I was looking forward to peace and the chance to begin my life in earnest: 
1945 marked a moment of promise, not just for me, but for all of mankind. A 
great struggle against dictatorship had been fought and won. Across the 
globe, we all looked forward to a future free of war, a world where we might 
raise our children in peace and freedom, and this institution, the United 
Nations, born amidst the ashes of war, embodied those hopes and dreams like no 
other. 
But the hopes and dreams of 1945 remained unfulfilled: communist 
imperialism divided the world in two, our hopes for peace and our dreams of 
freedom were frozen in the grip of cold war, and, instead of finding a common 
ground, we found ourselves at Ground Zero. Instead of living on Churchill's 
The President returned to the Chair. 

"broad, sunlit uplands", millions found that there was, as Arthur Koestler so 
chillingly wrote, "Darkness at Noon". Instead of uniting the nations, this 
body became a forum for distrust and division among nations and, in a cruel 
irony, the United Nations, created to free the world of conflict, itself 
became conflict's captive. 
I too lived through those disputes; I sat where you sit, proudly so; I 
served in this Assembly and I saw, in my time, the consequences of the cold 
war's hot words on the higher missions of the United Nations. Now, 47 years 
later, we stand at the end of another war, the cold war, and our hopes and 
dreams have awakened again. Driven by its own internal contradictions and 
banished by the peoples' undying thirst for freedom, imperial communism has 
collapsed in its birthplace, and today Russia has awakened democratic, 
independent and free; the Baltic States are free; and so too are Ukraine, 
Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan and the other independent States joining the 
nations of Central and Eastern Europe in freedom. 
The fear of nuclear Armageddon between the super-Powers has vanished, and 
we are proud to have done our part to ensure that our schoolchildren do not 
have to practise hiding under their desks for fear of nuclear attack, as the 
generation before them did. I am proud also to salute the courageous leaders 
with nuclear responsibilities Presidents Yeltsin, Kravchuk, Nazarbayev, 
Shushkevich who joined me in ending the super-Power stand-off that risked 
nuclear nightmare. This is the first General Assembly session to seat you as 
truly independent and free nations, and to you and the leaders of the other 
independent States, I say welcome home: we are now truly united nations. 

With the cold war's end, I believe we have a unique opportunity to go 
beyond artificial divisions of a first, second and third world to forge 
instead a genuine, global community of free and sovereign nations, a community 
built on respect for principle, on peaceful settlement of disputes, on 
fundamental human rights and on the twin pillars of freedom: democracy and 
free markets. Already, the United Nations, especially the Security Council, 
has done much to fulfil its original mission and to build this global 
community. 
United Nations leadership has been critical in resolving conflicts and 
brokering peace the entire world over, but securing democracy and securing the 
peace in the century ahead will be no simple task. Imperial communism may 
have been vanquished, but that does not end the challenges of our age, 
challenges that must be overcome if we are finally to end the divisions 
between East and West, North and South, that fuel strife and strain and 
conflict and war. 
As we support the historic growth of democracy around the world, I 
believe the community of nations and the United Nations face three critical, 
interrelated challenges as we enter the twenty-first century. 
First, we face the political challenge of keeping today's peace and 
preventing tomorrow's wars. As we see daily in Bosnia, Somalia and Cambodia, 
everywhere conflict claims innocent lives; the need for enhanced peace-keeping 
capabilities has never been greater; the conflicts we must deal with have 
never been more intractable, the costs of conflict higher. 
Second, we face the strategic challenge of the proliferation of weapons 
of mass destruction, truly the fastest growing security challenge to 
international peace and order. 

Third, we face the common economic challenge of promoting prosperity for 
all, of strengthening an open, growth-oriented, free-market international 
economic order while safeguarding the environment. 
Meeting these challenges will require us to strengthen our collective 
engagement; it will require us to transform our collective institutions; and, 
above all, it will require that each of us look seriously at our own 
Government and how we conduct our international affairs. We too must change 
our institutions and our practices if we are to make a new world of the 
promises of today, if we are to secure a twenty-first century peace. 
 
With you today I would like to discuss these three challenges: 
peace-keeping, proliferation and prosperity. And I should like to use this 
opportunity to begin to sketch how I believe the international community can 
work together to meet these three challenges and how the United States is 
changing its institutions and policies to catalyze this effort. 
Let me begin with peace-keeping. The United Nations has a long and 
distinguished history of peace-keeping and humanitarian relief. From Cyprus 
and Lebanon, to Cambodia and Croatia, the blue beret has become a symbol of 
hope amid all that hostility. And the United Nations has long played a 
central role in preventing conflicts from turning into wars, and strengthening 
peace-keeping capabilities can help buttress these diplomatic efforts. But, 
as much as the United Nations has done, it can do much more. 
Peace-keepers are stretched to the limit while the demands for their 
services increase by the day. The need for monitoring and preventive 
peace-keeping putting people on the ground before the fighting starts - may 
become especially critical in volatile regions. This is especially the case 
because of the rapid and turbulent change that continues to shake Eastern 
Europe and Eurasia. Across the lands that once were imprisoned behind an iron 
curtain, peoples are reasserting their historical identities that were frozen 
in communism's catacomb. 
Where this is taking place in a democratic manner with tolerance and 
civility and respect for fundamental human rights and freedoms, this new 
democratic nationalism is all to the good. But, unfortunately, we need only 
look to the bloody battles raging in places such as the former Yugoslavia to 
see the dangers of ethnic violence. This is the greatest threat to the 
democratic peace we hope to build with Eastern Europe, with Russia and 
 
Eurasia, even more than economic deprivation. We fully support the efforts of 
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the Conference on Security and 
Cooperation in Europe (CSCE), the Western European Union (WEU), the 
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) and other competent regional 
organizations to develop peace-keeping capabilities. 
We are convinced, however, that enhanced United Nations capabilities are 
a necessary complement to these regional efforts, not just in Europe and 
Eurasia, but across the globe. 
I welcome the Secretary-General's call for a new agenda to strengthen the 
ability of the United Nations to prevent, contain and resolve conflicts across 
the globe. Today I call upon all Members to join me in taking bold steps to 
advance that agenda. I will therefore be discussing with my colleagues the 
merits of a special meeting of the Security Council to discuss the 
Secretary-General's proposals and to develop concrete responses in five key 
areas. 
First, robust peace-keeping requires men and equipment that only Member 
States can provide. Nations should develop and train military units for 
possible peace-keeping operations and humanitarian relief and these forces 
must be available on short notice at the request of the Security Council and 
with the approval, of course, of the Governments providing it. 
Secondly, if multinational units are to work together, they must train 
together. Many nations for example, Fiji, Norway, Canada and Finland have 
a long history of peace-keeping and we can all tap into that experience as we 
train for expanded operations. Effective multinational action will also 
require coordinated command and control and inter-operability of both 
equipment and communications. Multinational planning, training, field 

exercises will be needed. Those efforts should link up with regional 
organizations. 
Thirdly, we also need to provide adequate logistical support for 
peace-keeping and humanitarian operations. Member States should designate 
stockpiles of resources necessary to meet humanitarian emergencies, including 
famines, floods and civil disturbances. This will save valuable time in a 
crisis. 
Fourthly, we will need to develop planning, crisis management and 
intelligence capabilities for peace-keeping and humanitarian operations. 
Fifthly, we must ensure adequate equitable financing for United Nations 
and associated peace-keeping efforts. 
As I said, we must change our national institutions if we are to change 
our international relations. So let me assure you that the United States is 
ready to do its part to strengthen world peace by strengthening international 
peace-keeping. 
For decades, the American military has served as a stabilizing presence 
around the globe. And I want to draw on our extensive experience in winning 
wars, in keeping the peace, to support United Nations peace-keeping. I have 
directed the United States Secretary of Defense to place a new emphasis on 
peace-keeping. Because of peace-keeping's growing importance as a mission for 
the United States military, we will emphasize training of combat, engineering 
and logistical units for the full range of peace-keeping and humanitarian 
activities and we will work with the United Nations to best employ our 
considerable lift, logistics, communications and intelligence capabilities to 
support peace-keeping operations. And we will offer our capabilities for 
joint simulations and exercises to strengthen our ability to undertake joint 
peace-keeping operations. 

There is room for all countries, large and small, and I hope all will 
play a part. 
Member States, as always, must retain the final decision on the use of 
their troops, of course. But we must develop our ability to coordinate 
peace-keeping efforts so that we can mobilize quickly when a threat to peace 
arises or when people in need look to the world for help. 
I have further directed the establishment of a permanent peace-keeping 
curriculum in United States military schools. Training, plainly, is a key 
element. The United States is prepared to make available our bases and 
facilities for multinational training and field exercises. One such base, 
nearby, with facilities is Fort Dix. America used these bases to win the cold 
war and today, with that war over, they can help build a lasting peace. 
The United States is willing to provide our military expertise to the 
United Nations to help the United Nations strengthen its planning and 
operations for peace-keeping, and we will also broaden American support for 
monitoring, verification, reconnaissance and other requirements of United 
Nations peace-keeping or humanitarian assistance operations. 
And, finally, the United States will review how we fund peace-keeping and 
explore new ways to ensure adequate American financial support for United 
Nations peace-keeping and United Nations humanitarian activities. I do 
believe that we must think differently about how we ensure and pay for our 
security in this new era. 
While the cold war may have ended, the super-Power nuclear arms 
competition, regional competition, weapons of mass destruction continue. Over 
20 countries have, or are developing, nuclear, chemical or biological weapons 
 
and the means to deliver them. At a time when the United States and its 
former adversaries are engaged in deep, historic cuts in our nuclear arsenals, 
our children and grandchildren will never forgive us if we allow new and 
unstable nuclear stand-offs to develop around the world. 

We believe the Security Council should become a key forum for 
non-proliferation enforcement. The Security Council should make clear its 
intention to stem proliferation and sanction proliferators. Reaffirming 
assurances made at the time the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons was negotiated, I propose that the Security Council reassure the 
non-nuclear States that it will seek immediate action to provide assistance, 
in accordance with the Charter, to any any non-nuclear-weapon State party to 
the non-proliferation Treaty that is a victim of an act of aggression or an 
object of threat of aggression involving nuclear weapons. 
I also call for the indefinite renewal of the nuclear non-proliferation 
Treaty when it is reviewed in 1995. I believe we must explore ways we can 
strengthen linkages between the suppliers "clubs", the nuclear-suppliers 
group, the Australia Group, the missile-technology control regime and United 
Nations specialized agencies. 
Here I would like to note the productive efforts of the United Nations 
Special Commission (UNSCOM) to dismantle the Iraqi weapons-of-mass-destruction 
programme, and the continuing good work of the International Atomic Energy 
Agency (IAEA). But as the United Nations organizations adapt to stop 
proliferation, so too must every Member State change its structures to advance 
our non-proliferation goals. 
In that spirit I want today to announce my intention to work with the 
United States Congress to redirect the United States Arms Control and 
Disarmament Agency (ACDA) to refocus its talents on providing technical 
support for non-proliferation, weapons monitoring and destruction, and global 
defence conversion. Under the direction of the Secretary of State, ACDA 

should be used not only in completing the traditional arms-control agenda but, 
just as importantly, in providing technical assistance on our new security 
agenda. 
Even as we work to prevent proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, 
we must be realistic and guard ourselves against proliferation that is already 
taking place. Therefore, we are working towards a cooperative system for 
defence against limited ballistic missile attacks. We fully intend to have 
other nations participate in this global protection system. 
While expanded peace-keeping capabilities and improved non-proliferation 
efforts will be critical for building an enduring peace, shared economic 
growth is the long-term foundation for a brighter future well into the next 
century. That is why I stated yesterday, during a moment of international 
uncertainty, that the United States would be strongly engaged with its global 
partners in building a global economic, financial and trading structure for 
this new era. 
At the same time, I urged that our global responsibilities lead us to 
examine ways to strengthen the Group of Seven (G-7) coordination process, and 
I affirmed America's support for a European integration that opens markets and 
enhances Europe's capability to be our partner in the great challenges that we 
face in this new era. While the exact form of integration is, of course, for 
Europeans to determine, we will stand by them. 
Economic growth is not a zero-sum process. All of us will benefit from 
the expanded trade and investment that comes from a vibrant, growing world 
economy. To ensure that the benefits of this growth are sustained and shared 
by all, fair and open competition should be the fuel for the global economic 

engine. That is why the United States wants to complete the Uruguay Round of 
the negotiations within the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) as 
soon as possible, and to create a network of free-trade agreements, beginning 
with the North American Free Trade Agreement. 
At the same time, we need to recognize that we have a shared 
responsibility to foster and support the free-market reforms necessary to 
build growing economies and vibrant democracies in the developing world and in 
the new democratic States. This should be done by promoting the private 
sector to build these new economies, not by fostering dependency with 
traditional Government-to-Government foreign aid. 
After the Second World War, foreign assistance often served as a weapon 
in the cold war. Obviously, we will still use critical foreign-assistance 
funds to meet legitimate security needs. And, as our humanitarian operations 
in Somalia and northern Iraq, Bosnia and the former Soviet Union will testify, 
we will continue our robust humanitarian assistance efforts to help those 
suffering from man-made and natural disasters. 
But foreign aid as we have known it needs to be transformed. The notion 
of the handout to less developed countries needs to give way to cooperation 
and mutually productive economic relationships. We know this: the more a 
nation relies on the private sector and free markets, the higher its rate of 
growth; the more open to trade it is, the higher its rate of growth; and the 
better a country's investment climate, the higher its rate of growth. 
To move from what I would call aid-dependency to economic partnership, we 
propose to alter fundamentally the focus of United States assistance 
programmes to building strong, independent economies that can become 

contributors to a healthy, growing global economy. That means that our new 
emphasis should be on building economic partnerships among our private sectors 
that will promote prosperity at home, and abroad also. Working with our 
Congress I will propose a top-to-bottom overhaul of our institutions that plan 
and administer foreign assistance, drastically reducing the bureaucracy that 
has built up around Government-based programmes, streamlining our delivery 
systems and strengthening support for private-sector development and economic 
reform. 
The Agency for International Development (AID), another institution born 
during the cold war, needs to be fundamentally and radically overhauled. 
Promoting economic security, opportunity and competitiveness will become a 
primary mission of the State Department. Our assistance efforts should not be 
charity. On the contrary, they should promote mutual prosperity. Therefore, 
using existing foreign-affairs resources, I will propose creating a $1 billion 
growth fund. The fund will provide grants and credits to support United 
States businesses in providing expertise, goods and services desperately 
needed in countries undertaking economic restructuring. 
I will also support significantly increasing the programmes of the 
Export-Import Bank to ensure that United States products and technology 
promote investment in world-wide economic growth. 
The United States will work with its global partners, especially the G-7 
nations, to enhance global growth at this key point in world history, as we 
end one era and begin another. 
None of us can afford insular policies. Each of us must contribute, 
through greater coordinated action, to building  stronger world economy. 

I realize that what I have outlined today is an ambitious agenda. But we 
live in remarkable times: times when empires collapse, ideologies dissolve 
and walls crumble; times when change can come so fast that we sometimes forget 
how far and how fast we have progressed in achieving our hopes for a global 
community of democratic nations. 

And in the face of today's changes, with the loss of so much that was 
familiar and predictable, there is now a great temptation for people 
everywhere to turn inward and to build walls around themselves walls against 
trade, walls against people, walls against ideas and investment, walls against 
anything at all that appears new and different. 
As the Berlin Wall fell, these walls too must fall. They must fall 
because we cannot separate our fate from that of others. Our peace is so 
interconnected, our security so intertwined, our prosperity so interdependent, 
that to turn inward and retreat from the world is to invite disaster and 
defeat. 
At the threshold of a new century we can truly say a more peaceful, more 
secure, more prosperous future beckons to us. For the sake of our children 
and our grandchildren, for the sake of those who perished during the cold war 
and for the sake of every man, woman and child who kept freedom's flame alive 
even during the darkest noon, let us pledge ourselves to make that future 
real, and let us pledge ourselves to fulfil the promise of a truly United 
Nations. 
Thank you and may God bless you all. 
May I begin 
by warmly congratulating you, Sir, on your election to the presidency of the 
current session of the United Nations General Assembly. I believe that, given 
your talent and experience, you will guide this session to a successful 
completion of the noble mission entrusted to it by the Charter of the United 
Nations. I would also like to express my appreciation and thanks to your 
predecessor, Mr. Shihabi, for the contribution he made to accomplishing the 
tasks of the last session. 
I would like to take this opportunity to extend my warm welcome and 
congratulations to the 13 States that have been admitted to the United Nations 
this year: the Republic of Armenia, the Azerbaijani Republic, the Republic of 
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Republic of Croatia, the Republic of Georgia, the 
Republic of Kazakhstan, the Republic of Kyrgyzstan, the Republic of Moldova, 
the Republic of San Marino, the Republic of Slovenia, the Republic of 
Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and the Republic of Uzbekistan. 
Since the last session of the General Assembly, profound changes have 
taken place in the world, with events of major consequences occurring one 
after another, from East to West and North to South. The international 
community has finally shaken off the old pattern whose main feature was the 
confrontation between the two military blocs. The world has now entered a new 
historical phase of development towards multipolarity. 
We in China have a saying: "Past experience can serve as a guide for the 
present". The tortuous course that mankind has traversed in this century, 
particularly since the end of the Second World War, has revealed a historical 
truth: any Power, however strong it may be, is bound to decline if it goes 
against the people's will for peace and development. It has always been a 
shared aspiration and objective of the people of all countries to work for 
world peace, national stability, social progress, economic growth and a better 
life. This is a historical trend which no force can resist. 
The genuine peace that the people of the world have longed for has not 
come with the end of the cold war. On the contrary, the world remains uneasy, 
with new problems added to the old ones and armed conflicts erupting one after 
another as a result of disrupted equilibrium. Hegemonism and power politics 
continue to exist. The attempt of some big Powers to control developing 
countries politically and economically has become more and more obvious. 
Long-hidden ethnic conflicts have surfaced with a vengeance and the 
North-South contradictions have further intensified. The road to peace and 
development before the people of the world is covered with thorns. 
As we can all see, a dangerous "seismic belt" extending from the Balkans 
to the Caucasus and to Central Asia is taking shape. In some regions, people 
have once again been plunged into war and turmoil, with millions of refugees 
fleeing in all directions. These conflicts have occurred in those areas where 
different ethnic groups have traditionally lived together, with age-old 
antagonisms suddenly coming to the surface under the new situation. These 
conflicts are interwoven with historical feuds, territorial disputes, 
political rivalries, clashes of economic interests, and religious intolerance. 
They have been further complicated by the involvement of outside forces. 
In our view, force should not be used even as a last resort in the search 
of the settlement of a problem, however complicated it may be. The 
fundamental solution lies in a reconciliation of various ethnic groups through 
dialogues on an equal footing and peaceful negotiations. We sincerely hope 
that the parties' to the conflicts will, proceeding from the overriding 
interest of maintaining the peace and in the interests of the people, abandon 
the threat or use of force and seek a political settlement of their conflicts 
through friendly consultations and negotiations on an equal footing in the 
spirit of mutual respect, good-neighbourliness and common progress. 
We support the United Nations in its positive efforts to avoid an 
escalation of conflicts and seek peaceful settlements. Outside intervention 
and mediation can be resorted to when necessary, provided that they are based 
on a strict observance of the principles and objectives of the United Nations 
Charter and the basic norms of international law. Only mediation or 
intervention in such a manner can contribute to a peaceful settlement of 
conflicts, the stability and unity of sovereign States, and the amicable 
coexistence of different ethnic groups. 
The Middle East peace process has taken a favourable turn thanks to the 
joint efforts of the Arab countries and Israel and the support of the rest of 
the international community. We hope that the parties concerned will seize 
the opportunity, take a flexible and practical approach, and conduct serious 
negotiations in order to remove obstacles and seek a comprehensive and fair 
solution to the Middle East issue, including the restoration of the national 
rights of the Palestinian people on the basis of the relevant United Nations 
Security Council resolutions. 
The Asia-Pacific region has enjoyed political stability and a sustained 
economic growth. In Cambodia, the striving for peace and rehabilitation has 
become the order of the day. Political settlement of the Cambodian issue is 
irreversible, though difficulties and twists and turns are hardly avoidable. 
The implementation of the Paris Agreements in their totality requires not only 
determination but also patience. In Afghanistan, the resistance forces have 
taken control. We hope they will end the bloodshed so as to create suitable 
conditions for the election. On the Korean peninsula, the North and the South 
have intensified their dialogue, resulting in a further relaxation of tension 
there. The recent establishment of diplomatic relations between China and the 
Republic of Korea will have a far-reaching impact on stability and peace in 
North-East Asia. 
The turbulent and complicated international situation has further 
awakened countries and peoples of the world to the urgency and necessity of 
establishing a new international order. The world of the future should not be 
a place where only the interests and privileges of big Powers or power groups 
are protected, nor a place where international affairs are monopolized and 
manipulated by the big, strong, and wealthy countries only. The old world 
order based on unequal relationships no longer works. 
A new international order should be based on the universal observance of 
the five principles of mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial 
integrity, mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each other's internal 
affairs, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence. This is in 
conformity with the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter. 
All countries, big or small, strong or weak, rich or poor, should have the 
right to choose a social system and a road to development suited to their 
actual conditions. Countries should respect each other, treat each other as 
equals, and resolve their disputes through peaceful negotiations. Only when 
all countries undertake to observe these principles can there be genuine 
democracy in international relations. We are convinced that as the world 
moves towards multipolarity, an equitable and rational international order of 
peace and stability will come into being. 
The United States and the former Soviet Union or Russia have reached some 
new agreements on nuclear-arms reduction in recent years. These agreements 
have been well-received by the international community, which hopes that they 
will be earnestly implemented by the countries concerned. At the same time, 
it is clear to people that even after the aforementioned disarmament 
agreements are fully implemented, the major military Powers will still be in 
possession of the largest arsenals of the most sophisticated nuclear and other 
high-tech weapons, and the capabilities to develop space weapons. 
After years of negotiations, the chemical weapons convention has finally 
been concluded. It has laid an international legal basis for a world-wide 
elimination of such weapons of mass destruction. Though some of its 
provisions are not fair and balanced, the purposes and objectives defined in 
the convention have nonetheless won the unanimous endorsement and support of 
the international community. We hope that these purposes and objectives will 
be observed and carried out effectively in the interest of the security of all 
countries. 
China has all along stood for the complete prohibition and thorough 
destruction of all weapons of mass destruction. Pending the realization of 
this goal, it is necessary for the international community to take, as a 
transitional step, appropriate measures to prevent the proliferation of 
weapons of mass destruction in the interest of regional and world security and 
stability. We maintain that international non-proliferation should be pursued 
in a fair, reasonable, comprehensive and balanced manner without prejudice to 
the legitimate security interests of any country, to its socio-economic 
development, or to international cooperation in the application of science 
and technology for peaceful purposes. 
We oppose the attempt of a country to interfere in and obstruct the 
normal cooperation between sovereign States under the pretext of preventing 
arms proliferation. We strongly condemn the blatant violation of one's own 
commitment to an international agreement by selling large amounts of advanced 
weapons and equipment, in gross interference in another country's internal 
affairs. 
We would like to make the following suggestions in the field of 
disarmament and arms control. First, all nuclear-weapon States should 
undertake not to be the first to use nuclear weapons or to resort to the 
threat or use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear weapon States in any 
circumstances whatsoever. Secondly, all nuclear-weapon States should support 
proposals for the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones, respect the 
status of the existing nuclear-weapon-free zones, and undertake corresponding 
obligations. Those countries which have deployed nuclear weapons abroad 
should withdraw all of them to their own territories. Thirdly, all countries 
with space capabilities should follow the principle of the peaceful use of 
space and immediately stop their research, testing, production, and deployment 
of space weapons and refrain from extending their weapons systems into space. 
In today's world, the gulf between the rich and the poor is further 
widening. The population of the richest countries and that of the poorest 
countries each accounts for 20 per cent of the world's total, but their income 
gap has grown wider, from 30-fold in the 1960s to 90-fold in the 1990s. The 
question of North-South relations has become more acute. Development and 
peace are matters of equal urgency and importance. 
The sluggish growth of the world economy, unequal and unfair trade, the 
plummeting prices of many primary products and crushing debt burdens are among 
the unfavourable external conditions which have continued to place severe 
constraints on the economic development of developing countries. Quite a few 
of them have suffered a constant drop in the growth rate of their per capita 
gross national product (GNP). Some have even registered negative economic 
growth rates. Their terms of trade continue to deteriorate, which hampers 
their export efforts. They have found it even more difficult to attract 
foreign investment and technology. 
Peace and development are mutually supportive. They can promote or 
hinder each other, but they cannot supersede each other. It is impossible to 
preserve world peace without development. There can hardly be durable 
stability and prosperity in the world in the absence of economic development 
and social progress in developing countries. A protracted economic stagnation 
or even decline in developing countries will also affect further economic 
growth in developed countries. 
Developing countries should mainly rely on themselves to achieve real 
economic growth. While restructuring their economies to speed up their 
economic development, many of them are reviewing their experience and 
earnestly exploring paths of development suited to their national conditions. 
No one can deny that the old international economic order, being 
irrational and inequitable, is an important external cause of the poverty and 
backwardness of developing countries. First and foremost, developed countries 
have the responsibility and obligation to take effective measures, including 
the following. 
First, developed countries should set aside 0.7 per cent of their GNP for 
assistance to developing countries in accordance with the relevant resolutions 
of the United Nations; increase official development assistance, and address 
the debt question and work to rectify the anomaly of the flight of capital 
from developing to developed countries. 
Secondly, they should observe the basic principles of the generalized 
system of preferences devised by the United Nations Conference on Trade and 
Development; dismantle discriminatory trade barriers; further open their 
markets to developing countries; and endeavour to keep the prices of primary 
products at rational levels. 
Thirdly, they should resume and increase official and non-governmental 
technical assistance and the concessional transfer of technology to developing 
countries in order gradually to narrow the North-South gap in science and 
technology and to facilitate the economic restructuring and technological 
progress of developing countries. 
It must be stressed that political stability is an important prerequisite 
for the economic growth of developing countries. Assistance for the purpose 
of applying pressure on the recipient countries will cause turbulence and 
instability in these countries, which will be even more detrimental to their 
economic development. 
It is obviously one-sided and harmful to make irresponsible comments 
about the human rights situation in developing countries in disregard of the 
differences in 'historical backgrounds and cultural traditions as well as the 
actual conditions in these countries. For the people of developing countries, 
the right to subsistence and the right to development are undoubtedly the 
fundamental and the most important human rights of all. In those areas hit by 
severe natural disasters year after year, people are starving; in war-ridden 
areas, millions are turned into refugees. How can people living in such 
conditions enjoy human rights? 
Establishing an equitable and rational new international economic order 
based on equality and mutual benefit will be a reliable guarantee of balanced, 
healthy and sustained growth in the world economy, and an important 
precondition for gradually narrowing the North-South gap as well. The 
achievement of this goal calls for serious dialogue between the North and the 
South and joint efforts by both. As long as the two sides adopt a positive 
approach, seek common ground on major issues while putting aside minor 
differences, seek mutual benefit and actively look for ways to cooperate 
effectively, the North-South dialogue will make headway. 
The important documents adopted at the United Nations Conference on 
Environment and Development and the Conventions on climate change and 
biological diversity open for signature during the Conference reflect the 
consensus and understanding that countries at different stages of development 
have reached on environmental protection and economic development. We hope 
that the obligations and rights in respect of environmental protection will be 
fulfilled or exercised fully, and that global cooperation in this field will 
provide scope for improved North-South relations. 
The Chinese Government actively supports the proposals for a World Summit 
for Social Development, under United Nations auspices. It warmly welcomes the 
convocation of the fourth World Conference on Women, to be held in Beijing in 
September 1995. The Chinese organization committee was set up in August this 
year, and China will begin preparing in earnest to ensure that arrangements 
for the conference in Beijing run smoothly. 
The historic changes in the international situation have also presented 
formidable challenges to the United Nations. The people of the world have 
high expectations of this world Organization. How the United Nations will 
adapt itself to the new international situation, address major international 
issues in a more positive, balanced, just and reasonable manner, promote world 
peace and development and play its role in the efforts to establish a new 
world order has become a major concern of the international community. 
The Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, has submitted a 
detailed and extensive mid-year report (A/47/277) on the role of the United 
Nations in maintaining international peace, which merits our careful study. 
We appreciate his efforts. 
The reform of the United Nations is now on the agenda, and its success 
depends on sound principles and on choosing the right direction. We should 
like to offer for consideration the following thoughts, which we think conform 
to the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter. 
The reform should contribute to maintaining the sovereignty of Member 
States. Sovereign States are the subjects of international law and form the 
basis of the United Nations. Safeguarding State sovereignty should be a 
fundamental principle of a new world order. 
The reform should facilitate the peaceful settlement of international 
conflicts. The United Nations should be an international organization 
dedicated to preserving peace and promoting cooperation. Only when it abides 
by the basic norms governing international relations, persists in settling all 
international disputes through peaceful means and opposes the threat or use of 
force will the United Nations be able to maintain international peace and 
security. The arbitrary use of military intervention by the United Nations or 
the indiscriminate and wilful imposition of mandatory measures on Member 
States would not be helpful to the resolution of conflicts, and, worse still, 
would impair the credibility and role of the United Nations. 
The reform should contribute to the balanced, healthy and sustained 
economic development of countries. Economic development is a major concern of 
the vast majority of the 179 States Members of the United Nations. In today's 
world, the North-South economic gap keeps widening, and the gulf between rich 
and poor is getting greater. The United Nations should attach great 
importance to the question of development, as it does to the settlement of 
international conflicts and crises. Only by so doing can it win support from 
the overwhelming majority of Member States. 
The reform should embody the basic principles of democracy, justice, 
objectivity, rationality, efficiency and balance of interests. It is not a 
matter that concerns solely a few big Powers, nor only the strong and the 
rich. The balanced approach should not be discarded in disregard of the 
reality. The reform should serve the general objective of establishing an 
equitable and rational new world order of peace and stability. The reform 
efforts will not receive understanding and support from Member States unless 
their opinions on this matter are earnestly sought and discussed, and studied 
fully and thoroughly. 
From 1981 to 1990 China's GNP grew at an average annual rate of 
8.9 per cent. In the 1980s significant changes took place in China. We enjoy 
political stability, economic prosperity, national unity and harmony. The 
Chinese people are enjoying their lives and work. 
Since the beginning of the 1990s people in China have been working hard 
to accelerate economic development and the reform and opening-up programme. 
Spurred by Deng Xiaoping's remarks at the beginning of the year, this 
programme and economic development have entered a new phase. The GNP growth 
rate this year is projected to reach and even exceed 9 per cent. China's 
economy has great vitality and its prospects are bright. 
China has expanded its open areas. As a result, a new pattern of general 
opening up has gradually taken shape, extending from coastal to border areas, 
from areas along the Yangtze river to the provincial capitals. China has 
further expanded the scale on which it can absorb foreign investment. In the 
first half of this year contracted foreign investment reached $14.6 billion, 
2.2 times what it was in the same period last year. During the same period 
China's imports and exports reached $33.06 billion and $35.61 billion 
respectively, up 23.4 per cent and 17.3 per cent over the same period last 
year. The total volume of foreign trade for the year is expected to exceed 
$150 billion. 
China's reform and opening-up programme is by no means a matter of 
expediency; rather, it is a long-term strategy, for it conforms to the popular 
will and benefits the people. Therefore, it enjoys their support and is bound 
to succeed. China is a force working steadfastly for world peace; its 
political stability and the success of its reform and opening up will 
contribute significantly to peace and development in Asia and the world at 
large. China will, as always, support the United Nations in its constructive 
efforts to promote peace and development. It will, together with the 
Governments and peoples of other countries, work for the establishment of a 
new world order conducive to world peace and common development. In electing you to your high office last week, Mr. President, 
the General Assembly also identified itself with the victory of freedom and 
democracy throughout Europe. I should like to congratulate you on this and 
greet you as the representative of a country with which we have a close and 
long-standing friendship. 
For you, Mr. Secretary-General, this is the first session of the General 
Assembly since you took office. For the determination and energy with which 
you have set about the huge tasks ahead you deserve the appreciation of us all. 
I extend a special welcome to the representatives of those countries that 
have been admitted to our Organization since the last session of the General 
Assembly. 
The world breathed a sigh of relief when the East-West confrontation 
ended at long last. There was an almost tangible euphoria of peace. Since 
then we have come back down to earth. Freedom has opened the door not only to 

historic opportunities but, unfortunately, to the old demons as well: blind 
nationalism and hegemonic aspirations, xenophobia and religious fanaticism. 
In this process, the dramatic changes to the political map are far from having 
settled down. The impact of the quake cannot yet be fully assessed, nor can 
we rule out further tremors. But despite all our new problems we must not 
forget that hardly any previous generation had such opportunities to live in 
peace, harmony and prosperity with its neighbours. We can therefore look to 
the future with confidence. 
And this opportunity extends beyond Europe. The termination of the 
East-West conflict has paved the way for the settlement of conflicts in the 
southern hemisphere as well, conflicts which for decades seemed insoluble. In 
the Middle East, in southern Africa and in Cambodia the parties involved are 
moving towards each other in a manner that would have been inconceivable in 
the days of the ideological proxy wars. 
Thus my message is: let us continue to be guided by the vision of a 
better, a more equitable world. With great perseverance, we have ended the 
East-West confrontation. We now need the same commitment, the same stamina, 
to build a new order. We must keep in mind the new energies that have been 
released and harness them for peace and for mankind. 
By establishing European union, the European Community is trying to seize. 
the chance of the century for the entire continent. It is the vision of a 
truly united Europe. The affirmation of this union by our French friends has 
kept alive the chance to make that vision a reality. 
 
However, Governments must also take their citizens along with them on 
this road to Europe. Europe does not grow out of treaties; it grows from the 
hearts of its citizens or it does not grow at all. Strengthening their 
confidence in Europe's common future remains the principal task of Community 
policy in the months ahead. Although the dissatisfaction, uncertainty and 
lack of understanding that have become apparent in nearly all countries cannot 
simply be dismissed, no changes to the Treaty of Maastricht are needed to 
cushion some of the effects. 
The European Community is not only a model of hope and prosperity for 
Eastern Europe; it has also developed new forms of cooperation and partnership 
with the developing countries. Its path towards integration has inspired many 
regional initiatives in Asia, Africa and Latin America. In the light of this 
global responsibility, too, Europe must come to speak with one voice here at 
the United Nations as well. 
In these times of change, when so much of what was valid yesterday is 
being challenged, when many people in the West see their standard of living, 
their personal security and their national and cultural identity threatened, 
when even more people in the East and in the South do not know today what they 
are going to live on tomorrow, when an army of refugees from war and poverty 
threatens to become a new migration, we shall have to find an answer to the 
question of whether the international community, through its new spirit of 
common endeavour following the cold war, will be capable of mastering the 
challenges of our time. 
There is doubt as to the ability of the political establishment as a 
whole to find solutions, and this applies not only to Europe. There is a huge 
gap between people's expectations and the actual achievements of Governments, 
 
both internally and externally. Governments are under an obligation to 
achieve again greater consistency between verbal commitment and action. 
The historic process of European unification is currently being 
overshadowed by something that was considered inconceivable only a few years 
ago: the return of barbarity to the European house. A war of destruction and 
expulsion is raging in Bosnia and Herzegovina, a conflict which conjures up a 
terrible past. What is happening there and we cannot be clear enough about 
this is genocide. 
The London Conference has underscored the resolve of the community of 
nations to silence the weapons. It has initiated the Geneva negotiating 
process as a common, major effort of the United Nations and the European 
Community probably one of the last chances to secure a political solution in 
the foreseeable future. The co-Chairmen of the conference, Cyrus Vance and 
Lord Owen, have our full support. Germany will play its part in this peace 
conference. But one thing must remain clear: the community of nations will 
never recognize borders that have been changed by force. Those who hope to 
receive assistance from the family of nations later must stop fighting now 
at once. 
Despite cautious signs that the Serbian leaders are perhaps after all 
becoming aware of the consequences of being outlawed by the international 
community, murder and expulsion continue. We have been shocked by the report 
of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) mission on the 
crimes and atrocities perpetrated in the detention camps. We Europeans 
especially must be honest: each day on which innocent civilians are fired at 
and prisoners tortured undermines the credibility and authority of the new 
Europe we aim to build together. 
 
War also prevails in Somalia, the Sudan, Liberia, Afghanistan, Georgia 
and Nagorno-Karabakh. Greed, anarchy and human suffering have assumed 
heart-wrenching dimensions, especially in Somalia. The community of nations, 
though late in doing so, has turned its attention to the starvation, misery 
and want of the people there. It is to be hoped that the efforts of the 
Secretary-General and his Special Representative Mr. Sahnoun will be able to 
restore peace to this sorely tried country and put it back on a sound economic 
foundation. 

What are the conclusions for the international community that must be 
drawn from this situation? Respect for international law and human rights as 
the foundation of peace and international order was one of the main lessons of 
the Second World War. That experience led to the creation of the United 
Nations and the European Community. The aim of overcoming nationalistic 
hegemony, the use of force and violations of human rights by means of 
international and supranational cooperation is still valid. Even setbacks 
must not be allowed to divert us from this just path of law and respect for 
human dignity. There is no reasonable alternative, unless we want to revert 
to the law of the jungle. 
Only if the United Nations or the regional organizations prove capable of 
protecting individual States from external aggression and minorities from 
domestic persecution will it be possible, now that the East-West conflict is 
over, to make the desired transition from policies of national hegemony and 
armament to the rule of law, collective security and economic and social 
development. 
What will this require? Firstly, the system of collective security of 
the United Nations, and of regional arrangements such as the CSCE, must be 
made a powerful instrument of a new world domestic policy. Conflicts are, 
unfortunately, emerging faster than the instruments to contain them. You, 
Mr. Secretary-General, have made extensive proposals with the correct aim of 
making the United Nations, for the first time in its history, what the Charter 
intended it to be: the world community's chief custodian of peace; and that 
aim, I say here, can be achieved. 

"Nip it in the bud!" This must be the golden rule of conflict 
prevention. Diplomatic activity must start before an acute threat to security 
occurs. Such activity must, where necessary, be reinforced by the preventive 
deployment of peace-keeping forces. This proposal has our full support. It 
must be made absolutely clear to a potential aggressor, right from the start, 
that he must expect to be confronted with the whole range of political, 
economic and military sanctions provided for in the United Nations Charter. 
Anyone who holds a protecting hand over the aggressor must expect to be 
isolated, and anyone who breaks sanctions will likewise have sanctions to 
contend with. 
Crucial for collective security is close cooperation between institutions 
such as the United Nations or the CSCE on the one hand and collective defence 
alliances such as the North Atlantic Treaty Organization or the Western 
European Union on the other. Initial steps have been taken in this direction 
in recognition of the fact that, even though the East-West conflict has ended, 
democracies must, firstly, remain capable of defending themselves and the new 
architecture must, secondly, become capable of defending itself. What is 
beyond dispute domestically must also be applied to international security if 
there is to be real order. If all other means fail, the law must, if 
necessary, be protected by military force against those who violate it. This 
is also a lesson from a past that was, for us Germans in particular, a 
disastrous one. This is anchored in the United Nations Charter. 
Germany's contribution to international stability will continue to focus 
on peacemaking, through economic cooperation, protection of human rights, 
humanitarian aid, and international measures to protect the environment. 

However, we must also establish the constitutional basis to enable us to make 
our armed forces available to the United Nations, with the approval of 
Parliament, for peace-keeping and peacemaking assignments. As a reunited and 
sovereign country we must assume all the rights and obligations of a Member of 
the United Nations to avoid any discrepancy between our verbal commitment to 
peace and human rights and our active involvement in their defence. 
The Government and the Parliament of my country will not forget that our 
history commands us to show particular restraint and judgment; but, while 
remaining aware of the past, we must derive the strength and courage to find a 
better future. 
Within the framework of its constitution Germany has already participated 
in United Nations operations for example, in Namibia, Angola, Central 
America, Cambodia and Iraq by providing logistic and organizational support, 
election observers, verification teams and medical personnel. Our relief 
flights to Sarajevo and Somalia have broadened the range of our commitment. 
The reforms you have vigorously initiated, Mr. Secretary General, have 
our full backing. We encourage you to pursue them with determination. The 
appointment of a coordinator for humanitarian assistance has shown, despite 
all the scepticism, that this Organization is capable of change. Further 
reforms should, in our view, focus principally on three areas: 
rationalization of the Secretariat, streamlining its committees and 
procedures, and strengthening the position of the Secretary-General in 
relation to the subsidiary bodies and specialized agencies. This is urgently 
needed, especially in the central area of environment and development. 

The Security Council is the guardian of international peace. Its 
efficiency and credibility are of equal importance. A debate on reforming the 
Council is under way. We Germans will not take the initiative in this 
respect, but if a change in the Council's composition is actually considered 
we too shall make known our intention to seek a permanent seat. 
Secondly, States and regional organizations must assume greater 
responsibility. The United Nations must not be overstrained: the idea that 
it can protect and feed all people afflicted by external or internal war is a 
Utopian. 
Thirdly, we must further develop the international legal system with the 
aim of further protecting mankind and nature. This can now take place in a 
process of fair partnership, free from bloc ideology. This too represents a 
great opportunity in the wake of the East-West conflict. In this process, we 
must bring out the special dimension of law: it demands participation and 
consensus. All are equal before the law. It protects the weak and 
legitimizes the use of force where force is unavoidable. 
No cultural region should try to force its own system of values on 
others. On the other hand, there is a body of human rights universally 
binding under international law which no one should seek to erode, not even on 
grounds of differing cultural traditions. This must be the central message of 
the Conference on Human Rights to be held in Vienna next year. 
Under the Nazi regime, the gravest crimes against humanity were committed 
in the name of Germany. In 1945, the Germans in the western part of our 
country had the good fortune to be able to establish a free, democratic 
society based on the rule of law. Those in the other part of Germany had to 

bear another totalitarian regime until 1990. So we Germans have well and 
truly suffered in this respect. We know from our own experience that a life 
of dignity and fulfilment is not possible without respect for human rights. I 
therefore never tire of repeating my belief that policy, including foreign 
policy, must focus on the individual. It is he who counts. It is he who must 
be protected and saved from injustice. The defence of human rights remains a 
central aim of German foreign policy. 

An effective international legal system must enable people to exercise 
their human rights, afford protection to those whose human rights have been 
violated, and consistently bring the perpetrators to account. Together with 
our partners in the European Community we call for the appointment of a High 
Commissioner for Human Rights. Those who commit genocide, those who commit 
serious violations of human rights - and this, unfortunately, is happening all 
the time all over the world - ask Amnesty International must be brought 
before an international crimes tribunal. I am gratified to note that 
Germany's proposal for such a tribunal is now receiving broad support. The 
International Law Commission should be given a mandate to draw up an 
appropriate statute. 
We shall strive to ensure that the perpetrators of atrocities, no matter 
who they are, are brought to justice. No one should be able to rest in the 
assurance that the matter will be forgotten. This is another reason why we 
need a High Commissioner for Human Rights. His investigations and other 
information should be collated in a register to serve as the basis for 
subsequent criminal proceedings. Our experience with the regime in the former 
German Democratic Republic shows that the fear of such misdeeds being recorded 
is not without effect. Violation of human rights is one of mankind's great 
scourges. We should not spare ourselves the effort needed to expose, denounce 
and prevent them. 
Although the massive East-West confrontation is a thing of the past, 
disarmament, confidence-building and the control of arms exports remain 
essential preconditions for enhancing peace. After an arms race spanning 
decades the new era has made considerable progress in the field of disarmament 
as well. 

Yet the world is still bristling with weapons. We in Europe are the 
first to have begun destroying tanks. The pacification of the North must not 
lead to the South being armed to the hilt. The developing countries do not 
need more tanks and guns but more schools and hospitals. The United Nations 
Register of Conventional Arms must be seen as the point of departure for 
reducing the present irresponsible level of international trade in weapons. 
Preventing the spread of weapons of mass destruction is the most urgent 
task in the field of disarmament today. Germany is determined to play a 
pioneering role in this respect. We are the only country in the world to have 
unilaterally and unconditionally renounced nuclear, biological and chemical 
weapons. 
The Convention imposing a global ban on chemical weapons, which was 
prepared by the Geneva Conference on Disarmament under our chairmanship, is a 
milestone along this road. I call upon all Members of the United Nations to 
signal their support of this Convention during the present session of the 
General Assembly and to sign it without delay. 
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons must be extended 
indefinitely in 1995. If we fail to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons, 
mankind will become exposed to a nuclear threat no less frightening than that 
of the cold war. We cannot put the nuclear genie back in the bottle, but we 
must keep it under strict control. This also calls for an international 
convention for the enhancement of reactor safety. 
All these are tasks enough, but the biggest of all is that of 
establishing a new partnership for development and environmental protection 
between poor and rich nations which will make the Earth a fit place for the 
present and future generations to live in. 

The world is grossly unjust. From the day of their birth countless 
people do not have the slightest chance whatsoever of living in conditions 
that could even remotely be described as worthy of the human race. About a 
billion people live in abject poverty and can neither read nor write. Almost 
20 million refugees are trying to escape from want. One fifth of the world's 
population consumes four fifths of all resources and earns 60 times as much as 
the poorest fifth. 
We in the industrialized countries, on the other hand, concerned with our 
own problems which I do not deny exist - forget that, compared with many 
regions of the third world, we live on an "island of bliss". Many of us think 
only of our entitlements, about defending our standards of living. As a 
result, we tend to forget the values of humanity and solidarity. 
Our free system in the West may have won the struggle with 
totalitarianism, but we must now prove that our economic system, our way of 
life, is able to secure lasting development in the eastern and southern 
regions of the globe as well. 
In the third world countries, on the other hand, the recognition must 
continue to grow that they cannot simply make demands on others but are 
themselves primarily responsible for keeping their house in order. The 
Jakarta Conference has confirmed the clear change of attitude in this 
respect. This is an encouraging trend. 
What is the essential requirement? It is to develop a global partnership 
and forms of coexistence in the North and the South which will ensure mutual 
survival. For this we shall have to find a reasonable middle way between the 
completely unrealistic attitude that everything must be achieved at one fell 
swoop and that of resignation, the attitude that it is already too late. 

The North must open its markets to give the weaker economies a genuine 
chance of development. By eliminating protectionism we must strengthen the 
economic foundations of those countries currently fighting for democracy and 
human rights. That is why it is so important to bring the negotiations of the 
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) to a successful conclusion. 
Stabilizing the economy of Eastern Europe and the Commonwealth of 
Independent States must not be done at the expense of development aid. 
Bringing the new democracies in the East and the developing countries into a 
global partnership together was the general objective of the economic summit 
meeting in Munich. Germany, too, has kept its word in this respect. In spite 
of our exceptional domestic situation and our enormous contribution to the 
process of economic recovery in the new democracies between Bug and 
Vladivostok, our development aid budget has continued to grow - even since 
1990. And we shall continue to provide substantial support for measures to 
bridge the poverty gap between North and South. Our offer to make Bonn the 
location for some United Nations development activities should be understood 
in this sense. 
What is required is a radical technological transformation in the fields 
of transport, energy, industrial production, housing and agriculture and a new 
generation of environment-friendly technologies. To implement the results of 
the Rio Conference there will have to be standard reduction levels for carbon 
dioxide emissions as well as effective measures for the protection of forests. 
The most difficult task is at the same time one of the most important 
that of implementing a responsible population policy. This calls for changes 
which considerably affect the rights of the individual. The first step must be 
to improve the social status of women in the developing countries. People 

have a right to determine the size of their family themselves. Family 
planning must be given greater prominence in development strategy. The 
importance of the International Conference on Population and Development 
to be held in 1994 and of the World Conference on Women scheduled for 1995 
cannot be emphasized enough. 
The help provided by the industrialized countries can never be more 
than help towards self-help. One must also draw the necessary conclusion 
from the collapse of communist ideology: totalitarianism renders a 
country incapable of development. 
In a nutshell, what is needed is a departure from short-sighted 
egoism and over-exploitation of nature towards measures to safeguard the 
future, towards more social justice, as well as a balance between ecology 
and economy. In this age of growing individual freedom we must also 
remain capable of demonstrating solidarity and showing consideration for 
the community as a whole. The responsible use of freedom is the real 
challenge at the end of this century. In order to meet this challenge, 
and for the sake of our children's future, the world - East and West, 
North and South must learn together. We must learn to survive together 
in a new world. 
No institution is more suited to be the central authority of this 
learning community than the United Nations. In 1995 it will celebrate its 
fiftieth anniversary. Let us by that date together strengthen this forum 
to make it capable of fulfilling the hopes of people all over the globe. 
Let us not forget: We, the nations, will get the world Organization we 
deserve! 

Hardly any country can have been more affected by the dramatic upheavals 
of our time and by the disparity of opportunity and risk, of hope and anxiety 
about the future, than has Germany. We have been reunited, and for that we 
are grateful very grateful. Our prime task now is to complete the internal 
unification of our nation, and this task pushes us to the limits of our 
resources. None the less, we have contributed more to the economic recovery 
of central and eastern Europe and the members of the Commonwealth of 
Independent States (CIS) than have all other countries together. 
In Europe, our liberal legislation on foreigners has enabled us to take 
in by far the largest number of asylum-seekers probably 400,000 this year; 
220,000 refugees from Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina have found refuge in 
our country. We are the biggest attraction in Europe and in the world for the 
massive social migration from East to West and from South to North. In view 
of our still-high level of unemployment and our housing shortage, especially 
in the eastern part of the country, this places an exceptional burden on the 
population. This has to be appreciated if one is to make a fair judgement of 
our people's attitude towards foreigners. 
In emphasizing this point I am not trying to tone it down. The hatred 
demonstrated and the terror perpetrated by a radical minority against 
asylum-seekers in our country brings disgrace on Germany. This I deeply 
regret, but let me add that this is not the attitude of the great majority of 
Germans towards other nationalities. In my country 6.3 million foreigners 
live harmoniously with their German neighbours. Year in, year out, the 
Germans demonstrate their solidarity with other nations through extensive 

relief campaigns, through their generous donations for the benefit of people 
in the former Soviet Union, and through their considerable aid for the Kurds 
and the starving people of Somalia. 
Germany owes its unity to the dismantling of confrontation in Europe and 
to the trust we have gained through our European policy and through our not 
having pursued a national course. We derive from this a responsibility. We 
shall continue to give our full support to European unification and global 
cooperation based on partnership, especially within the United Nations. We 
shall use all our energy in favour of human rights and against oppression, in 
favour of global solidarity and against excessive nationalism. This is the 
essence of the foreign policy of the united Germany for which I stand. 
Allow me to 
congratulate you. Sir, on your election as President of our General Assembly. 
Your outstanding abilities earned a unanimous vote, which is a tribute both to 
your country and to the example it sets in its newly regained freedom. 
Speaking from this rostrum last year, I welcomed the extraordinary winds 
of freedom which were sweeping oppressive regimes away everywhere in the 
world. I recalled the support that my country had always given to peoples' 
right to self-determination. I rejoiced at the promises of independence which 
arose on the ruins of empires. 
The distance covered since then gives us grounds for hope. While in 
Europe the barriers around blocs tumbled, in Africa the chains of apartheid 
were removed and in Asia Governments contested by their people fell, new 
sovereign entities were established. Let us therefore welcome the delegations 
of the new Member States that have joined us. 
These successes are also successes for our Organization. More than ever, 
the principles and rules of our Charter prove their immutable value; more than 
ever, let us show our commitment to them. 
I should like to turn to Mr. Boutros-Ghali and commend the example he 
sets us: the example of his energy, of his entire action focused on the aims 
of our Organization and the application of our Charter's principles. He 
succeeds someone who has brought honour to our Organization. But rarely will 
a Secretary-General have succeeded in overcoming so many crises and challenges 
in the first year of his mandate. Let us therefore thank him for his efforts, 
his imagination and his determination. 
 
In spite of freedom's victories, peace has not always been the child of 
liberation. Rivalries between neighbours, ethnic tensions and border disputes 
fan discord and foment insecurity to the point of provoking the return of war 
in all its cruelty and savagery. Yugoslavia, Liberia, Somalia: the names 
ring sadly in our ears, and the examples are, unfortunately, legion. 
Universal peace, our absolute principle, is still only an ambition. It must 
become our primary mission. 
To ensure that the paths of freedom become paths to peace everywhere, 
France proposes three lines of action: peace through the organization of 
security that is, peace-keeping operations and collective security and 
disarmament measures; peace through the affirmation of justice - that is, 
economic and social development to bring about greater fairness and equality 
among nations and peoples; peace through solidarity among States which know 
how to use their independence to establish beneficial cooperation. 
 
Let us speak first of peace through the organization of security. 
The immediate need is to halt the conflicts which are causing bloodshed 
in Europe, the border regions of Asia and Africa. They cast a sinister shadow 
over the successes of freedom and independence. The United Nations, 
strengthened by its new influence, reacted by mounting in the space of a few 
months peace-keeping operations on an unprecedented scale. Never before have 
so many men from such a large number of countries assembled under our flag, 
that of the international community. 
Stopping the expansion of a neighbour or faction, protecting populations, 
helping to deliver humanitarian aid, providing reassurance and at times 
renewing dialogue between the parties involved such are the many sensitive 
missions undertaken by the United Nations and our "Blue Helmets". 
Though peaceful, these operations are dangerous. It is not a question of 
making war; our mission is a mission of peace. The task, always the same yet 
always different, must be given all possible support at the local level and 
all available means of suitable protection and defence. 
There are cases in which we must intervene even though the cease-fire in 
question is neither complete nor lasting. There are cases in which, to impose 
respect, we must have clear rules of engagement binding on everyone. We need 
to define, for specific situations, a right of emergency, comprising measures 
for warning and protection. My country has several reasons for wanting this, 
as I am sure you will agree. Having become the leading participant in the 
peace-keeping forces, with what will soon be 6,000 men under the United 
Nations flag in former Yugoslavia, Cambodia, Lebanon, Western Sahara and 
El Salvador, France has paid a heavy price. Since the start of the year. 

eight of its sons have lost their lives, the last ones murdered in cowardly 
fashion. And they have not been the only ones. From this rostrum, I should 
like to pay a solemn tribute to all the soldiers of peace who have sacrificed 
their lives for the cause we all uphold. 
In the face of the increasing number of crises and the human tragedies 
resulting from them, our world is searching for new stability. It is adapting 
its instruments for peace and solidarity and devising others for the new 
times. It is essential that everyone be mobilized, most particularly the 
regional organizations. The Western European Union (WEU) and the North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) are in the process of shaping their 
future. The Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) is 
establishing its jurisdiction. In the wake of the Helsinki summit, France is 
now proposing to the CSCE member States the adoption of a code of conduct 
which would encompass and define the norms governing our collective security. 
This idea, which was also set out by Germany, could lead to the adoption of a 
treaty on security. France is also continuing and will continue to advocate 
establishment of a court of arbitration and conciliation to prevent conflicts. 
It is fortunate, moreover, that Chapter VIII of the Charter has at last, 
in the space of a few months, taken on its full meaning. I applaud the action 
of our Secretary-General, who has recommended precisely that the States 
members of regional organizations contribute to peace-keeping operations. His 
thinking concurred with that of the CSCE at the Helsinki summit and with that 
of France. 
Indeed, the United Nations remains the necessary recourse in all these 
instances, as the case of former Yugoslavia has shown us only too well. Our 

Organization confers universal legitimacy on peace-keeping operations. It is 
the United Nations which shoulders, if need be, the overall responsibility. 
Hence, what is at stake today is not to relieve the United Nations of its task 
but to help it perform it in the most effective manner. 
Yes, our peace mission is above all a matter of prevention: preventing 
conflicts, or preventing them from worsening and spreading. France therefore 
welcomed with keen interest the Secretary-General's proposals in his "Agenda 
for Peace". These set forth in outline form a charter for preventive 
diplomacy which is urgently needed. 
Once the Gulf War was over, the President of the French Republic 
underlined the need for new thinking. I am glad to see that this new thinking 
is now well under way and that France's proposals are being considered. I am 
also pleased that the European Community is offering specific assistance. 
I should like to confirm today, from this rostrum, France's commitment to 
make available to the Secretary-General, at any time, a contingent of 1,000 
men for a peace-keeping operation. I hope that this example will be followed, 
for our Organization must be sure that it can react quickly and forcefully as 
soon as there is a threat of a conflict or a conflict flares up. 
Reinforcement of preventive action should also encourage us to continue 
thinking about the reactivation of the United Nations Military Staff 
Committee. It is important, in any case, to strengthen the links between the 
Member States and the Secretariat Department of Peace-Keeping Operations, 
every aspect of whose work is deserving of praise. 
Preventive diplomacy, along with the development of peace-keeping 
operations, and the greater role for regional organizations: these are two 
indispensable pillars of the collective security system the world needs today. 

But there is a third one: disarmament. 
At their summit meeting on 31 January 1992, the members of the Security 
Council recalled that disarmament is one of our Organization's priorities and 
how essential it is for all Member States to fulfil the obligations they have 
undertaken with respect to arms control and disarmament itself. The progress 
achieved in two years has been spectacular: a reduction in stockpiles in 
Europe thanks to the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE) and 
the CFE 1-A; the commitment by the two super-Powers to genuine nuclear 
disarmament, which will be spread over a period of many years; and the 
convention banning chemical weapons, which for the first time will eliminate 
an entire category of weapons of mass destruction. This disarmament effort is 
accompanied for the first time by a move for transparency: all treaties are 
coupled with stringent verification procedures, and in Europe we have signed 
an "open sky" treaty providing for free over-flight. Monitoring is the mother 
of all assurances. 
But the illegal spread of these same weapons threatens to break the 
momentum for peace. The war against proliferation must be stepped up and 
waged relentlessly. In this area, as in others. United Nations decisions must 
be fully respected. New measures will no doubt be necessary, particularly 
given the risk of the uncontrolled proliferation of ballistic missiles. To 
avert the danger, let us therefore strengthen international cooperation 
without delay. 
My country has in the past put forth proposals from this rostrum to stop 
the development of an arms race in space. France will shortly propose a 
measure to enhance confidence by making it mandatory to give advance notice of 

firings of ballistic missiles and rockets carrying satellites or other space 
objects. This notification measure, if adopted, would be complemented by the 
establishment of an international centre, under United Nations auspices, 
responsible for collecting and using the data received. 

In deciding to suspend its nuclear tests until the end of 1992, France 
has shown that it is ready to help further the disarmament process. The 
suspension is temporary and its extension will be subject to reappraisal. Let 
us act so as progressively to reduce the number and power of such experiments 
in a lasting way. France has also made a contribution to disarmament by 
ratifying Additional Protocol No. 1 of the Treaty banning nuclear weapons in 
Latin America. In other parts of the world, it supports proposals to 
establish denuclearized zones, especially in South Asia, the Middle East, and 
Africa. My country is ready to provide guarantees for security, in 
conjunction with other nuclear Powers, to countries committed to establishing 
such zones. 
This year, the General Assembly begins preparing for the conference on 
extending the non-proliferation Treaty, to be held in 1995. The indefinite 
extension of this Treaty without renegotiation is an important event for 
international security. France, which is now a signatory of the 
non-proliferation Treaty, realizes that the nuclear Powers have a special 
contribution to make to this goal. France is ready to do its part. 
Collective security is the guard-rail of peace. Its development on an 
equitable basis will be the guarantee for all peoples. 
I shall now touch upon the subject of peace through greater justice by 
means of economic and social development. France has consistently said that 
there can be no lasting peace so long as some peoples are faced with extreme 
poverty and famine. There can be no peace so long as we seem to tolerate 
unacceptable discrepancies in standards of living. There can be no peace 
without hope for justice and for progress towards greater equality. 
 
Responsibility for real progress in this direction above all rests with our 
Organization and its Members, who are continuing to focus their efforts in 
this direction. 
The United Nations family in the broadest sense the World Bank, the 
International Monetary Fund, and all the specialized agencies is ready to 
assume this responsibility. However, I would like to see the nucleus of the 
family, the Secretariat, resume its proper role as a prime mover. What agency 
better than the Secretariat can appreciate and evaluate the order of 
priorities, provide the impetus, and avoid duplications and waste? 
But there can be no sustainable development in a deteriorating 
environment. The future of our planet requires ever closer solidarity between 
the North and South. Such solidarity should enable us to succeed in bringing 
about equitable development with due respect for the natural gifts of the 
Earth. The success of Rio is encouraging. But let us begin by respecting our 
commitment to devote at least 0.7 per cent of our gross national product to 
official development assistance. France will do so. It has already doubled 
the amount of its financing to the World Environment Fund and contributed to 
the establishment of a 20-billion franc programme agreed upon by the European 
Community. 
The General Assembly will shortly take up the Secretary-General's report 
on the results of the Rio Conference. It will have to decide among other 
things on the establishment of a commission for sustainable development that 
will be the central mechanism for following up the Conference's decisions. 
France, which was one of the first States to back the establishment of such a 
commission, hopes that it will convene at an early date, if possible in 1993, 
 
and that it will begin by examining how the pledges at Rio are to be 
implemented. Development and the environment remain the two major issues of 
the years ahead. 
Finally, the social dimension should not be absent from our concerns. 
The President of the French Republic, on 31 January 1992, gave his full 
support to convening a world summit on social development. Let us not forget 
that man must remain central to our concerns. It is for humanity, through the 
necessary solidarity among humans, that lasting peace will drive away the 
hatred and wars which still cast a pall over its future. 
I now turn to the subject of peace through solidarity. An important step 
forward has been taken with the progress of humanitarian activities that has 
been encouraged and supported by the United Nations. My country, which can 
take credit for having been a pioneer in this field, therefore welcomes the 
impetus which has thus been given to humanitarian action. 
The High Commissioner for Refugees, the Under-Secretary-General for 
Humanitarian Action, and United Nations forces are cooperating in providing 
assistance to populations exposed to violence, be they in Iraq, Yugoslavia, or 
Africa. A new principle of humanitarian law is taking shape which meets the 
aspiration of humanity, including the most unfortunate among its members. It 
will be to the credit of our Organization, as the end of the century 
approaches, to have helped in this decisive and historic progress transcending 
the barriers of national jurisdictions and regulations. It was precisely to 
make such a point that the President of the French Republic went to Sarajevo 
to open the way for the arrival of relief to that martyred city. To lay down 
the law in this matter is essential; to act is better still. 

France never tires of repeating that human rights are inalienable. So 
long as they are not respected, no peace is legitimate. Today still, in too 
many places, populations are terrorized and minorities maltreated. The World 
Conference on Human Rights will be one of the important events and rendezvous 
in 1993. It will be the occasion for us to reaffirm the universality of human 
rights and to strengthen the effectiveness of mechanisms to ensure 
compliance. Humanitarian action and peace-keeping are necessary functions, 
but they are needed in specific circumstances. Sooner or later, peoples will 
have to address the necessity of renewing the ties of their solidarity and 
rebuilding together a space for exchanges and cooperation. Lasting peace 
depends on this. It is clearly inconceivable that the movement for 
self-determination, which was so earnestly desired, should be judged guilty 
after the fact of the worst regressions. 
The example of Yugoslavia is on everybody's mind. Can we tolerate a 
return to the most barbaric practices, the very names of which are an insult 
to the human race: the massacre of civilians, detention camps without 
humanitarian monitoring, "ethnic cleansing"? A solution can only come about 
from two distinct measures: on one hand, the establishment of a higher 
framework for arbitration and conciliation; on the other, the protection of 
minorities. The latter, living within recognized borders, should have the 
benefit of guarantees, equitable representation being one and not the least 
such guarantee. 
 
Hopes have been raised in places where once everything still seemed to be 
impossible. I would like here to pay a tribute to men of good will, including 
Prime Minister Panic of Yugoslavia. This is yet another reason to intensify 
our efforts and help the Yugoslav peoples out of their tragic impasse. Let us 
conceive, let us decide, and then let us impose. 
In Cambodia, a long-suffering people has been making its return to the 
international community since the Paris Agreements reached under United 
Nations auspices. This progress embodies a great deal of hope for the 
Cambodian people and for Asia as a whole, and must not be jeopardized as a 
result of the refusal of the Khmer Rouge to open up its zone and demobilize 
its forces. There is always room for discussion among partners of good will. 
No one should use the pretext of his own complaints to try to block a peace 
plan which is binding on all the signatories of the Paris Agreements and, 
beyond that, upon the entire international community. 
After so many years of war in the Middle East, the prospect of a 
settlement based on justice and security for all is beginning to emerge thanks 
to the courage and clear-sightedness of all the parties. When the time comes, 
the international community, through the Security Council, will have to give 
its guarantee to a settlement. There is still a long way to go. The European 
Community is contributing to this future construction. France is doing its 
part in this. 
In South Africa, in spite of the terrible traces left by the hateful 
system of racial discrimination, the resolve to end apartheid and build a new 
open city has at last won the day. I would like to express from this rostrum 
today France's concern at the rising violence in South Africa and tell the 
leaders of that country: do not destroy the enormous hope you so recently 
inspired. 

I shall mention only briefly our old Europe, since its trials and 
tribulations are widely known, as are its bursts of hope. I can say much, 
however, in only a few words. The peoples of Europe wish to speed up their 
march toward peace, unity and prosperity. Such is the ambition affirmed by 
the signatories of the Maastricht Treaty - to create a genuine union of 
democratic States having the redoubled strength that comes from the 
combination of cultures, economic means and political resolve, as 
Mr. Douglas Hurd said so well when he spoke previously on our behalf. I am 
pleased and proud that the French people voted in favour of ratifying the 
European unity treaty. My fellow citizens chose the only future of any value, 
a future which will build peace on solidarity political, economic, and human. 
The European Union will not be inward looking, self-centred, and closed. 
On the contrary, the citizens of the European Union will be patriots of the 
old continent become the new world. They will have a sense of solidarity 
among themselves, be responsive to their brothers on the rest of the 
continent, attached to their respective nations yet firm in the face of any 
heightened national sentiments which invoke nationalism only the better to 
divide humanity and serve designs of domination and exclusion. 
The collapse of the wall which separated our continent spurred the 
efforts toward union. Today the difficulties of this Europe, separated from 
us for too long, then liberated, but weakened and troubled, are yet further 
encouragement to us to create this pole of stability on which all Europe will 
be able to build its peace and prosperity. That Europe will not be 
self-centred. When the time comes, it will welcome its neighbours from 
Central and Eastern Europe as brothers. Setting the example and opening the 
way are the first steps of true solidarity, that same solidarity which it is 
incumbent on our Organization to implement. The Union will undertake to serve 
 
the very ideals of our Charter: "We, the peoples of the United Nations" and 
now, we, the peoples of the European Union. 
I shall now conclude. It is incumbent on Governments, as it is on 
peoples, to set the example. Let us not hide from the fact that peace, like 
life, has no price but does have a cost. It is unacceptable for the United 
Nations to be foundering in an increasingly severe financial crisis. 
Certainly, our Organization has the necessary ambition to express at the 
global level that general resolve which Jean-Jacques Rousseau said is more 
than the simple addition of individual interests. But the sum total will be 
all the greater and all the more universal as the contribution of each and 
every one is significant and generous. The United Nations will have value 
only in so far as each State, in compliance with the Charter, fulfils its 
responsibilities. 
There can be no better service nor better example to humanity than to 
enable the duty of solidarity to prevail. Let us discharge this duty, first 
of all, by honouring our obligations. Peace is not a gift from heaven; it 
depends, above all, on human resolve. Thus a new era is opening for nations 
as for peoples. Today, as I speak, it is still in a state of confusion. 
Tomorrow, it will shine with the fires of justice, peace and solidarity. 
I am privileged to speak this morning on 
behalf of the European Community and its 12 member States. It is a pleasure 
to do so under your guidance, Mr. President under the guidance of a fellow 
European Foreign Minister whose country has made such great progress in recent 
years and whose foreign affairs, under your leadership, have also made a very 
substantial step forward. 
It is also a pleasure to speak in the presence of the Secretary-General. 
I do not wish to heap compliments upon you at this stage, 
Mr. Secretary-General, but I hope that the contents of what I have to say and 
what we offer you in terms of support for your practical policies you will 
accept as an adequate compliment. 
As my colleagues from other regions of the world have no doubt noticed, 
we in the European Community are conducting a lively discussion on how to 
achieve the ever closer union to which we are all committed. I am not going 
to speak about that subject today because I want to speak about Europe and the 
wider world, but I do want to emphasize on behalf of us all that so far from 
turning away from that wider world, we in Europe are increasingly active in 
it. And I want to make it clear that the European Community and its member 
States are determined to build up the place and the role of the Community and 
its 12 member States in world affairs. We intend to work together for the 
better world order in which we all believe and we intend to carry that work 
forward with greater impetus and greater effectiveness. 

Two years ago, when I first came to speak at the Assembly, the world was 
celebrating the end of the cold war, the beginnings of freedom. Everyone was 
optimistic, because everything had changed - it appeared for the better 
since I had first attended a session of the General Assembly, at the height of 
the cold war back in the 1950s. 
At the end of 1992 we see things differently. The world after the cold 
war is a better place, but it is also less stable. We have seen both a 
democratic spring and a demagogic spring, an outpouring of hope but also, in 
places, an outpouring of hate. 
International order is threatened in the short term by the unleashing of 
extreme nationalism, of challenges to the rule of law. In the medium term we 
have to reinforce the system of collective security based on the United 
Nations. Respect for good government, respect for human rights must move to 
the centre of our stage. In the long term we face the threat to international 
peace and security posed by poverty, posed by environmental degradation. We 
cannot afford to postpone action on the longer-term problems while we wrestle 
with the short-term problems. I should to look, very briefly, at each of 
these three challenges in turn. 
The short term the immediate. Nationalism, of course, is not a fault 
in itself; it is a natural instinct of man in society. We see its benign 
manifestations in many places in the former Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia, 
though even there, there are problems. Yugoslavia is the worst example of the 
bitterness of nationalism producing intolerable results. That is why both 
Europe and the United Nations have to work strenuously for peace with justice, 
for the relief of suffering in those tortured lands of the former Yugoslavia. 

Since last autumn the European Community and the United Nations have 
indeed been working closely, the United Nations leading on peace-keeping and 
the European Community on peace making through Lord Carrington's Peace 
Conference. This cooperation has helped stop the killing in, for example, the 
Serb Krajina in Croatia, where the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) 
and the European Community monitoring mission have achieved a good result. 
As conflict escalated, particularly in Bosnia, the United Nations and the 
European Community decided with wide international support to harness their 
efforts more closely together through the process launched by the London 
Conference last month. The International Conference on the former Yugoslavia 
is now working in Geneva under the co-chairmanship of Mr. Cyrus Vance for the 
United Nations and Lord Owen for the European Community. It is powered by the 
determination of the international community to bring an end to the violence 
in the former Yugoslavia. 
The Conference has two main objectives: humanitarian and political; to 
alleviate the suffering of the victims of the conflict and to bring that 
conflict permanently to an end by negotiating a political settlement. This 
is, of course, difficult work, requiring a deep understanding of the problems, 
requiring the respect and cooperation of the parties, requiring the unstinting 
support and, when necessary, the mobilizing of pressures from the 
international community. 
In this context, I believe that Prime Minister Panic's new approach shows 
great courage and I salute that courage. It offers a different way forward 
which we believe should be supported. But while the killing and suffering 
continue, as they did yesterday and as they do today, we cannot relax our 
efforts. We have to measure progress by deeds and not promises. 

We have to continue to deal with other problems left by the rolling back 
of the cold war. In Cambodia, we must not let the peace process drift. The 
Khmer Rouge have not joined phase II of the cease-fire arrangements. They are 
delaying the implementation of the comprehensive political settlement. On the 
positive side, the military deployment of the United Nations Transitional 
Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) is now fully complete and the civilian component 
is beginning to take control of the key ministries. We have to make every 
effort to hold to the timetable for elections next April. 
Some States still show a willingness to challenge the rule of 
international law and, indeed, to resort to terrorism. The invasion of Kuwait 
by Iraq was the first test of the post-cold-war era, and the liberation of 
Kuwait was one of this Organization's great successes. Unfortunately, we have 
to note that Saddam Hussein continues to defy the United Nations, that his 
Government is failing to meet Iraq's obligations under Security Council 
resolution 687 (1991), that he continues to repress his own population, 
particularly in northern and in southern Iraq. That is why pressure must 
and will - continue until he implements the resolutions of the United Nations 
in full. The message has to be that all States must comply with Security 
Council resolutions. We still wait for Libya to implement Security Council 
resolution 731 (1992). 
Those are just some of the short-term challenges that we have to meet. 
There are long-running problems which we must not forget, and one of 
particular concern to the European Community is Cyprus. This year, 
Mr. Secretary-General, you have made an energetic effort. It is not yet 
decisively successful. You are renewing the effort next month. There is a 

need for fresh impetus, it seems to us, on the key issues of territory and 
displaced persons. There must be a willingness to negotiate on all sides; 
otherwise there will be no lasting settlement. 

You have our full support, Mr. Secretary-General, as you renew your 
effort. Not only does it deserve to succeed, but it is in the crucial 
interest of Europe and the international community that it should succeed. 
In the medium term we have to build a stronger system of collective 
security. And here, everybody looks, rightly, to the United Nations. But as 
the Secretary-General has pointed out, we are in danger of loading the 
Organization with too heavy a burden: a burden of intervention and a burden, 
in effect, of partial administration. 
"Something must be done." That phrase is on many lips; it is the impulse 
which we all feel as we read about or as we watch on television screens some 
fresh evidence of man's inhumanity to man. But we have to realize where that 
impulse, that phrase "Something must be done", leads us. We should not wander 
down that road without serious thought because it would involve a 
restructuring of armed forces so that they could take a full part in the 
growing number of peace-making and peace-keeping exercises of the United 
Nations. It would mean a massive increase in the funds which the United 
Nations and its humanitarian agencies would require from Member States from 
us: from all of us in regular contributions and in aid, in times when many 
Member States face severe budgetary problems. These are just two of the 
implications of the course on which the world is beginning to propel the 
United Nations because "something must be done". 
How do we prevent these demands from getting out of hand? The best way, 
of course, is to prevent those conflicts which give rise to the demands - in 
short, diplomacy: preventive diplomacy. I know that diplomacy is 
unfashionable in the world of the knee-jerk reaction and the dogmatic 
sound-bite on television. Diplomacy lacks news value; it lacks glamour; it 

involves compromise; it takes time; it is easy to mock. It just happens to be 
indispensable. 
That is true, to take one example of many one could take, of conflicts in 
the Middle East. There the parties have from time to time tried to cut the 
knot; they have tried to resolve their disputes by force, but in vain. This 
is a critical moment in the Arab-Israel peace process, which we in Europe 
strongly support. We in the Community know that all concerned must seize this 
opportunity; the tide must be caught. The negotiation of a final settlement 
based on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) will take time 
yet, will take hard work yet. What is important in the immediate future is 
for all parties to work towards visible progress, building step on agreed step. 
Diplomacy is partly a matter of institutions and strengthening them. 
Speaking as a European on behalf of Europeans, I hope that one day the 
Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) will be effective in 
the prevention of conflict throughout Europe. With the adoption of the 
Helsinki document the CSCE has begun to give itself the tools to tackle 
problems by conciliation before they slide into violence, and to manage crises 
once they develop. That document shows that the CSCE is a regional 
arrangement according to Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter. That 
makes a crucial link between European and global security. 
But of course the United Nations is the centre of this thinking, and 
reform of the United Nations is crucial to its performance. Early this year 
the Secretary-General made a determined start on administrative reform. I 
believe that will turn out to be a decisive step. This is being followed up 
both in the Secretariat and in the vast superstructure of intergovernmental 
bodies which have grown up over the past 40 years in the economic, social and 
other fields. 

We welcome the work of the General Assembly to which I know that you 
personally, Mr. President, are devoted to rationalize its agenda. All this 
is welcome; all this has to be carried forward. 
A summit of the Security Council met last January at the initiative of my 
Prime Minister to consider next steps. We asked the Secretary-General to 
prepare a report on the ways in which the United Nations could help tackle the 
new challenges of which I have spoken. On 17 June, you, 
Mr. Secretary-General, published your ideas on preventive diplomacy, 
peace-keeping, peace-making and what you called peace-building. This 
collection of ideas is going to turn out to be a turning-point in the history 
of our Organization. You tried to address a need which is not some distance 
ahead, but which is here and now. I believe you are in the extraordinary 
position of someone who is being asked to manufacture a vehicle while he is 
driving that vehicle on the road. It is not easy, but it is necessary. 
The general debate should be a genuine debate on the ideas advanced in 
the report. All United Nations bodies, notably the Security Council and the 
General Assembly, should follow up swiftly in the light of the debate. 
Preventive diplomacy I have already mentioned. Obviously, it is 
quicker. It is more helpful to peoples about to be embroiled in conflict than 
even the most successful peace-keeping operation which comes after the 
outbreak of violence. It is also less costly in terms of lives and in terms 
of cash. The Secretary-General should be ready to make full use of his powers 
under Article 99 of the Charter to draw the attention of the Security Council 
to any matter which in his opinion may threaten international peace and 
security. Greater use is already being made of fact-finding missions; we 
would like to encourage this trend. 

Preventive deployment of troops might take place to deter aggression or 
conflict between States, possibly involving deployment to only one side of an 
international border. Of course there may be difficulties about timing the 
dispatch of such a force in a given crisis, but we believe this is essentially 
a sound idea that could be applied case by case. 
I warmly welcome what President Bush said yesterday on his initiatives to 
strengthen the peace-keeping work of the United Nations. 
In the European Community we want to follow up the idea of preventive 
deployment in the event of an internal crisis, where the Government concerned 
requests help, with humanitarian assistance or conciliation. No two cases 
would be the same. There would need to be careful discussions with 
Governments and the parties concerned before the international community could 
usefully deploy monitors. 
Recognizing that, the European Community and its member States have 
already decided in principle to send civilian monitoring missions to States 
which want them where this could avert a crisis and possible bloodshed. In 
South Africa, for example, with the agreement of all the parties, established 
during a recent visit of the troika, the United Nations will be joined by the 
European Community and by the Commonwealth in sending observers to reinforce 
the national peace accords there. 
Of course, part of this prevention of conflict must involve prevention of 
the proliferation of armaments, especially weapons of mass destruction. We 
welcome the agreement on a global convention on chemical weapons. This is a 
step towards a safer and more secure world. 

We recognize that peace-making brings pain to some. Bringing pressure -
even peaceful pressure, say, of sanctions on warring parties, means 
sacrifice for innocent third parties. We understand the economic difficulties 
often caused to third parties by the imposition of sanctions under 
Chapter VII. Countries which need balance-of-payments help, countries which 
may also at the same time be carrying out prudent adjustment programmes, can 
be badly affected. The international financial organizations are in the best 
position to assess and then take into account the effects of United Nations 
mandatory sanctions when the;_' design support packages for the countries 
concerned. 

The Secretary-General's report contains a number of proposals for Member 
States to earmark forces for enforcement action and for peace-keeping. All 12 
States members of the European Community have responded to his questionnaire 
on this and all Members of the United Nations should, we believe, keep it 
under regular review. 
Then there is money, financial contributions. The Secretary-General 
rightly, continuously underlines the importance of financial as well as 
military contributions to peace-keeping. The figures speak for themselves. 
The 12 States members of the European Community are supposed, under the rules, 
to contribute one third of the cost of peace-keeping operations financed 
through assessed contributions. At the end of August we, the Twelve, had in 
fact given not 33 per cent but over 40 per cent of total contributions 
actually collected so far for the various new operations launched or expanded 
since the end of the last session of the General Assembly. Those European 
Community member States, of which mine is one, joining in the new operation in 
Bosnia, will bear all their own costs. We believe we are doing our bit so far 
as this is concerned in Europe, and look to others to do the same. The 
Secretary-General is quite right: the financial problems of the United 
Nations must not be allowed to slide, must not be allowed to fester. We 
support the proposed peace-keeping reserve fund, subject to negotiation on the 
detail, and we believe the General Assembly must follow this up. 
The role of the United Nations does not stop once a conflict is over. 
That is why the Secretary-General's study entitled "An Agenda for Peace" 
rightly looks at how we can build peace after a conflict. Take El Salvador, 
an illustration that has already been used by His Excellency the President of 
the Republic of Korea. The promotion of free elections and democratic 

institutions is a key part of such peace-building, and so, to take a very 
different example, is de-mining. Is it not a sad commentary on the state of 
the world that the removal of mines in the aftermath of conflict has to be 
high on our agenda, whether in Cambodia, northern Somalia or Angola? 
But we of the European Community welcome the emphasis the 
Secretary-General gives to human rights, democracy and development. Perhaps 
during the cold war some of us tended to concentrate exclusively, or almost 
exclusively, on abuses of human rights in the Soviet bloc. Elsewhere there 
was lip-service when there should have been action. But all people are 
entitled to full human rights. We want the World Conference on Human Rights 
at Vienna in June 1993 to take real steps in that direction. 
We warmly welcome as part of that effort what we see as the tide of 
political reform now flowing in the continent of Africa. We are helping to 
promote good government and sound human rights and electoral practices. Both 
at the national and the Community level, we have already shown that we are 
ready to meet requests for help in election monitoring, notably in Ethiopia, 
the Congo and, later this year, in Kenya and Ghana, and also in the 
inter-parliamentary work going on in Namibia. 
But of course in the longer term collective security can be undermined by 
deeper economic and social forces, such as poverty and environmental 
degradation. Relief must be followed by recovery or else the countries 
afflicted will be overwhelmed by despair. Is that not what we see in 
Somalia? This appalling tragedy is a warning of what could happen elsewhere, 
of what could become widespread, because Somalia is just the most extreme form 
of a problem now affecting large parts of sub-Saharan Africa. 

I say this all the more strongly because at the beginning of this month I 
led a European Community Troika visit to Mogadishu. What we saw there is what 
many colleagues have spoken of, and I echo their voices. We saw the 
disintegration of a society. We marked the absence of all legitimate 
authority. We witnessed the collapse of a State and of all services connected 
with a State. Instead of order, instead of law, teenage gangsters roam the 
streets, toting their Kalashnikovs and offering protection at a price. 
Instead of a distribution system, whether capitalist or socialist, there is 
blackmail and looting. 
Against that background we saw the new humanitarian relief arrangements 
being put into place by Mr. Eliasson and many other devoted people. We saw 
how the United Nations has to work naturally, intimately and without rivalry 
with non-governmental organizations. We saw how urgently the Somalis need a 
reconstruction of civil authority. We fully support Ambassador Sahnoun's 
efforts in Mogadishu, in Somalia. He is an outstanding civil servant on 
behalf of us all. Last month the Security Council rightly voted to strengthen 
the United Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM) so that its security units 
will be better able to distribute aid. Among the States Members of the 
European Community, Belgium, with the support of all of us, plans a 
substantial contribution to that security. 
Of course not all disasters are man-made, though it looks as if an 
increasing proportion are. There is the drought in the Horn of Africa and 
southern Africa, which will require a major international effort over the 
coming year. 
For the first time, over the last two or three years, the environment has 
become a priority for all countries. I have to say that the road from Rio de 
 
Janeiro may be harder than to the road to it. The United Nations Conference 
on Environment and Development in Rio attracted the world's leaders, the 
world's media and the world's imagination. But sustainable development has to 
stay at the top of the international agenda. That is why, immediately after 
his return from Rio de Janeiro, Prime Minister Major proposed an eight-point 
follow-up plan picking up the key elements agreed upon at Rio de Janeiro. 
That initiative was broadly endorsed at our European Council in Lisbon and at 
the Economic Summit in Munich. 
The Sustainable Development Commission, which is to be set up by the 
General Assembly, will be crucial to the follow-up. The Assembly must create 
an effective instrument to ensure that the impetus built up at Rio is not 
dissipated and lost. 
To conclude, for the medium and long term we need to turn hope into 
reality. In the short term, time after time, in place after place, we must 
bring hope to what is already a grim reality. The legacy of the cold war is a 
mixed one. In facing it, the international community must be realistic, 
because history cannot be denied, cannot be uprooted. The solving of problems 
which have their roots deep in the centuries is a slow, frustrating business. 
After the brief gleam of optimism in 1989 and 1990, when all seemed easy, 
we are now more realistic. Progress towards a more decent, orderly world will 
never be without effort. Our best hope is to take two steps forward for each 
step back. Even that imperfect progress will require the rapid strengthening 
of our institutions and in particular of the family of institutions called the 
United Nations - not essentially by more conferences and more speeches, but by 
the practical effort which the United Nations, under the guidance of the 
 
Secretary-General, mounts today in Somalia, Yugoslavia, Cambodia and countless 
other troubled places. 
The trucks of our agencies, painted white, and the blue berets of our 
United Nations contingents do not bring magic or instant happiness, but they 
bring a glimmer of hope where till then there may have been despair. In the 
effort of bringing hope, in the short term and in the longer term, the 
European Community and its member States will take a persistent, energetic and 
worthy part. 
May I, at the outset, congratulate you. Sir, 
on your assumption of the presidency of the General Assembly at this session. 
I should also like to express our appreciation for the stewardship of the 
forty-sixth session of the General Assembly by your predecessor. 
Ambassador Samir Shihabi of Saudi Arabia. 
This is the first session of the General Assembly since 
Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali assumed the office of Secretary-General of the 
United Nations, and I take this opportunity to pay tribute to his dynamism, 
diplomatic skills and zeal for reform. 
I should also like to welcome into our midst the new Members of the 
United Nations and wish them success in their multifarious efforts and tasks. 
There have been dramatic changes world wide since the Assembly last met, 
in 1991. Some of these changes augur well, while others present uncertain 
prospects. While the cold war and the East-West confrontation are now, 
happily, but aberrations of the past, the shadow of conflict and suffering 
looms large in Yugoslavia, in Somalia and, indeed, in many other parts of the 
world. 
We cannot, therefore, be complacent or euphoric. What should have made 
the world safer has at the same time unleashed tendencies ethnic, sectarian 
and other - that threaten to keep it unsafe. The efforts of developing 

countries to improve their socio-economic conditions remain hamstrung by the 
inequities of the present international economic order. 
Therefore, what we need to work for is a new international order free 
from war, poverty, illiteracy and injustice. In this great endeavour the 
United Nations has a central role to play. Some eight and a half months ago, 
in this very city of New York, at the summit of the Security Council, 
Prime Minister Narasimha Rao pointed out that 
"Lasting peace and security necessarily require comparable levels of 
human happiness across the globe. It is impossible to think of a United 
Nations functioning usefully or harmoniously while humankind continues to 
be riddled with ever-increasing disparities". (S/PV.3046. p. 96) 
That is the concern that animates and reinforces our commitment to a United 
Nations dedicated as much to peace and stability as to progress and prosperity. 
The international community's efforts in this direction are none the less 
haunted by the shadow of continuing violence and conflict around the world. 
India has been deeply concerned at the conflict in Yugoslavia. The tragedy of 
Bosnia and Herzegovina demands redress. Its people must be given the chance 
to lead their lives in peace. India believes that the good work the United 
Nations is doing in that region deserves all our support. We also trust that 
decisions taken here will not complicate either the search for peace or the 
functioning of the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) in a difficult 
and dangerous situation. 

Somalia's tragedy is equally heart-rending. The wretchedness of its 
people, caught in a seemingly endless cycle of violence and misery, cries out 
for redress. The United Nations has instituted a valiant and generous 
operation there to provide relief to those affected. India believes that all 
the Somalian parties should work together to bring the conflict to an end so 
that tranquillity can be restored and the people of Somalia can be given the 
chance to work out their own destinies in peace. 
After years of suffering, the people of Cambodia aspire to build a 
sovereign, independent, non-aligned nation for themselves. The United Nations 
cannot falter in Cambodia, and the parties concerned in that country have a 
responsibility to ensure the success of the United Nations efforts. 
India has consistently supported the sovereignty, territorial integrity 
and non-aligned status of Afghanistan. We hope that all the parties there 
will work to restore peace and harmony so that the people of Afghanistan can 
have the opportunity, free of violence and conflict, to work for their own 
well-being. 
A glimmer of hope is visible on the West Asian horizon, with Israel and 
its Arab neighbours settling down to a dialogue. The numerous resolutions 
adopted by the Security Council and the General Assembly provide the necessary 
goals for those negotiations. The occupation of Arab lands should be vacated 
and the restitution of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, 
including their right to establish an independent State, as well as the 
security of all States in the region, should be assured if a genuine 
settlement with lasting peace is to be achieved in that part of the world. 
What the United Nations was able to do in restoring to Kuwait its 
independence and sovereignty was a singular achievement. India has 

traditionally enjoyed the warmest of relations with Kuwait, and we trust that 
following the restoration of its sovereignty Kuwait will also be able to 
recover the prosperity that it formerly enjoyed. 
I should like to add here that India feels sympathy for the civilian 
population of Iraq, and we believe that its needs should be looked at with 
generosity. Iraq's sovereignty as a State and its territorial integrity 
should be respected. 
The recent unfortunate violence in South Africa and the setback to the 
negotiations there for the elimination of apartheid will, we hope, be 
temporary. It is encouraging that the parties concerned have welcomed the 
catalytic role of the United Nations, which is fully committed to the 
objective of establishing a democratic, non-racial and united South Africa. 
As the country that first brought the question of apartheid to the United 
Nations in 1946, India is hopeful that the presence of United Nations 
observers will help to end the violence there and to get the negotiating 
process going once again. 
India has noted the recent changes in Fiji. I hope that the Government 
of Fiji will eschew racial and ethnic discrimination and revert to democratic 
governance at an early date. 
The Secretary-General has been able to record some progress on the issue 
of Cyprus. The acceptance by the parties concerned of the Secretary-General's 
"set of ideas" is significant. We share the Secretary-General's hope that the 
next round of direct talks in October will be the conclusive one. 
At this session the Assembly will take up the matter of the recently 
negotiated chemical-weapons Convention. The Convention opens up possibilities 
for similar action in other areas of disarmament. In this context, India in 

1988 proposed an action plan for nuclear disarmament within a specified 
time-frame. As an immediate step, the United Nations should envisage the 
following: a convention on the non-use of nuclear weapons, a verifiable 
freeze on the production of fissionable material for weapons purposes, a 
suspension of nuclear-weapon tests and negotiations on general and complete 
disarmament. 
Non-proliferation is a laudable objective, and India's commitment to it 
has been affirmed time and again. But there should be no distinction between 
nuclear-weapon States and non-nuclear-weapon States when it comes to rights 
and obligations. The geographical spread of nuclear arsenals has, as it were, 
nuclearized the globe. Therefore, the international community's efforts 
should be directed against that global menace. As part of them, regional 
non-proliferation should be considered only within the context of a properly 
specified region, taking into account the security concerns of the countries 
of the region, whose prior agreement should be obtained. 
Human rights have gained emphasis in recent times, and deservedly so. 
India welcomes the changes around the world that have strengthened human 
rights and fundamental freedoms. In line with our democratic traditions, 
independent judiciary and press and alert public, India has decided to set up 
a national human-rights commission further to safeguard and promote 
fundamental human rights in India. 
I should like to point out here that one of the most vicious forms of 
human-rights violations today is the violence unleashed by terrorists. And 
terrorism assumes a particularly pernicious character when it is aided, 
abetted and sponsored from abroad. Such sponsorship is against the principles 
of the United Nations Charter, and should be vigorously opposed by all. 

The United Nations recognizes its responsibilities for providing 
humanitarian assistance to Member States facing grave humanitarian crises. 
The newly created capacity of the United Nations to deal with such situations 
has performed creditably. It is important in this context that we mobilize 
the United Nations to address the root causes of many such disruptions: 
poverty, illiteracy and lack of development. It is equally important for the 
United Nations to be seen to be acting correctly and impartially in this field 
and at the request of the country concerned. 
The report of the Secretary-General entitled "An Agenda for Peace" 
(A/47/277) articulates the wealth of experience that the United Nations has 
gained in recent years in peacemaking and peace-keeping, and is an important 
and welcome input into our study of how the role of the United Nations in the 
maintenance of international peace and security can be strengthened. India, 
given its traditional and long-standing contribution to United Nations 
peace-keeping forces, takes a special interest in the matter. I trust that we 
shall be able to respond positively and constructively, in keeping with the 
United Nations Charter, to the Secretary-General's ideas. It should be 
ensured that the measures envisaged do not lead to the abridgement of the 
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States. They should also respect the 
cardinal tenet of non-interference in the internal affairs of States. 
Just as international activism should not violate accepted norms of 
international relations, the principle of self-determination has to be seen in 
the context of respect for national sovereignty. Self-determination can apply 
only to peoples under colonial or alien domination or foreign occupation, and 
not to integral parts of sovereign nations. 

The implementation of the proposals made by the Secretary-General will 
mean a more vigorous Security Council. An enhanced mandate for the Council 
requires matching transparency and democracy in its functioning. This cannot 
be done without an expansion of the membership of the Council to reflect the 
increased membership of the United Nations over the past few years, as well as 
the realities of the many changes in the international situation. And here I 
would submit that along with economic criteria, other relevant criteria should 
be given due weight in this context. 
The expansion in membership that I referred to is all the more essential 
if the Council is to ensure its moral sanction and political effectiveness. 
As the Secretary-General points out in his report on the work of the 
Organization 
"Democracy within the family of nations means the application of its 
principles within the world Organization itself." (A/47/1, para. 169) 
Similarly, the General Assembly has to be made more effective so as to 
represent not only the changes in its membership, but also the significant 
character of its universal composition. 
An agenda for development is as important to the United Nations as an 
agenda for peace. Any effort to assign to the United Nations only a 
complementary role in the economic and social field is, in fact, contrary to 
the letter and spirit of the Charter. The United Nations should continue to 
have a central role in macroeconomic policy formulation and implementation, 
because this is the only forum for reaching an international consensus on 
development. Developing nations around the globe, including India, are 
engaged in major reforms of their internal economic policies and mechanisms 
with a view to integrating their economies with the global economy. These 

reforms will have very limited meaning unless the external economic 
environment becomes conducive to the growth and development of developing 
countries. 
The Secretary-General, in his report on the work of the Organization, 
makes it clear that 
"the Organization's responsibilities and commitments in the political and 
security area should not be carried out at the expense of its 
responsibilities in the development field ..." (A/47/1, para. 66) 
This underpins and reinforces the continuing commitment of the United Nations 
in the field of development, particularly of the developing countries. 
The world economy is integrating both globally and regionally. But in 
the process, the needs of the developing countries are not finding the 
attention and response that they deserve. Hence, it becomes imperative that 
certain international events succeed such as the Uruguay Round of 
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, whose early, successful and balanced outcome 
would inject growth impulses into the world economy as a whole. The 
North-South dialogue is languishing and deserves reactivation. There are 
various other inequities in global economic interaction - such as poor 
commodity prices, monetary imbalances and others that call for urgent 
redress. The developing countries look to the United Nations for correctives 
in these fields. Socio-economic progress in developing countries will, in 
turn - I have no doubt about it enrich the prosperity of the developed world 
itself. 
Here, may I mention a disquieting aspect in this field, namely the 
tendency to impose non-economic conditionalities in international development 
assistance. They should be avoided so that the effectiveness of development 
assistance may not be impaired. 

My delegation sees merit in a number of proposals in the area of the 
developmental activities of the United Nations put forward by various groups, 
particularly the Nordic countries. In our view, one of the principal 
objectives of the exercise should be to decentralize the operational 
activities of the United Nations system so that countries and regions with 
their special characteristics and levels of development may be able to 
implement programmes suitable to them. Also, adequate resources should be 
found to promote development in the developing countries. 
The process of the restructuring of the United Nations should take into 
account the additional responsibilities assigned to the United Nations by the 
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) that was held 
this year. The concept of sustainable development has to be translated into 
workable strategies and policy measures. In the pursuit of sustainable 
development, developing countries need resources and, what is more, technical 
assistance, as well as environmentally sound technologies on preferential and 
concessional terms. I do hope that the establishment of a Commission on 
Sustainable Development in the course of the present session will lead to 
effective follow-up of UNCED. The creation of a Planet Protection Fund, which 
places on all countries, except the least developed, an obligation to acquire 
and develop environment-friendly technologies, will facilitate universal 
participation in the collective effort to attain sustainable development. 
The non-aligned countries, meeting at the level of Heads of State or 
Government in Jakarta earlier this month, issued the Jakarta message, which 
states: 
"A shift in focus of international relations to strengthen multilateral 
cooperation based on genuine interdependence, mutuality of interests and 
shared responsibility, has become indispensable." 

If we, in the international community and here at the United Nations, are to 
cooperate to combat global menaces and inequalities, we will need to forge a 
global partnership. And here, I am reminded of what the Prime Minister of 
India stated at the recent summit of non-aligned countries to which I have 
referred: 
"We are happy to note that the United Nations, at last, is coming into 
its own in the fifth decade of its existence. While even today there is 
a tendency to subordinate the global agenda to narrow national concerns, 
we are happy to note that the United Nations is more effective than ever 
before. The question now is to make it even more effective." 
Let us also hope that the Assembly as its present session will promote 
the effectiveness of the United Nations even further by shaping it as an 
instrument of international consensus and action and of common benefit in all 
matters of international concern. 
Let me begin by congratulating you, Sir, and 
the nation of Bulgaria, on your assumption of the presidency of the United 
Nations General Assembly. May I also congratulate the Secretary-General, 
Mr. Boutros-Ghali, on his leadership in the struggle for peace. I wish him 
success in his endeavours. 
Today I speak for an Israel that has chosen to step out of the shadows of 
the past to prepare for the invitation of a new future. The world is alive 
with the impulse for change. The end of conflict is no longer a Utopian 

fantasy. It is the dictate of realism and of universal self-interest. We 
look to the future in a world that wants peace. 
Like a hidden Samson, the forces of change have pushed aside the pillars 
of conventional wisdom, which proclaimed that military power is the source of 
national strength and prestige. This is no longer true. The cost of 
maintaining a significantly large army can deplete the resources of the 
richest countries, even if the weaponry remains unused. Around our changing 
world, the flow of knowledge has superseded military might as the source of 
real strength and social stability. 

The flow of knowledge no longer stops at national frontiers. It is not 
possible in the age of modern communications to shield peoples from truth and 
reality. Eventually, even dictators must face the fact that the best censors 
cannot block the free flow of ideas. But knowledge cannot be acquired without 
the right to doubt, the readiness to change. Knowledge is not available 
without freedom, and so democracy is prevailing throughout the world. 
In this new era, the era of knowledge, the governing principles are those 
of democratic structures, market-based economies, open borders, demilitarized 
international and regional relations, and respect for human rights. But while 
all nations should embrace these new principles, national traditions and 
identities retain their power. Nation-States will remain the focus of 
allegiance and social pride. 
To reconcile national identity, regional cooperation and universal 
solidarities is the central issue of contemporary life. 
The United Nations was established in an era that no longer exists. Yet 
its ideals and structures can meet the challenges and dangers of this new 
age. We support the "Agenda for Peace" offered by the Secretary-General. We 
support and will participate in the attempt to build a global protection 
system. 
The United Nations must be the headquarters for an all-embracing struggle 
to safeguard the environment against new threats. It must be a powerhouse to 
arrest starvation. It must develop the institutions and the ability to 
intervene when necessary to stop otherwise insoluble civil wars. The United 
Nations must reorganize to face these problems in a global capacity. 
In our own region, we must understand that even if our geography and 
people have not changed, the world has changed. No longer can we live on 

disappearing premises. For generations, the conflicts in the Middle East were 
nurtured by global conflicts by the cold war and hot competition. Within 
the context of super-Power rivalry, the belligerents in the Middle East were 
generously supplied with shining armour. But where there were once evil 
empires, we now see only the desire for a peaceful world. Russia has 
changed. The United States has emerged from the cold war with renewed respect 
from the world for its democratic drive for peace. The third world is 
changing, with many nations ending old hostilities and building new 
economies. In Africa, the forces of racism are being gradually driven out. 
In the Middle East itself let's face it the peace between Israel and Egypt 
is attaining the respect of age. There is a fresh atmosphere in our time. 
The time is now upon us for the nations of the Middle East to come to 
terms with the new realities, to make a living on their own. We can learn to 
benefit from peaceful coexistence. If we are to survive, we must understand 
that the dangers and opportunities we face are regional rather than national. 
In an age of long-range missiles, national defence must be a collective 
effort. To provide our people with modern standards of living we must have 
open borders and mutually beneficial exchanges. 
For too long the Middle East has been caught up in national conflicts and 
national rivalries for the glorification of national leaders. We need to 
build a new Middle East of, by and for the people. In our effort to build 
this new future for the Middle East, Israel does not ignore its still existing 
disagreements with our neighbours. The record shows that we are working to 
solve them humanely, honourably and, wherever possible, permanently. We are 
currently engaged in bilateral negotiations to bring an end to the conflicts 
of the past and multilateral negotiations to lay the foundation for the future. 

In the bilateral negotiations, we are negotiating with the Jordanians, 
the Palestinians, the Syrians and the Lebanese. The committed leadership of 
the United States has played a central role in bringing all the parties into 
face-to-face negotiations. 
With the Jordanians, the solutions are awaiting the parties. We face 
common problems we must confront together, including the possible Jordanian 
connection to Palestinian self-government and beyond. Our relations with the 
Hashemite Kingdom have seen open hostilities but also tacit efforts to 
overcome these hostilities. We look forward to a complete peace with the 
Kingdom of Jordan in the near future. 
With the Palestinian people, our conflict has been long and painful. We 
seek to end this conflict. We are looking for a bridge to cross the gulf of 
bitter memories, painful hatreds and emotion-laden suspicions. We have 
offered to negotiate an interim or transitional goal. There is no difference 
between the two. In fact, one can note with satisfaction that the 
Palestinians have agreed to this gradual approach. The direction is clear, 
even if the bridge will be built slowly. 
The suggested path is an interim self-government arrangement, as 
conceived at Camp David. We know that this proposal is imperfect in some 
respects. Self-government is less than independence. But it offers the 
flexibility of an arrangement that will last no more than five years. During 
this limited period of time, Palestinians in the territories will enjoy 
self-government. The opportunity to select, through democratic political 
elections, a Palestinian administrative council will enable the Palestinian 
people to exercise a double measure of freedom: the freedom to govern their 
own lives and to do so politically and democratically. 

But instead of attempting to draw a map of a self-governing territory 
and it is doubtful that this could be achieved now we have suggested a 
definite timetable. So, while this proposal lacks the clarity of a map, it 
provides the commitment of a calendar. This proposal is clearly a departure 
from the present situation. It has the dynamics of a voyage to a new destiny, 
a bridge which begins at one shore and reaches another. 
I know it will not be an easy choice for either side. But neither the 
existing situation nor the foreseeable future contains a more promising 
alternative. I am speaking for an Israeli Government that has firmly made up 
its mind and seeks the expeditious implementation of this proposal. 
In negotiations, the parties tend to scrutinize every letter, every dot. 
I hope that the Palestinians will also perceive the spirit of our intent, 
which is to extricate ourselves from the position of domination over another 
people. We have never in our history as a people sought domination over 
others. We wholeheartedly seek a future where the children of both peoples 
will escape the agonies of a distorted past and live under a clear sky of 
security and hope. 

With the Syrians, we have begun a dialogue in full daylight for the first 
time in 44 years. It is necessary now to translate the change in the mood 
between our two nations into viable and carefully constructed accords 
expressing a mutual interest in security and cooperation. 
We call for a departure from old dogmas and all-embracing dictates, and 
we hope the Syrians will adopt the same approach. We understand the need to 
safeguard the security and freedom of both nations, theirs and ours. It is 
our responsibility to ensure that those who have survived the wars of the past 
will have the opportunity to open a new peaceful chapter in the history of the 
two peoples. 
The leaders of both countries should be directly involved in these 
negotiations, which are in need of a new approach and creative thinking. I 
call on the President of Syria to set aside his reservations and meet with the 
Prime Minister of Israel. 
We have made clear to the Syrians that Security Council resolutions 
242 (1967) and 338 (1973) contain a territorial dimension, combined with other 
components of peace and security which must be equally respected. 
We believe in a comprehensive solution involving all issues and all 
parties. Yet we do not consider it wise to link one negotiation to another, 
or to postpone an agreement with one country because of delays elsewhere. One 
negotiating process should not be handcuffed to another. 
With respect to Lebanon, Israel holds no territorial claims; nor does it 
seek to influence the political destiny of that country. We recall peaceful 
relations with Lebanon at a time when it was internally balanced and 
tranquil. We hope that such a time will return again. The moment Lebanon 
finds peace within itself and independence from outside intervention, Lebanon 
and Israel will live in peace again. 

Looking at the bilateral negotiations, we recall that the success of our 
negotiations with Egypt stemmed from dialogue at many levels of society: 
decision makers, leaders, businessmen, academicians. We appeal to all our 
Arab neighbours to establish the same dialogue today. There is no room for 
timidity, reluctance or boycotts in a peace process. Peacemaking should not 
be a hideaway operation. 
I hope our neighbours realize that Israel has implemented unilateral 
confidence-building measures. We have drastically changed our settlement 
policies, altered our policies towards the Palestinian people, offered new 
proposals for self-government and suggested target dates for the 
implementation of this process. We have done these things unconditionally. 
Yet confidence-building measures call for reciprocity. We seek an end to the 
unjustified economic boycott and the cessation of terror. 
We shall not allow ourselves or our adversaries to escape this chance for 
peace. Yet we cannot turn our region into a new Middle East by just 
negotiating old disputes. Our new challenges are on our horizons, not only in 
our frontiers. 
We say to our Arab neighbours: the real danger is not Israel. The real 
danger is poverty. The real danger is poverty that creates protest, even if 
it is occasionally cloaked in a religious mantle. Poverty and protest 
endanger both the Arab nations and Israel. Israel does not want to become an 
isolated island in an ocean of resentment. 
Two hundred forty million people live today in the Middle East. The 
majority of them live in a state of want. In 30 years, there will be 
500 million people in the region, two thirds residing in Africa, one third in 
Asia. 
 
The poverty of the Middle East has nothing to do with geography. It has 
to do with the use and misuse of available and potential resources in the 
region. The gap between wealthy and poor nations is wide: the more 
prosperous nations enjoy a per capita income 10 times greater than their 
poorer neighbours. The earth beneath us will continue to tremble if the 
wealthy remain oblivious to the needy, both within and beyond national borders. 
The multilateral negotiations are composed of five areas: economics, 
arms control, refugees, ecology and water. Progress in these areas will more 
likely be attained if we can restructure the multilateral talks, which 
initially created two advantages: the cluster of issues and the participation 
of many Arab countries. But the talks suffer as well from loose organization, 
which has resulted in seminars rather than negotiations, and from the lack of 
a concentrated thrust to coordinate their work. We suggest the following 
changes. 
First, the separate negotiations should be conducted in a coordinated 
manner. 
Secondly, participation in the steering committee should be raised to the 
ministerial level. 
Thirdly, the multilateral negotiations should be intensified through more 
frequent meetings for longer periods of time. 
Fourthly, the Syrians and the Lebanese should participate. 
Fifthly, discussion of human rights and pluralistic values should be made 
part of the talks so as to combine the discussion of well-defined practical 
issues with the pursuit of common values very much akin to the Helsinki 
accords. 

And finally, the parties should agree not to postpone progress in the 
multilateral talks until the conclusion of the bilateral negotiations. Early 
planning can save crucial time for all parties without forcing irreversible 
commitments. And lost time cannot be regained. 
The bilateral negotiations are essentially political. The multilateral 
negotiations are essentially economic. We live in an age when financial 
assistance in itself is no longer the answer to the economic needs of the 
Middle East. In the past, belligerency created dependence upon the financial 
assistance of other nations. By diminishing the need for arms and building 
the right economic structure, we will be able create wealth of our own. There 
is no need to impoverish the wealthy in order to enrich the poor. Opening 
borders, paving roads, introducing modern communications, and exchanging 
technology will generate economic growth in the Middle East. 
Trade across borders is essential for economic growth. Markets transcend 
national boundaries. Water, tourism and commerce do not subjugate themselves 
to political maps. The Middle East should follow the example of the "seven 
tigers" in Asia, the European Common Market and the North American Free Trade 
Agreement. Let us understand: these regions are our competitors and they are 
far ahead of the Middle East in facing the new realities of the international 
economy. We have to build an open regional economy, for the same reasons and 
with the same promise that led others to do so. We have to build a common 
market in the Middle East. 
 
We have to set out upon the long and complicated road to arms control. 
That we can learn from the East-West negotiations and other attempts at arms 
control. We have to follow the patient path of confidence-building measures 
in the geographical and technical domains until we are able to rid the Middle 
East of the terror presented by weapons of mass destruction, both conventional 
and non-conventional. Israel has proposed the creation of a nuclear-free zone 
in the Middle East numerous times, and we stand ready to pursue this goal 
today. 
We should address the problems of refugees, not by threatening to destroy 
the existing demographic balance, but by exploring a range of possibilities 
for restoring the dignity of refugees and offering them a new life. 
We should act to save our fresh air and historic landscape. Ecological 
pollution does not respect borders, and so we have to marshal forces to save 
our region from the danger of uncontrolled deterioration. 
Finally, the Middle East possesses vast desert land but meagre water 
resources. The land is static, the population is increasing and water 
resources are declining. Available water should be reused, and new fresh 
water produced from the sea. Either the land will be salinized by the sea or 
the sea water will be desalinized through available technology. The 
technology is available, and the necessary credit is attainable. We can 
satisfy the needs of man and land. The Middle East can be made green. It 
depends upon us. 
Here, I believe, are the pillars of wisdom for a new Middle East: 
economic growth, arms control, dignity for the refugees, environmental 
protection and water resources, coupled with religious freedom, pluralistic 
values and human rights. The nations of the Middle East must work 
individually and collectively to meet these challenges of a changed world. 

The agenda is ambitious. Is it merely a dream? No. It is a blueprint, 
and the necessary elements are within our grasp. Will these goals be achieved 
in our lifetime? We dare not hesitate, because the world will not wait for 
the Middle East. We are tragically late in making peace. If we do not face 
our economic challenges, we will be left hopelessly far behind. 
The agenda is new. The vision was already mentioned in Proverbs: 
"Wisdom builds the house. 
"Good judgment makes it secure." (The Holy Bible. Proverbs 24:3) 
"Wisdom prevails over strength; knowledge over brute force." (The Holy 
Bible. Proverbs 24:5) 
We have to go to work. For us, the Jewish people, this is Rosh Hashanah, 
the New Year. We pray that the year to come will bring peace, freedom and 
prosperity to build a new Middle East for all of its people Muslim, 
Christian, Jewish, Arab, Israeli for us, and for our children. 
Mr. President, New Zealand congratulates 
you on your election to lead the Assembly and offers you its support in your 
task. 
One year ago I stood on this rostrum and spoke about the Gulf crisis and 
the way in which the United Nations, with strong leadership from the Security 
Council, had shown a firmness of judgement and a commitment to the ideals of 
the founders of the United Nations that reinforced the status and authority of 
the Organization. 
I spoke of my own country. New Zealand, a small nation in the south-west 
Pacific, which supported the United Nations, in keeping with our tradition of 
opposing tyranny and supporting freedom. 
This year I have returned to this Organization even more confident of the 
vital role of the United Nations in today's world, of the important 
contribution each nation, be it large or small, can make to the achievement of 
its ideals. Most important, however, I want to affirm the commitment of New 
Zealand, a founder member of the United Nations, to ensuring that this 
Organization adapts to meet the challenge of a world that has changed, is 
changing and will continue to change in the years ahead. To do that, the 
 
United Nations requires a vibrant, active General Assembly and a Security 
Council that truly reflects the different regions and the different peoples of 
the world. 
The Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros-Ghali,, has made his views clear in 
putting before this Assembly his report, "An Agenda for Peace". His message 
is summed up in paragraphs 75 and 76, where he says: 
"With the cold war ended we have drawn back from the brink of a 
confrontation that threatened the world and, too often, paralysed our 
Organization. 
"Even as we celebrate our restored possibilities, there is a need to 
ensure that the lessons of the past ... are learned and that the 
errors ... are not repeated. For there may not be a third opportunity 
for our planet ... ." (A/47/277, paras. 75-76) 
New Zealand endorses that conclusion. 
We can also take hope from the fact that at last both the Security 
Council and the Assembly have the chance to work as they were originally 
intended, free from crippling ideological competition. Through the Security 
Council, and with the support of all the Members of the United Nations, we 
have seen decisive action to implement collective security measures on a scale 
never before possible. 
There is much still to be done, but no longer need the people of the 
world despair about impotence and inaction on the part of the United Nations. 
In Cambodia, in Somalia, in the Balkans, in the Middle East, the United 
Nations has moved to assist in the vital battle for human survival where 
before there was only the prospect of continued death and destruction. 
 
In our view, the Agenda for Peace will succeed only if we support an 
agenda for action. This is no time for complacency. The heavy cloud of the 
cold war has lifted. But over the years that cloud concealed many smaller 
conflicts and tensions regional, national and ethnic. Freed from being 
bottled up by the cold war, a growing and frightening tendency is exposed to 
settle ancient differences by the use of force. 
The Agenda for Peace also reminds us that there are other critical issues 
which threaten not only the security of Member States but also the future of 
the planet itself. 
Poverty, disease, malnutrition, crippling levels of debt and negligible 
economic growth are scourges in themselves. They can unleash despair and 
anger that will destabilize political and social institutions. 
Environmental degradation does not threaten only our immediate 
surroundings and livelihoods; problems such as the depletion of the ozone 
layer, the spread of toxic chemicals, climate change and the overfishing of 
the seas put at risk the well-being of whole communities, and even the very 
survival of certain small island countries. 
Weapons of mass destruction continue to proliferate. We must take a 
stand against those who are blind to the lessons of the past and remain 
determined to acquire or expand their stocks of nuclear or other weapons of 
mass destruction. 
The Secretary-General reminds us, too, that 
"social peace is as important as strategic or political peace". 
 
It is clear that a root cause of insecurity and conflict at the international 
level is the existence of social structures, policies and systems within 
States which marginalize minorities or other groups. Such tension will be 
resolved only when the social needs of the underprivileged are addressed. The 
proposed United Nations social Summit could have a catalytic role to play in 
this area. I suggest that it is only through tolerance and through talking to 
one another that we can all encourage and achieve full respect for human 
rights and implement the international standards as they were intended. 
 
The other very important issues raised by the Secretary-General must be 
considered thoroughly. This session of the Assembly provides the first 
opportunity to debate them and I wish to outline New Zealand's views. 
First, let me refer to peace and security. New Zealand stands very 
firmly behind the United Nations as an instrument for collective action when 
security is threatened. The situations which the world wants the United 
Nations to respond to today are not the same as those of the cold-war era. 
New Zealand supports concepts such as preventive diplomacy, peace-keeping and 
peace-building. As a world body we know that consensus is important but 
collectively we must be bold, we must be innovative. 
New Zealand believes it is vital that the United Nations respond to 
situations which threaten the peace or cry out for global action, wherever in 
the world they may occur. We cannot, we must not, allow parts of the world to 
be marginalized or thought less important than others. The tragedy in Somalia 
is different from, but of equal horror to, that in what was Yugoslavia. 
Secondly, I want to endorse strongly the conclusion that there is an 
inextricable link between security and economic development. This is not a 
new or radical idea. Every political leader knows from domestic experience 
that a nation feels more secure when its economy is performing strongly. 
People in every country have rapidly growing expectations, but with the global 
economy very sluggish leaders are finding it difficult to satisfy these 
ambitions. 
Further, we need major sustainable growth in the global economy if the 
development concerns identified at the Earth summit at Rio are to be achieved. 
One fact, though self-evident, must be repeated: sustainable and 
equitable economic growth and development will be possible only if there is an 
open and fair international trading system. 

As a world community we need the courage to pull down the artificial 
barriers to economic growth. The solution is in our hands. We need leaders 
to say "Yes" to fair trade and "No" to their protectionist lobbies. If we 
knock out the selfish and inward-looking tendencies to protectionism and 
subsidization, we will create a surge in global trade and real growth in the 
global economy. It will provide the opportunities we all want - so let's do 
it. 
The alternative is bleak. History shows only too clearly what can happen 
if there is a deep and prolonged global recession. Political extremists come 
to the fore and begin to manipulate desperate people. Disintegrating 
economies fall into the hands of dictators, and international peace and 
security are quickly put at risk. 
But this need not be so. It is not inevitable. A breakthrough in the 
multilateral trade negotiations, the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on 
Tariffs and Trade (GATT), is achievable, given the right degree of political 
will. There is a risk that the political will may ebb away, that the focus 
may be lost, that excuses for delay may become more important than reasons to 
press on. Should that prove true, then the bold reform set out in the Dunkel 
text will go down as one more lost opportunity. We cannot afford that so we 
New Zealand - continue to urge the European Community and the United States to 
resolve their differences and to put the GATT talks back on track for a 
successful conclusion. For world economic growth, it is not an optional 
extra; it is essential. 
Just as economics and security are closely linked, the world seems to 
have accepted, just in time, that there is a third element to this equation. 
It is the environment. Everything we do has an impact on the environment. If 

we cripple the environment, it will affect our economies, our societies and 
our security. Moreover, these impacts will not respect national boundaries. 
Before the Earth summit, some important first steps were taken. The 
Montreal Protocol proved that the world had the political will to deal with 
the problem of ozone depletion. The General Assembly itself responded to the 
challenge of drift-net fishing and has secured a moratorium on that 
ecologically-destructive technique of fishing. 
The Earth summit, under the auspices of the United Nations, has given us 
a challenging work programme, "Agenda 21", to match the Secretary-General's 
proposals, "An Agenda for Peace". But international agendas only work if 
nations are committed to their success. 
New Zealand went to the Earth summit committed to working for consensus 
solutions to the problems of environment and development which ultimately 
threaten us all. 
New Zealand is a country endowed with a rich environmental inheritance. 
But we understand that our good fortune does not give us the moral right to 
point the finger at other countries which are struggling for their very 
survival. At the same time, our considerable experience in sustainable 
resource management - for example, in the development of new forests can be 
helpful in the search for practical solutions to problems of resource 
depletion. 
As part of New Zealand's commitment to environmental protection and to 
providing sustainable resources, we have just agreed to go ahead with the 
planting of another 200,000 hectares of forest. 
At the Earth summit, we accepted a commitment to augment our aid 
programme as soon as possible in order to assist in the prompt and effective 
 
implementation of Agenda 21. Our development assistance projects, based on 
consultation with our partner countries, particularly in the South Pacific, 
have always had a strong focus on the environment and on sustainable 
development. 
But aid alone is not enough. New Zealand, like many countries which 
depend on agricultural exports, has been severely disadvantaged by a world 
trading system which handicaps non-subsidized and efficient producers. We 
therefore strongly support the call in Agenda 21 for an open, transparent and 
non-discriminatory trading system that reveals the real environmental costs of 
unsustainable production and enables all countries to pursue truly sustainable 
development on a secure and equitable basis. 
To achieve that would be to achieve a real foundation for peace and 
progress. I am not making these observations from an ivory tower. For its 
part. New Zealand already has one of the most open economies in the world. 
Yes, there was a short-term cost in achieving that, but now we are reaping 
rewards through higher productivity and international competitiveness. 
Despite the progress made from the ending of the cold war, we have not 
yet removed the threat from weapons of mass destruction. 
New Zealand warmly welcomed the agreement reached by President Bush and 
President Yeltsin in June. The two largest nuclear arsenals are to be reduced 
by some 70 per cent. That is remarkable progress and both leaders deserve and 
have our thanks. They have made historic progress but we must keep the 
momentum up. Unless we take decisive action, the dangers from nuclear 
proliferation will increase. 

Therefore we must build on the leadership shown by two nuclear-weapon 
States in declaring moratoriums. We must advance the goal, which New Zealand 
has unwaveringly pursued, of a comprehensive test-ban treaty. We must 
strengthen the International Atomic Energy Agency's safeguards regime. And we 
must secure an indefinite extension of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons in 1995. 

France's decision to suspend testing has been widely welcomed by New 
Zealand and Pacific island countries in the South Pacific Forum region. It 
has opened the way for significantly more positive relations between France 
and the region, which I welcome. We hope the moratorium will be maintained, 
and copied by others. 
Another milestone approaches, with the presentation to this session of 
the General Assembly of a treaty banning another class of weapons of mass 
destruction: chemical weapons. Patient and persistent efforts over 20 years 
will have their reward. New Zealand has strongly supported those efforts and 
intends to be an original signatory to the treaty. We urge other countries to 
take the same step. 
And we must not ignore the continued proliferation of conventional 
armaments. There are legitimate concerns about the levels and availability of 
highly destructive conventional weapons. The implementation of the United 
Nations Register of Conventional Arms would be a useful first step on the way 
to greater accountability in this area. 
Finally, I want to touch on the institutional issues the 
Secretary-General has raised. We strongly endorse the role that is envisaged 
for the United Nations to work with, and on occasions through, regional 
organizations that have some special contribution they can make. Already in 
South Africa we see cooperation between the United Nations and the 
Commonwealth beginning to bear positive fruit. In Somalia the Organization of 
African Unity (OAU), the League of Arab States and the Organization of the 
Islamic Conference have contributed positively to the United Nations mission. 
In the Americas the Organization of American States (OAS) has played an 
increasingly effective role. 

The United Nations role in Cambodia is of particular importance in this 
regard. The operation is unique and deserves the highest praise. But the 
countries of the region - which include New Zealand, with 100 men and women in 
the United Nations force have also played a major part in bringing about the 
conditions necessary for a successful United Nations involvement. Regional 
organizations such as the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) have 
been indispensable in this process. 
The fact of the matter is that the United Nations cannot do everything. 
Neither do I expect it to do everything - but free from the shackles of the 
past it now has a new authority which it must exercise wisely. To maintain 
its authority we must ensure that democratic principles are applied to the 
workings of the United Nations itself. That means that the small must be 
represented in major United Nations decision-making as well as the large. 
It means that there must be fair and regular rotation among Member 
States. And it means we must evolve processes that will allow constructive 
communication between the Security Council and the wider United Nations 
membership so that broad coalitions in support of Security Council action can 
be forged while preserving room for quick and decisive actions where necessary. 
New Zealand's commitment to a strong, effective and democratic United 
Nations has never wavered. At the beginning, at the San Francisco Conference 
in 1945, New Zealand championed the broadest possible participation in 
decision-making. Over the years we have backed up our words with a real 
commitment to United Nations peace-keeping efforts. We have participated thus 
far in 15 such operations: New Zealanders have worn the blue beret in Croatia 
and Bosnia, Lebanon, Cyprus, India, Pakistan, Iraq, Iran, Namibia, Angola, 
Cambodia, the Congo and Yemen. In addition. New Zealand supplied personnel to 
assist the United Nations with mine removal in Afghanistan. 

In conclusion, I want to return to the two agendas which are before this 
Assembly and which seek to achieve a new partnership of nations. Nothing is 
more important than the Agenda for Peace and the Agenda for the Environment 
and Sustainable Development. The United Nations Secretary-General and the 
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development have both identified 
monumental challenges for the General Assembly for several years to come. 
They also highlight the reality of global interdependence. The way ahead has 
to lie in cooperation rather than confrontation, in a recognition that the 
future of each of us is tied up with the future of us all and that no agenda, 
no matter how noble its goals, will succeed unless first and foremost we are 
prepared to work for them. New Zealand is. 

First, I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your election to this 
important post. The fact that a representative of Bulgaria has assumed this 
post at the head of the Assembly at precisely this time is a sign of the 
importance that the world community attaches to the peaceful democratic 
revolution in Eastern Europe. And we are proud that our countries, linked by 
ties of traditional friendship, are treading this path together. 
The democratic movement has prevailed in the cold war. For the first 
time in history unprecedented opportunities have opened up for the 
implementation of the principles proclaimed by the United Nations. 

The post-confrontational and post-communist world is not a 
pax Sovietica. a pax Americana, a pax Islamica or a pax Christiana, nor is it 
a monopolistic system of any kind, but rather the multipolar unity in 
diversity that the United Nations has symbolized from the very outset. 
For the present, such a world is only a possibility yet to be realized 
through our joint efforts. Realism leaves no room for euphoria. A difficult 
period of transition lies ahead. But realism compels us to reject any 
alternative to the democratic choice. 
Russia, which has rejected communism, has, perhaps more than any other 
country, learned from its own experience that there can be no alternative to 
democratic development; our country voted for democracy during the first 
nation-wide presidential election in its history, and defended it at the 
barricades around the Moscow White House. Neither the President, nor the 
Government, nor the majority of Parliament, nor the country at large will turn 
aside from the path of reform, no matter how difficult it may prove. 
Totalitarianism robbed Russia both of its unique identity and of the 
possibility of self-fulfilment in its relations with other nations. Through 
its self-imposed isolation, the richest country of Eurasia became the sick man 
of Europe and Asia. In contrast, only an open society and a policy of 
openness will enable Russia to find and play to the fullest extent its unique 
and historic role. 
This policy has its roots in an age-old Russian idea. Back in the 
thirteenth century Saint Alexander Nevsky, one of the founders and defenders 
of the Russian State, said: "God is to be found not in power but in truth". 

Today this is the policy of the true national interests of the Russian 
State as a normal rather than an aggressive great Power, as one that 
recognizes and shoulders its responsibilities as a permanent member of the 
Security Council. 
The basic elements of this policy are as follows: partnership and 
alliance for democracy and a dynamic market economy with countries that share 
these values; good-neighbourly relations with all neighbouring States; 
comprehensive strengthening of the Commonwealth of Independent States, 
strategic partnership with Ukraine, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan and all 
other countries created in the place of the former Soviet Union; and 
solidarity and mutually advantageous cooperation with all the members of the 
world community. 
Russia intends to act in support of United Nations efforts to address 
the twofold task of the democratization of societies and the renewal of 
international relations. This is consonant with the concluding statement of 
the summit meeting of the Security Council, with Secretary-General 
Boutros Boutros-Ghali's report "An Agenda for Peace" and with the first 
statements already made from this rostrum. Russia is ready to give practical 
support to the proposals made yesterday by George Bush, President of the 
United States. 
First of all, it is necessary to extinguish armed conflicts. 
The Russian Federation will increase its efforts to eliminate conflicts 
inherited from the past in the territory of the former USSR, bearing in mind 
the special interest and responsibility of Russia in strengthening the 
civilized principles of the United Nations and the Conference on Security and 
Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) in this part of the world. 

Russia supports the participation of the new independent States in these 
two organizations and other international forums. We welcome their 
representatives in this Hall. 
We categorically reject imperialistic ambitions, diktat and violence, 
both in the area of the former USSR and in other parts of the world. Should 
political means fail, force can and should be used to separate the warring 
sides, to protect human rights and humanitarian missions and to restore peace 
in strict conformity with the Charter of the United Nations. 
Agreements for cease-fires and for the establishment of peace-keeping 
forces, concluded with Russian participation, are already in effect in 
Ossetia, the Dniester region and Abkhazia, where Russian soldiers are carrying 
out their peace-keeping duties. Together with CSCE, we will strive to end the 
war and bring peace to Karabakh and to secure the integrity of Tajikistan and 
bring national reconciliation to that country. In all those efforts we count 
on continued active cooperation with the United Nations. 
We support efforts aimed at forcing Iraq to implement the decisions of 
the United Nations and ensuring at the same time the territorial integrity and 
the peaceful nature of that State. For that purpose, Russia has sent two 
naval vessels to the Persian Gulf. 
We also must ensure that the demands of the Security Council are 
complied with by all the Yugoslav sides and must enable them to maintain 
contact with the United Nations. A Russian infantry battalion is serving 
honourably with the United Nations forces in Yugoslavia. 
I agree with the preceding speaker concerning the need to support the 
efforts of Mr. Panic for the practical implementation of the intentions he has 
declared. 
 
Russia will continue to cooperate actively with the other permanent 
members of the Security Council and with all the parties concerned in 
order to seize the opportunity for a peaceful settlement in the Middle 
East, Cambodia, Angola and other areas of conflict. 
We have no doubt that it is the task of the United Nations to combat 
violence with force based on law, with its potential for enforcing peace. 
The Blue Helmets should take action in response even when they are fired 
upon. 
It is time to strengthen the capacity of the Security Council to 
take swift and decisive action in humanitarian emergency situations 
arising from mass violations of human rights and inter-ethnic clashes, 
including those within national borders. 

It is important to strengthen the preventive component of United Nations 
activities. This includes the establishment of hot lines to United Nations 
Headquarters, the submission of intelligence information to the 
Secretary-General and the further development of fact-finding. 
Enhanced United Nations efforts to safeguard human rights and the rights 
of national minorities are also a priority. In the past it was chiefly the 
victims of totalitarian regimes and ideologies who needed protection. What is 
increasingly needed now is to combat the aggressive nationalism that is 
emerging as the new global threat. 
The replacement of ideological intolerance with national and religious 
intolerance would threaten the world which is increasingly becoming one 
world - with rifts just as serious and with national, regional and global 
catastrophes. Democratic Russia categorically rejects any form of chauvinism, 
be it Russophobia or anti-Semitism. 
We feel special concern at the growing discriminatory practices against 
Russians, Ukrainians, Jews and all other non-indigenous nationalities in some 
of the new States that have emerged in the territory of the former USSR, 
particularly in Estonia and Latvia. A situation in which 42 per cent of the 
population of the Estonian Republic are disenfranchised is totally 
inconsistent with international law. 
We have raised and will continue to raise these issues in the United 
Nations and other forums. We have the right to do so, among other reasons, 
because the countries in question won their independence, to a substantial 
extent, through the triumph of the democrats in Russia. The practices I have 
referred to can in no way be justified by invoking the problem, inherited from 
the USSR, of the withdrawal of armed forces from the Baltic States. We are 

already working together to resolve that problem, and we intend to resolve it 
as soon as possible; however, due regard must also be given to the rights of 
those who are in military uniform. 
It would be appropriate to give thought to a joint interpretation of the 
international trusteeship system set forth in the Charter of the United 
Nations, particularly since one of its basic objectives is and I quote the 
Charter - "To encourage respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms 
for all without distinction as to race, sex, language, or religion". That 
system has brought many nations to independence. Today national minorities 
desperately need the trusteeship of the world community. 
The fate of former Soviet servicemen taken prisoner in Afghanistan 
remains one of the gravest humanitarian problems. We call upon the General 
Assembly to proclaim its support for the urgent resolution of this problem. 
The rejection of the game of "nuclear roulette" in favour of cooperation 
in the interests of strategic stability for all and with the participation of 
all States concerned is reflected in the agreements on further drastic cuts in 
strategic offensive arms and on a global defense system reached in Washington 
by the Presidents of Russia and the United States of America. 
Reaffirming its commitments under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons, the Russian Federation invites all countries that have not 
yet done so to join the Treaty as non-nuclear-weapon States. It is our belief 
that all the former Republics of the USSR, including Ukraine, Belarus and 
Kazakhstan, will do so. This step should be taken as soon as possible, since 
the entry into force of the treaty on strategic offensive arms depends on it. 

We expect that a sense of high responsibility and a readiness to reach 
compromise solutions will prevail in the decisive phase of the approval of the 
Convention on the banning of chemical weapons. 
Russia is in favour of control, including control through the United 
Nations, over international arms transfers, especially over offensive and 
highly destructive weapons. The approach taken with respect to regimes that 
disregard the standards of international law should be particularly strict. 
There is an obvious need for the development of concrete 
military-industry conversion programmes, not only through the efforts of 
individual countries but also through the combined action of the international 
community. The United Nations and its specialized agencies could play a 
pioneering role in this endeavour. In the long run, real disarmament and the 
conversion of military industries to peaceful production will make it possible 
to release additional resources for the needs of development. 
But development cannot be achieved without ensuring full political and 
economic rights and freedoms, without releasing human creative potential in a 
market environment. Russia has learned this from its own experience. 
For a successful solution of the problems of development, it is extremely 
important to strengthen the interaction between the United Nations and the 
Bretton Woods institutions. Herein lies the key to the harmonization of the 
world community's efforts in such areas as support of macroeconomic reforms 
and technical assistance and the provision of help in resolving social 
problems. Both developing and developed countries will benefit from this. 
The United Nations Conference at Rio de Janeiro reinforced the consensus 
on the need to integrate development policies and environmental protection. 

The task of renewing international relations calls for the 
rationalization of the United Nations itself and of the United Nations 
system. The desire of some States to play a more active role in the United 
Nations is quite natural. The Charter provides ample scope for this. In 
particular, the Charter permits the Security Council to establish auxiliary 
bodies in which many States would participate. We are convinced that the 
United Nations and other international organizations will play a growing role 
in regulating international relations. 
In conclusion, I should like to address you, Mr. Secretary-General. 
Russia supports your efforts to bring about the settlement of international 
crises, to improve the efficiency of the United Nations Secretariat and the 
coordination of the activities of all international agencies. 
Support of the United Nations presupposes the fulfilment of financial 
obligations to the Organization. Despite its economic difficulties, in the 
period from September of this year to March 1993 Russia will pay $130 million 
as partial payment of our arrears to the United Nations and an additional 
$30 million to other agencies. 
Your recent statements in Moscow, Mr. Secretary-General, have confirmed 
the similarity of our vision of the great future of the United Nations. 
Forty-seven years ago I was a young man of 21, and, 
like thousands of others of my generation, I had gone off to war to help keep 
freedom alive. Forty-seven years ago this month the war was finally over, and 
I was looking forward to peace and the chance to begin my life in earnest: 
1945 marked a moment of promise, not just for me, but for all of mankind. A 
great struggle against dictatorship had been fought and won. Across the 
globe, we all looked forward to a future free of war, a world where we might 
raise our children in peace and freedom, and this institution, the United 
Nations, born amidst the ashes of war, embodied those hopes and dreams like no 
other. 
But the hopes and dreams of 1945 remained unfulfilled: communist 
imperialism divided the world in two, our hopes for peace and our dreams of 
freedom were frozen in the grip of cold war, and, instead of finding a common 
ground, we found ourselves at Ground Zero. Instead of living on Churchill's 
The President returned to the Chair. 

"broad, sunlit uplands", millions found that there was, as Arthur Koestler so 
chillingly wrote, "Darkness at Noon". Instead of uniting the nations, this 
body became a forum for distrust and division among nations and, in a cruel 
irony, the United Nations, created to free the world of conflict, itself 
became conflict's captive. 
I too lived through those disputes; I sat where you sit, proudly so; I 
served in this Assembly and I saw, in my time, the consequences of the cold 
war's hot words on the higher missions of the United Nations. Now, 47 years 
later, we stand at the end of another war, the cold war, and our hopes and 
dreams have awakened again. Driven by its own internal contradictions and 
banished by the peoples' undying thirst for freedom, imperial communism has 
collapsed in its birthplace, and today Russia has awakened democratic, 
independent and free; the Baltic States are free; and so too are Ukraine, 
Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan and the other independent States joining the 
nations of Central and Eastern Europe in freedom. 
The fear of nuclear Armageddon between the super-Powers has vanished, and 
we are proud to have done our part to ensure that our schoolchildren do not 
have to practise hiding under their desks for fear of nuclear attack, as the 
generation before them did. I am proud also to salute the courageous leaders 
with nuclear responsibilities Presidents Yeltsin, Kravchuk, Nazarbayev, 
Shushkevich who joined me in ending the super-Power stand-off that risked 
nuclear nightmare. This is the first General Assembly session to seat you as 
truly independent and free nations, and to you and the leaders of the other 
independent States, I say welcome home: we are now truly united nations. 

With the cold war's end, I believe we have a unique opportunity to go 
beyond artificial divisions of a first, second and third world to forge 
instead a genuine, global community of free and sovereign nations, a community 
built on respect for principle, on peaceful settlement of disputes, on 
fundamental human rights and on the twin pillars of freedom: democracy and 
free markets. Already, the United Nations, especially the Security Council, 
has done much to fulfil its original mission and to build this global 
community. 
United Nations leadership has been critical in resolving conflicts and 
brokering peace the entire world over, but securing democracy and securing the 
peace in the century ahead will be no simple task. Imperial communism may 
have been vanquished, but that does not end the challenges of our age, 
challenges that must be overcome if we are finally to end the divisions 
between East and West, North and South, that fuel strife and strain and 
conflict and war. 
As we support the historic growth of democracy around the world, I 
believe the community of nations and the United Nations face three critical, 
interrelated challenges as we enter the twenty-first century. 
First, we face the political challenge of keeping today's peace and 
preventing tomorrow's wars. As we see daily in Bosnia, Somalia and Cambodia, 
everywhere conflict claims innocent lives; the need for enhanced peace-keeping 
capabilities has never been greater; the conflicts we must deal with have 
never been more intractable, the costs of conflict higher. 
Second, we face the strategic challenge of the proliferation of weapons 
of mass destruction, truly the fastest growing security challenge to 
international peace and order. 

Third, we face the common economic challenge of promoting prosperity for 
all, of strengthening an open, growth-oriented, free-market international 
economic order while safeguarding the environment. 
Meeting these challenges will require us to strengthen our collective 
engagement; it will require us to transform our collective institutions; and, 
above all, it will require that each of us look seriously at our own 
Government and how we conduct our international affairs. We too must change 
our institutions and our practices if we are to make a new world of the 
promises of today, if we are to secure a twenty-first century peace. 
 
With you today I would like to discuss these three challenges: 
peace-keeping, proliferation and prosperity. And I should like to use this 
opportunity to begin to sketch how I believe the international community can 
work together to meet these three challenges and how the United States is 
changing its institutions and policies to catalyze this effort. 
Let me begin with peace-keeping. The United Nations has a long and 
distinguished history of peace-keeping and humanitarian relief. From Cyprus 
and Lebanon, to Cambodia and Croatia, the blue beret has become a symbol of 
hope amid all that hostility. And the United Nations has long played a 
central role in preventing conflicts from turning into wars, and strengthening 
peace-keeping capabilities can help buttress these diplomatic efforts. But, 
as much as the United Nations has done, it can do much more. 
Peace-keepers are stretched to the limit while the demands for their 
services increase by the day. The need for monitoring and preventive 
peace-keeping putting people on the ground before the fighting starts - may 
become especially critical in volatile regions. This is especially the case 
because of the rapid and turbulent change that continues to shake Eastern 
Europe and Eurasia. Across the lands that once were imprisoned behind an iron 
curtain, peoples are reasserting their historical identities that were frozen 
in communism's catacomb. 
Where this is taking place in a democratic manner with tolerance and 
civility and respect for fundamental human rights and freedoms, this new 
democratic nationalism is all to the good. But, unfortunately, we need only 
look to the bloody battles raging in places such as the former Yugoslavia to 
see the dangers of ethnic violence. This is the greatest threat to the 
democratic peace we hope to build with Eastern Europe, with Russia and 
 
Eurasia, even more than economic deprivation. We fully support the efforts of 
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the Conference on Security and 
Cooperation in Europe (CSCE), the Western European Union (WEU), the 
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) and other competent regional 
organizations to develop peace-keeping capabilities. 
We are convinced, however, that enhanced United Nations capabilities are 
a necessary complement to these regional efforts, not just in Europe and 
Eurasia, but across the globe. 
I welcome the Secretary-General's call for a new agenda to strengthen the 
ability of the United Nations to prevent, contain and resolve conflicts across 
the globe. Today I call upon all Members to join me in taking bold steps to 
advance that agenda. I will therefore be discussing with my colleagues the 
merits of a special meeting of the Security Council to discuss the 
Secretary-General's proposals and to develop concrete responses in five key 
areas. 
First, robust peace-keeping requires men and equipment that only Member 
States can provide. Nations should develop and train military units for 
possible peace-keeping operations and humanitarian relief and these forces 
must be available on short notice at the request of the Security Council and 
with the approval, of course, of the Governments providing it. 
Secondly, if multinational units are to work together, they must train 
together. Many nations for example, Fiji, Norway, Canada and Finland have 
a long history of peace-keeping and we can all tap into that experience as we 
train for expanded operations. Effective multinational action will also 
require coordinated command and control and inter-operability of both 
equipment and communications. Multinational planning, training, field 

exercises will be needed. Those efforts should link up with regional 
organizations. 
Thirdly, we also need to provide adequate logistical support for 
peace-keeping and humanitarian operations. Member States should designate 
stockpiles of resources necessary to meet humanitarian emergencies, including 
famines, floods and civil disturbances. This will save valuable time in a 
crisis. 
Fourthly, we will need to develop planning, crisis management and 
intelligence capabilities for peace-keeping and humanitarian operations. 
Fifthly, we must ensure adequate equitable financing for United Nations 
and associated peace-keeping efforts. 
As I said, we must change our national institutions if we are to change 
our international relations. So let me assure you that the United States is 
ready to do its part to strengthen world peace by strengthening international 
peace-keeping. 
For decades, the American military has served as a stabilizing presence 
around the globe. And I want to draw on our extensive experience in winning 
wars, in keeping the peace, to support United Nations peace-keeping. I have 
directed the United States Secretary of Defense to place a new emphasis on 
peace-keeping. Because of peace-keeping's growing importance as a mission for 
the United States military, we will emphasize training of combat, engineering 
and logistical units for the full range of peace-keeping and humanitarian 
activities and we will work with the United Nations to best employ our 
considerable lift, logistics, communications and intelligence capabilities to 
support peace-keeping operations. And we will offer our capabilities for 
joint simulations and exercises to strengthen our ability to undertake joint 
peace-keeping operations. 

There is room for all countries, large and small, and I hope all will 
play a part. 
Member States, as always, must retain the final decision on the use of 
their troops, of course. But we must develop our ability to coordinate 
peace-keeping efforts so that we can mobilize quickly when a threat to peace 
arises or when people in need look to the world for help. 
I have further directed the establishment of a permanent peace-keeping 
curriculum in United States military schools. Training, plainly, is a key 
element. The United States is prepared to make available our bases and 
facilities for multinational training and field exercises. One such base, 
nearby, with facilities is Fort Dix. America used these bases to win the cold 
war and today, with that war over, they can help build a lasting peace. 
The United States is willing to provide our military expertise to the 
United Nations to help the United Nations strengthen its planning and 
operations for peace-keeping, and we will also broaden American support for 
monitoring, verification, reconnaissance and other requirements of United 
Nations peace-keeping or humanitarian assistance operations. 
And, finally, the United States will review how we fund peace-keeping and 
explore new ways to ensure adequate American financial support for United 
Nations peace-keeping and United Nations humanitarian activities. I do 
believe that we must think differently about how we ensure and pay for our 
security in this new era. 
While the cold war may have ended, the super-Power nuclear arms 
competition, regional competition, weapons of mass destruction continue. Over 
20 countries have, or are developing, nuclear, chemical or biological weapons 
 
and the means to deliver them. At a time when the United States and its 
former adversaries are engaged in deep, historic cuts in our nuclear arsenals, 
our children and grandchildren will never forgive us if we allow new and 
unstable nuclear stand-offs to develop around the world. 

We believe the Security Council should become a key forum for 
non-proliferation enforcement. The Security Council should make clear its 
intention to stem proliferation and sanction proliferators. Reaffirming 
assurances made at the time the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons was negotiated, I propose that the Security Council reassure the 
non-nuclear States that it will seek immediate action to provide assistance, 
in accordance with the Charter, to any any non-nuclear-weapon State party to 
the non-proliferation Treaty that is a victim of an act of aggression or an 
object of threat of aggression involving nuclear weapons. 
I also call for the indefinite renewal of the nuclear non-proliferation 
Treaty when it is reviewed in 1995. I believe we must explore ways we can 
strengthen linkages between the suppliers "clubs", the nuclear-suppliers 
group, the Australia Group, the missile-technology control regime and United 
Nations specialized agencies. 
Here I would like to note the productive efforts of the United Nations 
Special Commission (UNSCOM) to dismantle the Iraqi weapons-of-mass-destruction 
programme, and the continuing good work of the International Atomic Energy 
Agency (IAEA). But as the United Nations organizations adapt to stop 
proliferation, so too must every Member State change its structures to advance 
our non-proliferation goals. 
In that spirit I want today to announce my intention to work with the 
United States Congress to redirect the United States Arms Control and 
Disarmament Agency (ACDA) to refocus its talents on providing technical 
support for non-proliferation, weapons monitoring and destruction, and global 
defence conversion. Under the direction of the Secretary of State, ACDA 

should be used not only in completing the traditional arms-control agenda but, 
just as importantly, in providing technical assistance on our new security 
agenda. 
Even as we work to prevent proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, 
we must be realistic and guard ourselves against proliferation that is already 
taking place. Therefore, we are working towards a cooperative system for 
defence against limited ballistic missile attacks. We fully intend to have 
other nations participate in this global protection system. 
While expanded peace-keeping capabilities and improved non-proliferation 
efforts will be critical for building an enduring peace, shared economic 
growth is the long-term foundation for a brighter future well into the next 
century. That is why I stated yesterday, during a moment of international 
uncertainty, that the United States would be strongly engaged with its global 
partners in building a global economic, financial and trading structure for 
this new era. 
At the same time, I urged that our global responsibilities lead us to 
examine ways to strengthen the Group of Seven (G-7) coordination process, and 
I affirmed America's support for a European integration that opens markets and 
enhances Europe's capability to be our partner in the great challenges that we 
face in this new era. While the exact form of integration is, of course, for 
Europeans to determine, we will stand by them. 
Economic growth is not a zero-sum process. All of us will benefit from 
the expanded trade and investment that comes from a vibrant, growing world 
economy. To ensure that the benefits of this growth are sustained and shared 
by all, fair and open competition should be the fuel for the global economic 

engine. That is why the United States wants to complete the Uruguay Round of 
the negotiations within the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) as 
soon as possible, and to create a network of free-trade agreements, beginning 
with the North American Free Trade Agreement. 
At the same time, we need to recognize that we have a shared 
responsibility to foster and support the free-market reforms necessary to 
build growing economies and vibrant democracies in the developing world and in 
the new democratic States. This should be done by promoting the private 
sector to build these new economies, not by fostering dependency with 
traditional Government-to-Government foreign aid. 
After the Second World War, foreign assistance often served as a weapon 
in the cold war. Obviously, we will still use critical foreign-assistance 
funds to meet legitimate security needs. And, as our humanitarian operations 
in Somalia and northern Iraq, Bosnia and the former Soviet Union will testify, 
we will continue our robust humanitarian assistance efforts to help those 
suffering from man-made and natural disasters. 
But foreign aid as we have known it needs to be transformed. The notion 
of the handout to less developed countries needs to give way to cooperation 
and mutually productive economic relationships. We know this: the more a 
nation relies on the private sector and free markets, the higher its rate of 
growth; the more open to trade it is, the higher its rate of growth; and the 
better a country's investment climate, the higher its rate of growth. 
To move from what I would call aid-dependency to economic partnership, we 
propose to alter fundamentally the focus of United States assistance 
programmes to building strong, independent economies that can become 

contributors to a healthy, growing global economy. That means that our new 
emphasis should be on building economic partnerships among our private sectors 
that will promote prosperity at home, and abroad also. Working with our 
Congress I will propose a top-to-bottom overhaul of our institutions that plan 
and administer foreign assistance, drastically reducing the bureaucracy that 
has built up around Government-based programmes, streamlining our delivery 
systems and strengthening support for private-sector development and economic 
reform. 
The Agency for International Development (AID), another institution born 
during the cold war, needs to be fundamentally and radically overhauled. 
Promoting economic security, opportunity and competitiveness will become a 
primary mission of the State Department. Our assistance efforts should not be 
charity. On the contrary, they should promote mutual prosperity. Therefore, 
using existing foreign-affairs resources, I will propose creating a $1 billion 
growth fund. The fund will provide grants and credits to support United 
States businesses in providing expertise, goods and services desperately 
needed in countries undertaking economic restructuring. 
I will also support significantly increasing the programmes of the 
Export-Import Bank to ensure that United States products and technology 
promote investment in world-wide economic growth. 
The United States will work with its global partners, especially the G-7 
nations, to enhance global growth at this key point in world history, as we 
end one era and begin another. 
None of us can afford insular policies. Each of us must contribute, 
through greater coordinated action, to building  stronger world economy. 

I realize that what I have outlined today is an ambitious agenda. But we 
live in remarkable times: times when empires collapse, ideologies dissolve 
and walls crumble; times when change can come so fast that we sometimes forget 
how far and how fast we have progressed in achieving our hopes for a global 
community of democratic nations. 

And in the face of today's changes, with the loss of so much that was 
familiar and predictable, there is now a great temptation for people 
everywhere to turn inward and to build walls around themselves walls against 
trade, walls against people, walls against ideas and investment, walls against 
anything at all that appears new and different. 
As the Berlin Wall fell, these walls too must fall. They must fall 
because we cannot separate our fate from that of others. Our peace is so 
interconnected, our security so intertwined, our prosperity so interdependent, 
that to turn inward and retreat from the world is to invite disaster and 
defeat. 
At the threshold of a new century we can truly say a more peaceful, more 
secure, more prosperous future beckons to us. For the sake of our children 
and our grandchildren, for the sake of those who perished during the cold war 
and for the sake of every man, woman and child who kept freedom's flame alive 
even during the darkest noon, let us pledge ourselves to make that future 
real, and let us pledge ourselves to fulfil the promise of a truly United 
Nations. 
Thank you and may God bless you all. 
May I begin 
by warmly congratulating you, Sir, on your election to the presidency of the 
current session of the United Nations General Assembly. I believe that, given 
your talent and experience, you will guide this session to a successful 
completion of the noble mission entrusted to it by the Charter of the United 
Nations. I would also like to express my appreciation and thanks to your 
predecessor, Mr. Shihabi, for the contribution he made to accomplishing the 
tasks of the last session. 
I would like to take this opportunity to extend my warm welcome and 
congratulations to the 13 States that have been admitted to the United Nations 
this year: the Republic of Armenia, the Azerbaijani Republic, the Republic of 
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Republic of Croatia, the Republic of Georgia, the 
Republic of Kazakhstan, the Republic of Kyrgyzstan, the Republic of Moldova, 
the Republic of San Marino, the Republic of Slovenia, the Republic of 
Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and the Republic of Uzbekistan. 
Since the last session of the General Assembly, profound changes have 
taken place in the world, with events of major consequences occurring one 
after another, from East to West and North to South. The international 
community has finally shaken off the old pattern whose main feature was the 
confrontation between the two military blocs. The world has now entered a new 
historical phase of development towards multipolarity. 
We in China have a saying: "Past experience can serve as a guide for the 
present". The tortuous course that mankind has traversed in this century, 
particularly since the end of the Second World War, has revealed a historical 
truth: any Power, however strong it may be, is bound to decline if it goes 
against the people's will for peace and development. It has always been a 
shared aspiration and objective of the people of all countries to work for 
world peace, national stability, social progress, economic growth and a better 
life. This is a historical trend which no force can resist. 
The genuine peace that the people of the world have longed for has not 
come with the end of the cold war. On the contrary, the world remains uneasy, 
with new problems added to the old ones and armed conflicts erupting one after 
another as a result of disrupted equilibrium. Hegemonism and power politics 
continue to exist. The attempt of some big Powers to control developing 
countries politically and economically has become more and more obvious. 
Long-hidden ethnic conflicts have surfaced with a vengeance and the 
North-South contradictions have further intensified. The road to peace and 
development before the people of the world is covered with thorns. 
As we can all see, a dangerous "seismic belt" extending from the Balkans 
to the Caucasus and to Central Asia is taking shape. In some regions, people 
have once again been plunged into war and turmoil, with millions of refugees 
fleeing in all directions. These conflicts have occurred in those areas where 
different ethnic groups have traditionally lived together, with age-old 
antagonisms suddenly coming to the surface under the new situation. These 
conflicts are interwoven with historical feuds, territorial disputes, 
political rivalries, clashes of economic interests, and religious intolerance. 
They have been further complicated by the involvement of outside forces. 
In our view, force should not be used even as a last resort in the search 
of the settlement of a problem, however complicated it may be. The 
fundamental solution lies in a reconciliation of various ethnic groups through 
dialogues on an equal footing and peaceful negotiations. We sincerely hope 
that the parties' to the conflicts will, proceeding from the overriding 
interest of maintaining the peace and in the interests of the people, abandon 
the threat or use of force and seek a political settlement of their conflicts 
through friendly consultations and negotiations on an equal footing in the 
spirit of mutual respect, good-neighbourliness and common progress. 
We support the United Nations in its positive efforts to avoid an 
escalation of conflicts and seek peaceful settlements. Outside intervention 
and mediation can be resorted to when necessary, provided that they are based 
on a strict observance of the principles and objectives of the United Nations 
Charter and the basic norms of international law. Only mediation or 
intervention in such a manner can contribute to a peaceful settlement of 
conflicts, the stability and unity of sovereign States, and the amicable 
coexistence of different ethnic groups. 
The Middle East peace process has taken a favourable turn thanks to the 
joint efforts of the Arab countries and Israel and the support of the rest of 
the international community. We hope that the parties concerned will seize 
the opportunity, take a flexible and practical approach, and conduct serious 
negotiations in order to remove obstacles and seek a comprehensive and fair 
solution to the Middle East issue, including the restoration of the national 
rights of the Palestinian people on the basis of the relevant United Nations 
Security Council resolutions. 
The Asia-Pacific region has enjoyed political stability and a sustained 
economic growth. In Cambodia, the striving for peace and rehabilitation has 
become the order of the day. Political settlement of the Cambodian issue is 
irreversible, though difficulties and twists and turns are hardly avoidable. 
The implementation of the Paris Agreements in their totality requires not only 
determination but also patience. In Afghanistan, the resistance forces have 
taken control. We hope they will end the bloodshed so as to create suitable 
conditions for the election. On the Korean peninsula, the North and the South 
have intensified their dialogue, resulting in a further relaxation of tension 
there. The recent establishment of diplomatic relations between China and the 
Republic of Korea will have a far-reaching impact on stability and peace in 
North-East Asia. 
The turbulent and complicated international situation has further 
awakened countries and peoples of the world to the urgency and necessity of 
establishing a new international order. The world of the future should not be 
a place where only the interests and privileges of big Powers or power groups 
are protected, nor a place where international affairs are monopolized and 
manipulated by the big, strong, and wealthy countries only. The old world 
order based on unequal relationships no longer works. 
A new international order should be based on the universal observance of 
the five principles of mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial 
integrity, mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each other's internal 
affairs, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence. This is in 
conformity with the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter. 
All countries, big or small, strong or weak, rich or poor, should have the 
right to choose a social system and a road to development suited to their 
actual conditions. Countries should respect each other, treat each other as 
equals, and resolve their disputes through peaceful negotiations. Only when 
all countries undertake to observe these principles can there be genuine 
democracy in international relations. We are convinced that as the world 
moves towards multipolarity, an equitable and rational international order of 
peace and stability will come into being. 
The United States and the former Soviet Union or Russia have reached some 
new agreements on nuclear-arms reduction in recent years. These agreements 
have been well-received by the international community, which hopes that they 
will be earnestly implemented by the countries concerned. At the same time, 
it is clear to people that even after the aforementioned disarmament 
agreements are fully implemented, the major military Powers will still be in 
possession of the largest arsenals of the most sophisticated nuclear and other 
high-tech weapons, and the capabilities to develop space weapons. 
After years of negotiations, the chemical weapons convention has finally 
been concluded. It has laid an international legal basis for a world-wide 
elimination of such weapons of mass destruction. Though some of its 
provisions are not fair and balanced, the purposes and objectives defined in 
the convention have nonetheless won the unanimous endorsement and support of 
the international community. We hope that these purposes and objectives will 
be observed and carried out effectively in the interest of the security of all 
countries. 
China has all along stood for the complete prohibition and thorough 
destruction of all weapons of mass destruction. Pending the realization of 
this goal, it is necessary for the international community to take, as a 
transitional step, appropriate measures to prevent the proliferation of 
weapons of mass destruction in the interest of regional and world security and 
stability. We maintain that international non-proliferation should be pursued 
in a fair, reasonable, comprehensive and balanced manner without prejudice to 
the legitimate security interests of any country, to its socio-economic 
development, or to international cooperation in the application of science 
and technology for peaceful purposes. 
We oppose the attempt of a country to interfere in and obstruct the 
normal cooperation between sovereign States under the pretext of preventing 
arms proliferation. We strongly condemn the blatant violation of one's own 
commitment to an international agreement by selling large amounts of advanced 
weapons and equipment, in gross interference in another country's internal 
affairs. 
We would like to make the following suggestions in the field of 
disarmament and arms control. First, all nuclear-weapon States should 
undertake not to be the first to use nuclear weapons or to resort to the 
threat or use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear weapon States in any 
circumstances whatsoever. Secondly, all nuclear-weapon States should support 
proposals for the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones, respect the 
status of the existing nuclear-weapon-free zones, and undertake corresponding 
obligations. Those countries which have deployed nuclear weapons abroad 
should withdraw all of them to their own territories. Thirdly, all countries 
with space capabilities should follow the principle of the peaceful use of 
space and immediately stop their research, testing, production, and deployment 
of space weapons and refrain from extending their weapons systems into space. 
In today's world, the gulf between the rich and the poor is further 
widening. The population of the richest countries and that of the poorest 
countries each accounts for 20 per cent of the world's total, but their income 
gap has grown wider, from 30-fold in the 1960s to 90-fold in the 1990s. The 
question of North-South relations has become more acute. Development and 
peace are matters of equal urgency and importance. 
The sluggish growth of the world economy, unequal and unfair trade, the 
plummeting prices of many primary products and crushing debt burdens are among 
the unfavourable external conditions which have continued to place severe 
constraints on the economic development of developing countries. Quite a few 
of them have suffered a constant drop in the growth rate of their per capita 
gross national product (GNP). Some have even registered negative economic 
growth rates. Their terms of trade continue to deteriorate, which hampers 
their export efforts. They have found it even more difficult to attract 
foreign investment and technology. 
Peace and development are mutually supportive. They can promote or 
hinder each other, but they cannot supersede each other. It is impossible to 
preserve world peace without development. There can hardly be durable 
stability and prosperity in the world in the absence of economic development 
and social progress in developing countries. A protracted economic stagnation 
or even decline in developing countries will also affect further economic 
growth in developed countries. 
Developing countries should mainly rely on themselves to achieve real 
economic growth. While restructuring their economies to speed up their 
economic development, many of them are reviewing their experience and 
earnestly exploring paths of development suited to their national conditions. 
No one can deny that the old international economic order, being 
irrational and inequitable, is an important external cause of the poverty and 
backwardness of developing countries. First and foremost, developed countries 
have the responsibility and obligation to take effective measures, including 
the following. 
First, developed countries should set aside 0.7 per cent of their GNP for 
assistance to developing countries in accordance with the relevant resolutions 
of the United Nations; increase official development assistance, and address 
the debt question and work to rectify the anomaly of the flight of capital 
from developing to developed countries. 
Secondly, they should observe the basic principles of the generalized 
system of preferences devised by the United Nations Conference on Trade and 
Development; dismantle discriminatory trade barriers; further open their 
markets to developing countries; and endeavour to keep the prices of primary 
products at rational levels. 
Thirdly, they should resume and increase official and non-governmental 
technical assistance and the concessional transfer of technology to developing 
countries in order gradually to narrow the North-South gap in science and 
technology and to facilitate the economic restructuring and technological 
progress of developing countries. 
It must be stressed that political stability is an important prerequisite 
for the economic growth of developing countries. Assistance for the purpose 
of applying pressure on the recipient countries will cause turbulence and 
instability in these countries, which will be even more detrimental to their 
economic development. 
It is obviously one-sided and harmful to make irresponsible comments 
about the human rights situation in developing countries in disregard of the 
differences in 'historical backgrounds and cultural traditions as well as the 
actual conditions in these countries. For the people of developing countries, 
the right to subsistence and the right to development are undoubtedly the 
fundamental and the most important human rights of all. In those areas hit by 
severe natural disasters year after year, people are starving; in war-ridden 
areas, millions are turned into refugees. How can people living in such 
conditions enjoy human rights? 
Establishing an equitable and rational new international economic order 
based on equality and mutual benefit will be a reliable guarantee of balanced, 
healthy and sustained growth in the world economy, and an important 
precondition for gradually narrowing the North-South gap as well. The 
achievement of this goal calls for serious dialogue between the North and the 
South and joint efforts by both. As long as the two sides adopt a positive 
approach, seek common ground on major issues while putting aside minor 
differences, seek mutual benefit and actively look for ways to cooperate 
effectively, the North-South dialogue will make headway. 
The important documents adopted at the United Nations Conference on 
Environment and Development and the Conventions on climate change and 
biological diversity open for signature during the Conference reflect the 
consensus and understanding that countries at different stages of development 
have reached on environmental protection and economic development. We hope 
that the obligations and rights in respect of environmental protection will be 
fulfilled or exercised fully, and that global cooperation in this field will 
provide scope for improved North-South relations. 
The Chinese Government actively supports the proposals for a World Summit 
for Social Development, under United Nations auspices. It warmly welcomes the 
convocation of the fourth World Conference on Women, to be held in Beijing in 
September 1995. The Chinese organization committee was set up in August this 
year, and China will begin preparing in earnest to ensure that arrangements 
for the conference in Beijing run smoothly. 
The historic changes in the international situation have also presented 
formidable challenges to the United Nations. The people of the world have 
high expectations of this world Organization. How the United Nations will 
adapt itself to the new international situation, address major international 
issues in a more positive, balanced, just and reasonable manner, promote world 
peace and development and play its role in the efforts to establish a new 
world order has become a major concern of the international community. 
The Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, has submitted a 
detailed and extensive mid-year report (A/47/277) on the role of the United 
Nations in maintaining international peace, which merits our careful study. 
We appreciate his efforts. 
The reform of the United Nations is now on the agenda, and its success 
depends on sound principles and on choosing the right direction. We should 
like to offer for consideration the following thoughts, which we think conform 
to the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter. 
The reform should contribute to maintaining the sovereignty of Member 
States. Sovereign States are the subjects of international law and form the 
basis of the United Nations. Safeguarding State sovereignty should be a 
fundamental principle of a new world order. 
The reform should facilitate the peaceful settlement of international 
conflicts. The United Nations should be an international organization 
dedicated to preserving peace and promoting cooperation. Only when it abides 
by the basic norms governing international relations, persists in settling all 
international disputes through peaceful means and opposes the threat or use of 
force will the United Nations be able to maintain international peace and 
security. The arbitrary use of military intervention by the United Nations or 
the indiscriminate and wilful imposition of mandatory measures on Member 
States would not be helpful to the resolution of conflicts, and, worse still, 
would impair the credibility and role of the United Nations. 
The reform should contribute to the balanced, healthy and sustained 
economic development of countries. Economic development is a major concern of 
the vast majority of the 179 States Members of the United Nations. In today's 
world, the North-South economic gap keeps widening, and the gulf between rich 
and poor is getting greater. The United Nations should attach great 
importance to the question of development, as it does to the settlement of 
international conflicts and crises. Only by so doing can it win support from 
the overwhelming majority of Member States. 
The reform should embody the basic principles of democracy, justice, 
objectivity, rationality, efficiency and balance of interests. It is not a 
matter that concerns solely a few big Powers, nor only the strong and the 
rich. The balanced approach should not be discarded in disregard of the 
reality. The reform should serve the general objective of establishing an 
equitable and rational new world order of peace and stability. The reform 
efforts will not receive understanding and support from Member States unless 
their opinions on this matter are earnestly sought and discussed, and studied 
fully and thoroughly. 
From 1981 to 1990 China's GNP grew at an average annual rate of 
8.9 per cent. In the 1980s significant changes took place in China. We enjoy 
political stability, economic prosperity, national unity and harmony. The 
Chinese people are enjoying their lives and work. 
Since the beginning of the 1990s people in China have been working hard 
to accelerate economic development and the reform and opening-up programme. 
Spurred by Deng Xiaoping's remarks at the beginning of the year, this 
programme and economic development have entered a new phase. The GNP growth 
rate this year is projected to reach and even exceed 9 per cent. China's 
economy has great vitality and its prospects are bright. 
China has expanded its open areas. As a result, a new pattern of general 
opening up has gradually taken shape, extending from coastal to border areas, 
from areas along the Yangtze river to the provincial capitals. China has 
further expanded the scale on which it can absorb foreign investment. In the 
first half of this year contracted foreign investment reached $14.6 billion, 
2.2 times what it was in the same period last year. During the same period 
China's imports and exports reached $33.06 billion and $35.61 billion 
respectively, up 23.4 per cent and 17.3 per cent over the same period last 
year. The total volume of foreign trade for the year is expected to exceed 
$150 billion. 
China's reform and opening-up programme is by no means a matter of 
expediency; rather, it is a long-term strategy, for it conforms to the popular 
will and benefits the people. Therefore, it enjoys their support and is bound 
to succeed. China is a force working steadfastly for world peace; its 
political stability and the success of its reform and opening up will 
contribute significantly to peace and development in Asia and the world at 
large. China will, as always, support the United Nations in its constructive 
efforts to promote peace and development. It will, together with the 
Governments and peoples of other countries, work for the establishment of a 
new world order conducive to world peace and common development. In electing you to your high office last week, Mr. President, 
the General Assembly also identified itself with the victory of freedom and 
democracy throughout Europe. I should like to congratulate you on this and 
greet you as the representative of a country with which we have a close and 
long-standing friendship. 
For you, Mr. Secretary-General, this is the first session of the General 
Assembly since you took office. For the determination and energy with which 
you have set about the huge tasks ahead you deserve the appreciation of us all. 
I extend a special welcome to the representatives of those countries that 
have been admitted to our Organization since the last session of the General 
Assembly. 
The world breathed a sigh of relief when the East-West confrontation 
ended at long last. There was an almost tangible euphoria of peace. Since 
then we have come back down to earth. Freedom has opened the door not only to 

historic opportunities but, unfortunately, to the old demons as well: blind 
nationalism and hegemonic aspirations, xenophobia and religious fanaticism. 
In this process, the dramatic changes to the political map are far from having 
settled down. The impact of the quake cannot yet be fully assessed, nor can 
we rule out further tremors. But despite all our new problems we must not 
forget that hardly any previous generation had such opportunities to live in 
peace, harmony and prosperity with its neighbours. We can therefore look to 
the future with confidence. 
And this opportunity extends beyond Europe. The termination of the 
East-West conflict has paved the way for the settlement of conflicts in the 
southern hemisphere as well, conflicts which for decades seemed insoluble. In 
the Middle East, in southern Africa and in Cambodia the parties involved are 
moving towards each other in a manner that would have been inconceivable in 
the days of the ideological proxy wars. 
Thus my message is: let us continue to be guided by the vision of a 
better, a more equitable world. With great perseverance, we have ended the 
East-West confrontation. We now need the same commitment, the same stamina, 
to build a new order. We must keep in mind the new energies that have been 
released and harness them for peace and for mankind. 
By establishing European union, the European Community is trying to seize. 
the chance of the century for the entire continent. It is the vision of a 
truly united Europe. The affirmation of this union by our French friends has 
kept alive the chance to make that vision a reality. 
 
However, Governments must also take their citizens along with them on 
this road to Europe. Europe does not grow out of treaties; it grows from the 
hearts of its citizens or it does not grow at all. Strengthening their 
confidence in Europe's common future remains the principal task of Community 
policy in the months ahead. Although the dissatisfaction, uncertainty and 
lack of understanding that have become apparent in nearly all countries cannot 
simply be dismissed, no changes to the Treaty of Maastricht are needed to 
cushion some of the effects. 
The European Community is not only a model of hope and prosperity for 
Eastern Europe; it has also developed new forms of cooperation and partnership 
with the developing countries. Its path towards integration has inspired many 
regional initiatives in Asia, Africa and Latin America. In the light of this 
global responsibility, too, Europe must come to speak with one voice here at 
the United Nations as well. 
In these times of change, when so much of what was valid yesterday is 
being challenged, when many people in the West see their standard of living, 
their personal security and their national and cultural identity threatened, 
when even more people in the East and in the South do not know today what they 
are going to live on tomorrow, when an army of refugees from war and poverty 
threatens to become a new migration, we shall have to find an answer to the 
question of whether the international community, through its new spirit of 
common endeavour following the cold war, will be capable of mastering the 
challenges of our time. 
There is doubt as to the ability of the political establishment as a 
whole to find solutions, and this applies not only to Europe. There is a huge 
gap between people's expectations and the actual achievements of Governments, 
 
both internally and externally. Governments are under an obligation to 
achieve again greater consistency between verbal commitment and action. 
The historic process of European unification is currently being 
overshadowed by something that was considered inconceivable only a few years 
ago: the return of barbarity to the European house. A war of destruction and 
expulsion is raging in Bosnia and Herzegovina, a conflict which conjures up a 
terrible past. What is happening there and we cannot be clear enough about 
this is genocide. 
The London Conference has underscored the resolve of the community of 
nations to silence the weapons. It has initiated the Geneva negotiating 
process as a common, major effort of the United Nations and the European 
Community probably one of the last chances to secure a political solution in 
the foreseeable future. The co-Chairmen of the conference, Cyrus Vance and 
Lord Owen, have our full support. Germany will play its part in this peace 
conference. But one thing must remain clear: the community of nations will 
never recognize borders that have been changed by force. Those who hope to 
receive assistance from the family of nations later must stop fighting now 
at once. 
Despite cautious signs that the Serbian leaders are perhaps after all 
becoming aware of the consequences of being outlawed by the international 
community, murder and expulsion continue. We have been shocked by the report 
of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) mission on the 
crimes and atrocities perpetrated in the detention camps. We Europeans 
especially must be honest: each day on which innocent civilians are fired at 
and prisoners tortured undermines the credibility and authority of the new 
Europe we aim to build together. 
 
War also prevails in Somalia, the Sudan, Liberia, Afghanistan, Georgia 
and Nagorno-Karabakh. Greed, anarchy and human suffering have assumed 
heart-wrenching dimensions, especially in Somalia. The community of nations, 
though late in doing so, has turned its attention to the starvation, misery 
and want of the people there. It is to be hoped that the efforts of the 
Secretary-General and his Special Representative Mr. Sahnoun will be able to 
restore peace to this sorely tried country and put it back on a sound economic 
foundation. 

What are the conclusions for the international community that must be 
drawn from this situation? Respect for international law and human rights as 
the foundation of peace and international order was one of the main lessons of 
the Second World War. That experience led to the creation of the United 
Nations and the European Community. The aim of overcoming nationalistic 
hegemony, the use of force and violations of human rights by means of 
international and supranational cooperation is still valid. Even setbacks 
must not be allowed to divert us from this just path of law and respect for 
human dignity. There is no reasonable alternative, unless we want to revert 
to the law of the jungle. 
Only if the United Nations or the regional organizations prove capable of 
protecting individual States from external aggression and minorities from 
domestic persecution will it be possible, now that the East-West conflict is 
over, to make the desired transition from policies of national hegemony and 
armament to the rule of law, collective security and economic and social 
development. 
What will this require? Firstly, the system of collective security of 
the United Nations, and of regional arrangements such as the CSCE, must be 
made a powerful instrument of a new world domestic policy. Conflicts are, 
unfortunately, emerging faster than the instruments to contain them. You, 
Mr. Secretary-General, have made extensive proposals with the correct aim of 
making the United Nations, for the first time in its history, what the Charter 
intended it to be: the world community's chief custodian of peace; and that 
aim, I say here, can be achieved. 

"Nip it in the bud!" This must be the golden rule of conflict 
prevention. Diplomatic activity must start before an acute threat to security 
occurs. Such activity must, where necessary, be reinforced by the preventive 
deployment of peace-keeping forces. This proposal has our full support. It 
must be made absolutely clear to a potential aggressor, right from the start, 
that he must expect to be confronted with the whole range of political, 
economic and military sanctions provided for in the United Nations Charter. 
Anyone who holds a protecting hand over the aggressor must expect to be 
isolated, and anyone who breaks sanctions will likewise have sanctions to 
contend with. 
Crucial for collective security is close cooperation between institutions 
such as the United Nations or the CSCE on the one hand and collective defence 
alliances such as the North Atlantic Treaty Organization or the Western 
European Union on the other. Initial steps have been taken in this direction 
in recognition of the fact that, even though the East-West conflict has ended, 
democracies must, firstly, remain capable of defending themselves and the new 
architecture must, secondly, become capable of defending itself. What is 
beyond dispute domestically must also be applied to international security if 
there is to be real order. If all other means fail, the law must, if 
necessary, be protected by military force against those who violate it. This 
is also a lesson from a past that was, for us Germans in particular, a 
disastrous one. This is anchored in the United Nations Charter. 
Germany's contribution to international stability will continue to focus 
on peacemaking, through economic cooperation, protection of human rights, 
humanitarian aid, and international measures to protect the environment. 

However, we must also establish the constitutional basis to enable us to make 
our armed forces available to the United Nations, with the approval of 
Parliament, for peace-keeping and peacemaking assignments. As a reunited and 
sovereign country we must assume all the rights and obligations of a Member of 
the United Nations to avoid any discrepancy between our verbal commitment to 
peace and human rights and our active involvement in their defence. 
The Government and the Parliament of my country will not forget that our 
history commands us to show particular restraint and judgment; but, while 
remaining aware of the past, we must derive the strength and courage to find a 
better future. 
Within the framework of its constitution Germany has already participated 
in United Nations operations for example, in Namibia, Angola, Central 
America, Cambodia and Iraq by providing logistic and organizational support, 
election observers, verification teams and medical personnel. Our relief 
flights to Sarajevo and Somalia have broadened the range of our commitment. 
The reforms you have vigorously initiated, Mr. Secretary General, have 
our full backing. We encourage you to pursue them with determination. The 
appointment of a coordinator for humanitarian assistance has shown, despite 
all the scepticism, that this Organization is capable of change. Further 
reforms should, in our view, focus principally on three areas: 
rationalization of the Secretariat, streamlining its committees and 
procedures, and strengthening the position of the Secretary-General in 
relation to the subsidiary bodies and specialized agencies. This is urgently 
needed, especially in the central area of environment and development. 

The Security Council is the guardian of international peace. Its 
efficiency and credibility are of equal importance. A debate on reforming the 
Council is under way. We Germans will not take the initiative in this 
respect, but if a change in the Council's composition is actually considered 
we too shall make known our intention to seek a permanent seat. 
Secondly, States and regional organizations must assume greater 
responsibility. The United Nations must not be overstrained: the idea that 
it can protect and feed all people afflicted by external or internal war is a 
Utopian. 
Thirdly, we must further develop the international legal system with the 
aim of further protecting mankind and nature. This can now take place in a 
process of fair partnership, free from bloc ideology. This too represents a 
great opportunity in the wake of the East-West conflict. In this process, we 
must bring out the special dimension of law: it demands participation and 
consensus. All are equal before the law. It protects the weak and 
legitimizes the use of force where force is unavoidable. 
No cultural region should try to force its own system of values on 
others. On the other hand, there is a body of human rights universally 
binding under international law which no one should seek to erode, not even on 
grounds of differing cultural traditions. This must be the central message of 
the Conference on Human Rights to be held in Vienna next year. 
Under the Nazi regime, the gravest crimes against humanity were committed 
in the name of Germany. In 1945, the Germans in the western part of our 
country had the good fortune to be able to establish a free, democratic 
society based on the rule of law. Those in the other part of Germany had to 

bear another totalitarian regime until 1990. So we Germans have well and 
truly suffered in this respect. We know from our own experience that a life 
of dignity and fulfilment is not possible without respect for human rights. I 
therefore never tire of repeating my belief that policy, including foreign 
policy, must focus on the individual. It is he who counts. It is he who must 
be protected and saved from injustice. The defence of human rights remains a 
central aim of German foreign policy. 

An effective international legal system must enable people to exercise 
their human rights, afford protection to those whose human rights have been 
violated, and consistently bring the perpetrators to account. Together with 
our partners in the European Community we call for the appointment of a High 
Commissioner for Human Rights. Those who commit genocide, those who commit 
serious violations of human rights - and this, unfortunately, is happening all 
the time all over the world - ask Amnesty International must be brought 
before an international crimes tribunal. I am gratified to note that 
Germany's proposal for such a tribunal is now receiving broad support. The 
International Law Commission should be given a mandate to draw up an 
appropriate statute. 
We shall strive to ensure that the perpetrators of atrocities, no matter 
who they are, are brought to justice. No one should be able to rest in the 
assurance that the matter will be forgotten. This is another reason why we 
need a High Commissioner for Human Rights. His investigations and other 
information should be collated in a register to serve as the basis for 
subsequent criminal proceedings. Our experience with the regime in the former 
German Democratic Republic shows that the fear of such misdeeds being recorded 
is not without effect. Violation of human rights is one of mankind's great 
scourges. We should not spare ourselves the effort needed to expose, denounce 
and prevent them. 
Although the massive East-West confrontation is a thing of the past, 
disarmament, confidence-building and the control of arms exports remain 
essential preconditions for enhancing peace. After an arms race spanning 
decades the new era has made considerable progress in the field of disarmament 
as well. 

Yet the world is still bristling with weapons. We in Europe are the 
first to have begun destroying tanks. The pacification of the North must not 
lead to the South being armed to the hilt. The developing countries do not 
need more tanks and guns but more schools and hospitals. The United Nations 
Register of Conventional Arms must be seen as the point of departure for 
reducing the present irresponsible level of international trade in weapons. 
Preventing the spread of weapons of mass destruction is the most urgent 
task in the field of disarmament today. Germany is determined to play a 
pioneering role in this respect. We are the only country in the world to have 
unilaterally and unconditionally renounced nuclear, biological and chemical 
weapons. 
The Convention imposing a global ban on chemical weapons, which was 
prepared by the Geneva Conference on Disarmament under our chairmanship, is a 
milestone along this road. I call upon all Members of the United Nations to 
signal their support of this Convention during the present session of the 
General Assembly and to sign it without delay. 
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons must be extended 
indefinitely in 1995. If we fail to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons, 
mankind will become exposed to a nuclear threat no less frightening than that 
of the cold war. We cannot put the nuclear genie back in the bottle, but we 
must keep it under strict control. This also calls for an international 
convention for the enhancement of reactor safety. 
All these are tasks enough, but the biggest of all is that of 
establishing a new partnership for development and environmental protection 
between poor and rich nations which will make the Earth a fit place for the 
present and future generations to live in. 

The world is grossly unjust. From the day of their birth countless 
people do not have the slightest chance whatsoever of living in conditions 
that could even remotely be described as worthy of the human race. About a 
billion people live in abject poverty and can neither read nor write. Almost 
20 million refugees are trying to escape from want. One fifth of the world's 
population consumes four fifths of all resources and earns 60 times as much as 
the poorest fifth. 
We in the industrialized countries, on the other hand, concerned with our 
own problems which I do not deny exist - forget that, compared with many 
regions of the third world, we live on an "island of bliss". Many of us think 
only of our entitlements, about defending our standards of living. As a 
result, we tend to forget the values of humanity and solidarity. 
Our free system in the West may have won the struggle with 
totalitarianism, but we must now prove that our economic system, our way of 
life, is able to secure lasting development in the eastern and southern 
regions of the globe as well. 
In the third world countries, on the other hand, the recognition must 
continue to grow that they cannot simply make demands on others but are 
themselves primarily responsible for keeping their house in order. The 
Jakarta Conference has confirmed the clear change of attitude in this 
respect. This is an encouraging trend. 
What is the essential requirement? It is to develop a global partnership 
and forms of coexistence in the North and the South which will ensure mutual 
survival. For this we shall have to find a reasonable middle way between the 
completely unrealistic attitude that everything must be achieved at one fell 
swoop and that of resignation, the attitude that it is already too late. 

The North must open its markets to give the weaker economies a genuine 
chance of development. By eliminating protectionism we must strengthen the 
economic foundations of those countries currently fighting for democracy and 
human rights. That is why it is so important to bring the negotiations of the 
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) to a successful conclusion. 
Stabilizing the economy of Eastern Europe and the Commonwealth of 
Independent States must not be done at the expense of development aid. 
Bringing the new democracies in the East and the developing countries into a 
global partnership together was the general objective of the economic summit 
meeting in Munich. Germany, too, has kept its word in this respect. In spite 
of our exceptional domestic situation and our enormous contribution to the 
process of economic recovery in the new democracies between Bug and 
Vladivostok, our development aid budget has continued to grow - even since 
1990. And we shall continue to provide substantial support for measures to 
bridge the poverty gap between North and South. Our offer to make Bonn the 
location for some United Nations development activities should be understood 
in this sense. 
What is required is a radical technological transformation in the fields 
of transport, energy, industrial production, housing and agriculture and a new 
generation of environment-friendly technologies. To implement the results of 
the Rio Conference there will have to be standard reduction levels for carbon 
dioxide emissions as well as effective measures for the protection of forests. 
The most difficult task is at the same time one of the most important 
that of implementing a responsible population policy. This calls for changes 
which considerably affect the rights of the individual. The first step must be 
to improve the social status of women in the developing countries. People 

have a right to determine the size of their family themselves. Family 
planning must be given greater prominence in development strategy. The 
importance of the International Conference on Population and Development 
to be held in 1994 and of the World Conference on Women scheduled for 1995 
cannot be emphasized enough. 
The help provided by the industrialized countries can never be more 
than help towards self-help. One must also draw the necessary conclusion 
from the collapse of communist ideology: totalitarianism renders a 
country incapable of development. 
In a nutshell, what is needed is a departure from short-sighted 
egoism and over-exploitation of nature towards measures to safeguard the 
future, towards more social justice, as well as a balance between ecology 
and economy. In this age of growing individual freedom we must also 
remain capable of demonstrating solidarity and showing consideration for 
the community as a whole. The responsible use of freedom is the real 
challenge at the end of this century. In order to meet this challenge, 
and for the sake of our children's future, the world - East and West, 
North and South must learn together. We must learn to survive together 
in a new world. 
No institution is more suited to be the central authority of this 
learning community than the United Nations. In 1995 it will celebrate its 
fiftieth anniversary. Let us by that date together strengthen this forum 
to make it capable of fulfilling the hopes of people all over the globe. 
Let us not forget: We, the nations, will get the world Organization we 
deserve! 

Hardly any country can have been more affected by the dramatic upheavals 
of our time and by the disparity of opportunity and risk, of hope and anxiety 
about the future, than has Germany. We have been reunited, and for that we 
are grateful very grateful. Our prime task now is to complete the internal 
unification of our nation, and this task pushes us to the limits of our 
resources. None the less, we have contributed more to the economic recovery 
of central and eastern Europe and the members of the Commonwealth of 
Independent States (CIS) than have all other countries together. 
In Europe, our liberal legislation on foreigners has enabled us to take 
in by far the largest number of asylum-seekers probably 400,000 this year; 
220,000 refugees from Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina have found refuge in 
our country. We are the biggest attraction in Europe and in the world for the 
massive social migration from East to West and from South to North. In view 
of our still-high level of unemployment and our housing shortage, especially 
in the eastern part of the country, this places an exceptional burden on the 
population. This has to be appreciated if one is to make a fair judgement of 
our people's attitude towards foreigners. 
In emphasizing this point I am not trying to tone it down. The hatred 
demonstrated and the terror perpetrated by a radical minority against 
asylum-seekers in our country brings disgrace on Germany. This I deeply 
regret, but let me add that this is not the attitude of the great majority of 
Germans towards other nationalities. In my country 6.3 million foreigners 
live harmoniously with their German neighbours. Year in, year out, the 
Germans demonstrate their solidarity with other nations through extensive 

relief campaigns, through their generous donations for the benefit of people 
in the former Soviet Union, and through their considerable aid for the Kurds 
and the starving people of Somalia. 
Germany owes its unity to the dismantling of confrontation in Europe and 
to the trust we have gained through our European policy and through our not 
having pursued a national course. We derive from this a responsibility. We 
shall continue to give our full support to European unification and global 
cooperation based on partnership, especially within the United Nations. We 
shall use all our energy in favour of human rights and against oppression, in 
favour of global solidarity and against excessive nationalism. This is the 
essence of the foreign policy of the united Germany for which I stand. 
Allow me to 
congratulate you. Sir, on your election as President of our General Assembly. 
Your outstanding abilities earned a unanimous vote, which is a tribute both to 
your country and to the example it sets in its newly regained freedom. 
Speaking from this rostrum last year, I welcomed the extraordinary winds 
of freedom which were sweeping oppressive regimes away everywhere in the 
world. I recalled the support that my country had always given to peoples' 
right to self-determination. I rejoiced at the promises of independence which 
arose on the ruins of empires. 
The distance covered since then gives us grounds for hope. While in 
Europe the barriers around blocs tumbled, in Africa the chains of apartheid 
were removed and in Asia Governments contested by their people fell, new 
sovereign entities were established. Let us therefore welcome the delegations 
of the new Member States that have joined us. 
These successes are also successes for our Organization. More than ever, 
the principles and rules of our Charter prove their immutable value; more than 
ever, let us show our commitment to them. 
I should like to turn to Mr. Boutros-Ghali and commend the example he 
sets us: the example of his energy, of his entire action focused on the aims 
of our Organization and the application of our Charter's principles. He 
succeeds someone who has brought honour to our Organization. But rarely will 
a Secretary-General have succeeded in overcoming so many crises and challenges 
in the first year of his mandate. Let us therefore thank him for his efforts, 
his imagination and his determination. 
 
In spite of freedom's victories, peace has not always been the child of 
liberation. Rivalries between neighbours, ethnic tensions and border disputes 
fan discord and foment insecurity to the point of provoking the return of war 
in all its cruelty and savagery. Yugoslavia, Liberia, Somalia: the names 
ring sadly in our ears, and the examples are, unfortunately, legion. 
Universal peace, our absolute principle, is still only an ambition. It must 
become our primary mission. 
To ensure that the paths of freedom become paths to peace everywhere, 
France proposes three lines of action: peace through the organization of 
security that is, peace-keeping operations and collective security and 
disarmament measures; peace through the affirmation of justice - that is, 
economic and social development to bring about greater fairness and equality 
among nations and peoples; peace through solidarity among States which know 
how to use their independence to establish beneficial cooperation. 
 
Let us speak first of peace through the organization of security. 
The immediate need is to halt the conflicts which are causing bloodshed 
in Europe, the border regions of Asia and Africa. They cast a sinister shadow 
over the successes of freedom and independence. The United Nations, 
strengthened by its new influence, reacted by mounting in the space of a few 
months peace-keeping operations on an unprecedented scale. Never before have 
so many men from such a large number of countries assembled under our flag, 
that of the international community. 
Stopping the expansion of a neighbour or faction, protecting populations, 
helping to deliver humanitarian aid, providing reassurance and at times 
renewing dialogue between the parties involved such are the many sensitive 
missions undertaken by the United Nations and our "Blue Helmets". 
Though peaceful, these operations are dangerous. It is not a question of 
making war; our mission is a mission of peace. The task, always the same yet 
always different, must be given all possible support at the local level and 
all available means of suitable protection and defence. 
There are cases in which we must intervene even though the cease-fire in 
question is neither complete nor lasting. There are cases in which, to impose 
respect, we must have clear rules of engagement binding on everyone. We need 
to define, for specific situations, a right of emergency, comprising measures 
for warning and protection. My country has several reasons for wanting this, 
as I am sure you will agree. Having become the leading participant in the 
peace-keeping forces, with what will soon be 6,000 men under the United 
Nations flag in former Yugoslavia, Cambodia, Lebanon, Western Sahara and 
El Salvador, France has paid a heavy price. Since the start of the year. 

eight of its sons have lost their lives, the last ones murdered in cowardly 
fashion. And they have not been the only ones. From this rostrum, I should 
like to pay a solemn tribute to all the soldiers of peace who have sacrificed 
their lives for the cause we all uphold. 
In the face of the increasing number of crises and the human tragedies 
resulting from them, our world is searching for new stability. It is adapting 
its instruments for peace and solidarity and devising others for the new 
times. It is essential that everyone be mobilized, most particularly the 
regional organizations. The Western European Union (WEU) and the North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) are in the process of shaping their 
future. The Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) is 
establishing its jurisdiction. In the wake of the Helsinki summit, France is 
now proposing to the CSCE member States the adoption of a code of conduct 
which would encompass and define the norms governing our collective security. 
This idea, which was also set out by Germany, could lead to the adoption of a 
treaty on security. France is also continuing and will continue to advocate 
establishment of a court of arbitration and conciliation to prevent conflicts. 
It is fortunate, moreover, that Chapter VIII of the Charter has at last, 
in the space of a few months, taken on its full meaning. I applaud the action 
of our Secretary-General, who has recommended precisely that the States 
members of regional organizations contribute to peace-keeping operations. His 
thinking concurred with that of the CSCE at the Helsinki summit and with that 
of France. 
Indeed, the United Nations remains the necessary recourse in all these 
instances, as the case of former Yugoslavia has shown us only too well. Our 

Organization confers universal legitimacy on peace-keeping operations. It is 
the United Nations which shoulders, if need be, the overall responsibility. 
Hence, what is at stake today is not to relieve the United Nations of its task 
but to help it perform it in the most effective manner. 
Yes, our peace mission is above all a matter of prevention: preventing 
conflicts, or preventing them from worsening and spreading. France therefore 
welcomed with keen interest the Secretary-General's proposals in his "Agenda 
for Peace". These set forth in outline form a charter for preventive 
diplomacy which is urgently needed. 
Once the Gulf War was over, the President of the French Republic 
underlined the need for new thinking. I am glad to see that this new thinking 
is now well under way and that France's proposals are being considered. I am 
also pleased that the European Community is offering specific assistance. 
I should like to confirm today, from this rostrum, France's commitment to 
make available to the Secretary-General, at any time, a contingent of 1,000 
men for a peace-keeping operation. I hope that this example will be followed, 
for our Organization must be sure that it can react quickly and forcefully as 
soon as there is a threat of a conflict or a conflict flares up. 
Reinforcement of preventive action should also encourage us to continue 
thinking about the reactivation of the United Nations Military Staff 
Committee. It is important, in any case, to strengthen the links between the 
Member States and the Secretariat Department of Peace-Keeping Operations, 
every aspect of whose work is deserving of praise. 
Preventive diplomacy, along with the development of peace-keeping 
operations, and the greater role for regional organizations: these are two 
indispensable pillars of the collective security system the world needs today. 

But there is a third one: disarmament. 
At their summit meeting on 31 January 1992, the members of the Security 
Council recalled that disarmament is one of our Organization's priorities and 
how essential it is for all Member States to fulfil the obligations they have 
undertaken with respect to arms control and disarmament itself. The progress 
achieved in two years has been spectacular: a reduction in stockpiles in 
Europe thanks to the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE) and 
the CFE 1-A; the commitment by the two super-Powers to genuine nuclear 
disarmament, which will be spread over a period of many years; and the 
convention banning chemical weapons, which for the first time will eliminate 
an entire category of weapons of mass destruction. This disarmament effort is 
accompanied for the first time by a move for transparency: all treaties are 
coupled with stringent verification procedures, and in Europe we have signed 
an "open sky" treaty providing for free over-flight. Monitoring is the mother 
of all assurances. 
But the illegal spread of these same weapons threatens to break the 
momentum for peace. The war against proliferation must be stepped up and 
waged relentlessly. In this area, as in others. United Nations decisions must 
be fully respected. New measures will no doubt be necessary, particularly 
given the risk of the uncontrolled proliferation of ballistic missiles. To 
avert the danger, let us therefore strengthen international cooperation 
without delay. 
My country has in the past put forth proposals from this rostrum to stop 
the development of an arms race in space. France will shortly propose a 
measure to enhance confidence by making it mandatory to give advance notice of 

firings of ballistic missiles and rockets carrying satellites or other space 
objects. This notification measure, if adopted, would be complemented by the 
establishment of an international centre, under United Nations auspices, 
responsible for collecting and using the data received. 

In deciding to suspend its nuclear tests until the end of 1992, France 
has shown that it is ready to help further the disarmament process. The 
suspension is temporary and its extension will be subject to reappraisal. Let 
us act so as progressively to reduce the number and power of such experiments 
in a lasting way. France has also made a contribution to disarmament by 
ratifying Additional Protocol No. 1 of the Treaty banning nuclear weapons in 
Latin America. In other parts of the world, it supports proposals to 
establish denuclearized zones, especially in South Asia, the Middle East, and 
Africa. My country is ready to provide guarantees for security, in 
conjunction with other nuclear Powers, to countries committed to establishing 
such zones. 
This year, the General Assembly begins preparing for the conference on 
extending the non-proliferation Treaty, to be held in 1995. The indefinite 
extension of this Treaty without renegotiation is an important event for 
international security. France, which is now a signatory of the 
non-proliferation Treaty, realizes that the nuclear Powers have a special 
contribution to make to this goal. France is ready to do its part. 
Collective security is the guard-rail of peace. Its development on an 
equitable basis will be the guarantee for all peoples. 
I shall now touch upon the subject of peace through greater justice by 
means of economic and social development. France has consistently said that 
there can be no lasting peace so long as some peoples are faced with extreme 
poverty and famine. There can be no peace so long as we seem to tolerate 
unacceptable discrepancies in standards of living. There can be no peace 
without hope for justice and for progress towards greater equality. 
 
Responsibility for real progress in this direction above all rests with our 
Organization and its Members, who are continuing to focus their efforts in 
this direction. 
The United Nations family in the broadest sense the World Bank, the 
International Monetary Fund, and all the specialized agencies is ready to 
assume this responsibility. However, I would like to see the nucleus of the 
family, the Secretariat, resume its proper role as a prime mover. What agency 
better than the Secretariat can appreciate and evaluate the order of 
priorities, provide the impetus, and avoid duplications and waste? 
But there can be no sustainable development in a deteriorating 
environment. The future of our planet requires ever closer solidarity between 
the North and South. Such solidarity should enable us to succeed in bringing 
about equitable development with due respect for the natural gifts of the 
Earth. The success of Rio is encouraging. But let us begin by respecting our 
commitment to devote at least 0.7 per cent of our gross national product to 
official development assistance. France will do so. It has already doubled 
the amount of its financing to the World Environment Fund and contributed to 
the establishment of a 20-billion franc programme agreed upon by the European 
Community. 
The General Assembly will shortly take up the Secretary-General's report 
on the results of the Rio Conference. It will have to decide among other 
things on the establishment of a commission for sustainable development that 
will be the central mechanism for following up the Conference's decisions. 
France, which was one of the first States to back the establishment of such a 
commission, hopes that it will convene at an early date, if possible in 1993, 
 
and that it will begin by examining how the pledges at Rio are to be 
implemented. Development and the environment remain the two major issues of 
the years ahead. 
Finally, the social dimension should not be absent from our concerns. 
The President of the French Republic, on 31 January 1992, gave his full 
support to convening a world summit on social development. Let us not forget 
that man must remain central to our concerns. It is for humanity, through the 
necessary solidarity among humans, that lasting peace will drive away the 
hatred and wars which still cast a pall over its future. 
I now turn to the subject of peace through solidarity. An important step 
forward has been taken with the progress of humanitarian activities that has 
been encouraged and supported by the United Nations. My country, which can 
take credit for having been a pioneer in this field, therefore welcomes the 
impetus which has thus been given to humanitarian action. 
The High Commissioner for Refugees, the Under-Secretary-General for 
Humanitarian Action, and United Nations forces are cooperating in providing 
assistance to populations exposed to violence, be they in Iraq, Yugoslavia, or 
Africa. A new principle of humanitarian law is taking shape which meets the 
aspiration of humanity, including the most unfortunate among its members. It 
will be to the credit of our Organization, as the end of the century 
approaches, to have helped in this decisive and historic progress transcending 
the barriers of national jurisdictions and regulations. It was precisely to 
make such a point that the President of the French Republic went to Sarajevo 
to open the way for the arrival of relief to that martyred city. To lay down 
the law in this matter is essential; to act is better still. 

France never tires of repeating that human rights are inalienable. So 
long as they are not respected, no peace is legitimate. Today still, in too 
many places, populations are terrorized and minorities maltreated. The World 
Conference on Human Rights will be one of the important events and rendezvous 
in 1993. It will be the occasion for us to reaffirm the universality of human 
rights and to strengthen the effectiveness of mechanisms to ensure 
compliance. Humanitarian action and peace-keeping are necessary functions, 
but they are needed in specific circumstances. Sooner or later, peoples will 
have to address the necessity of renewing the ties of their solidarity and 
rebuilding together a space for exchanges and cooperation. Lasting peace 
depends on this. It is clearly inconceivable that the movement for 
self-determination, which was so earnestly desired, should be judged guilty 
after the fact of the worst regressions. 
The example of Yugoslavia is on everybody's mind. Can we tolerate a 
return to the most barbaric practices, the very names of which are an insult 
to the human race: the massacre of civilians, detention camps without 
humanitarian monitoring, "ethnic cleansing"? A solution can only come about 
from two distinct measures: on one hand, the establishment of a higher 
framework for arbitration and conciliation; on the other, the protection of 
minorities. The latter, living within recognized borders, should have the 
benefit of guarantees, equitable representation being one and not the least 
such guarantee. 
 
Hopes have been raised in places where once everything still seemed to be 
impossible. I would like here to pay a tribute to men of good will, including 
Prime Minister Panic of Yugoslavia. This is yet another reason to intensify 
our efforts and help the Yugoslav peoples out of their tragic impasse. Let us 
conceive, let us decide, and then let us impose. 
In Cambodia, a long-suffering people has been making its return to the 
international community since the Paris Agreements reached under United 
Nations auspices. This progress embodies a great deal of hope for the 
Cambodian people and for Asia as a whole, and must not be jeopardized as a 
result of the refusal of the Khmer Rouge to open up its zone and demobilize 
its forces. There is always room for discussion among partners of good will. 
No one should use the pretext of his own complaints to try to block a peace 
plan which is binding on all the signatories of the Paris Agreements and, 
beyond that, upon the entire international community. 
After so many years of war in the Middle East, the prospect of a 
settlement based on justice and security for all is beginning to emerge thanks 
to the courage and clear-sightedness of all the parties. When the time comes, 
the international community, through the Security Council, will have to give 
its guarantee to a settlement. There is still a long way to go. The European 
Community is contributing to this future construction. France is doing its 
part in this. 
In South Africa, in spite of the terrible traces left by the hateful 
system of racial discrimination, the resolve to end apartheid and build a new 
open city has at last won the day. I would like to express from this rostrum 
today France's concern at the rising violence in South Africa and tell the 
leaders of that country: do not destroy the enormous hope you so recently 
inspired. 

I shall mention only briefly our old Europe, since its trials and 
tribulations are widely known, as are its bursts of hope. I can say much, 
however, in only a few words. The peoples of Europe wish to speed up their 
march toward peace, unity and prosperity. Such is the ambition affirmed by 
the signatories of the Maastricht Treaty - to create a genuine union of 
democratic States having the redoubled strength that comes from the 
combination of cultures, economic means and political resolve, as 
Mr. Douglas Hurd said so well when he spoke previously on our behalf. I am 
pleased and proud that the French people voted in favour of ratifying the 
European unity treaty. My fellow citizens chose the only future of any value, 
a future which will build peace on solidarity political, economic, and human. 
The European Union will not be inward looking, self-centred, and closed. 
On the contrary, the citizens of the European Union will be patriots of the 
old continent become the new world. They will have a sense of solidarity 
among themselves, be responsive to their brothers on the rest of the 
continent, attached to their respective nations yet firm in the face of any 
heightened national sentiments which invoke nationalism only the better to 
divide humanity and serve designs of domination and exclusion. 
The collapse of the wall which separated our continent spurred the 
efforts toward union. Today the difficulties of this Europe, separated from 
us for too long, then liberated, but weakened and troubled, are yet further 
encouragement to us to create this pole of stability on which all Europe will 
be able to build its peace and prosperity. That Europe will not be 
self-centred. When the time comes, it will welcome its neighbours from 
Central and Eastern Europe as brothers. Setting the example and opening the 
way are the first steps of true solidarity, that same solidarity which it is 
incumbent on our Organization to implement. The Union will undertake to serve 
 
the very ideals of our Charter: "We, the peoples of the United Nations" and 
now, we, the peoples of the European Union. 
I shall now conclude. It is incumbent on Governments, as it is on 
peoples, to set the example. Let us not hide from the fact that peace, like 
life, has no price but does have a cost. It is unacceptable for the United 
Nations to be foundering in an increasingly severe financial crisis. 
Certainly, our Organization has the necessary ambition to express at the 
global level that general resolve which Jean-Jacques Rousseau said is more 
than the simple addition of individual interests. But the sum total will be 
all the greater and all the more universal as the contribution of each and 
every one is significant and generous. The United Nations will have value 
only in so far as each State, in compliance with the Charter, fulfils its 
responsibilities. 
There can be no better service nor better example to humanity than to 
enable the duty of solidarity to prevail. Let us discharge this duty, first 
of all, by honouring our obligations. Peace is not a gift from heaven; it 
depends, above all, on human resolve. Thus a new era is opening for nations 
as for peoples. Today, as I speak, it is still in a state of confusion. 
Tomorrow, it will shine with the fires of justice, peace and solidarity. 
I am privileged to speak this morning on 
behalf of the European Community and its 12 member States. It is a pleasure 
to do so under your guidance, Mr. President under the guidance of a fellow 
European Foreign Minister whose country has made such great progress in recent 
years and whose foreign affairs, under your leadership, have also made a very 
substantial step forward. 
It is also a pleasure to speak in the presence of the Secretary-General. 
I do not wish to heap compliments upon you at this stage, 
Mr. Secretary-General, but I hope that the contents of what I have to say and 
what we offer you in terms of support for your practical policies you will 
accept as an adequate compliment. 
As my colleagues from other regions of the world have no doubt noticed, 
we in the European Community are conducting a lively discussion on how to 
achieve the ever closer union to which we are all committed. I am not going 
to speak about that subject today because I want to speak about Europe and the 
wider world, but I do want to emphasize on behalf of us all that so far from 
turning away from that wider world, we in Europe are increasingly active in 
it. And I want to make it clear that the European Community and its member 
States are determined to build up the place and the role of the Community and 
its 12 member States in world affairs. We intend to work together for the 
better world order in which we all believe and we intend to carry that work 
forward with greater impetus and greater effectiveness. 

Two years ago, when I first came to speak at the Assembly, the world was 
celebrating the end of the cold war, the beginnings of freedom. Everyone was 
optimistic, because everything had changed - it appeared for the better 
since I had first attended a session of the General Assembly, at the height of 
the cold war back in the 1950s. 
At the end of 1992 we see things differently. The world after the cold 
war is a better place, but it is also less stable. We have seen both a 
democratic spring and a demagogic spring, an outpouring of hope but also, in 
places, an outpouring of hate. 
International order is threatened in the short term by the unleashing of 
extreme nationalism, of challenges to the rule of law. In the medium term we 
have to reinforce the system of collective security based on the United 
Nations. Respect for good government, respect for human rights must move to 
the centre of our stage. In the long term we face the threat to international 
peace and security posed by poverty, posed by environmental degradation. We 
cannot afford to postpone action on the longer-term problems while we wrestle 
with the short-term problems. I should to look, very briefly, at each of 
these three challenges in turn. 
The short term the immediate. Nationalism, of course, is not a fault 
in itself; it is a natural instinct of man in society. We see its benign 
manifestations in many places in the former Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia, 
though even there, there are problems. Yugoslavia is the worst example of the 
bitterness of nationalism producing intolerable results. That is why both 
Europe and the United Nations have to work strenuously for peace with justice, 
for the relief of suffering in those tortured lands of the former Yugoslavia. 

Since last autumn the European Community and the United Nations have 
indeed been working closely, the United Nations leading on peace-keeping and 
the European Community on peace making through Lord Carrington's Peace 
Conference. This cooperation has helped stop the killing in, for example, the 
Serb Krajina in Croatia, where the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) 
and the European Community monitoring mission have achieved a good result. 
As conflict escalated, particularly in Bosnia, the United Nations and the 
European Community decided with wide international support to harness their 
efforts more closely together through the process launched by the London 
Conference last month. The International Conference on the former Yugoslavia 
is now working in Geneva under the co-chairmanship of Mr. Cyrus Vance for the 
United Nations and Lord Owen for the European Community. It is powered by the 
determination of the international community to bring an end to the violence 
in the former Yugoslavia. 
The Conference has two main objectives: humanitarian and political; to 
alleviate the suffering of the victims of the conflict and to bring that 
conflict permanently to an end by negotiating a political settlement. This 
is, of course, difficult work, requiring a deep understanding of the problems, 
requiring the respect and cooperation of the parties, requiring the unstinting 
support and, when necessary, the mobilizing of pressures from the 
international community. 
In this context, I believe that Prime Minister Panic's new approach shows 
great courage and I salute that courage. It offers a different way forward 
which we believe should be supported. But while the killing and suffering 
continue, as they did yesterday and as they do today, we cannot relax our 
efforts. We have to measure progress by deeds and not promises. 

We have to continue to deal with other problems left by the rolling back 
of the cold war. In Cambodia, we must not let the peace process drift. The 
Khmer Rouge have not joined phase II of the cease-fire arrangements. They are 
delaying the implementation of the comprehensive political settlement. On the 
positive side, the military deployment of the United Nations Transitional 
Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) is now fully complete and the civilian component 
is beginning to take control of the key ministries. We have to make every 
effort to hold to the timetable for elections next April. 
Some States still show a willingness to challenge the rule of 
international law and, indeed, to resort to terrorism. The invasion of Kuwait 
by Iraq was the first test of the post-cold-war era, and the liberation of 
Kuwait was one of this Organization's great successes. Unfortunately, we have 
to note that Saddam Hussein continues to defy the United Nations, that his 
Government is failing to meet Iraq's obligations under Security Council 
resolution 687 (1991), that he continues to repress his own population, 
particularly in northern and in southern Iraq. That is why pressure must 
and will - continue until he implements the resolutions of the United Nations 
in full. The message has to be that all States must comply with Security 
Council resolutions. We still wait for Libya to implement Security Council 
resolution 731 (1992). 
Those are just some of the short-term challenges that we have to meet. 
There are long-running problems which we must not forget, and one of 
particular concern to the European Community is Cyprus. This year, 
Mr. Secretary-General, you have made an energetic effort. It is not yet 
decisively successful. You are renewing the effort next month. There is a 

need for fresh impetus, it seems to us, on the key issues of territory and 
displaced persons. There must be a willingness to negotiate on all sides; 
otherwise there will be no lasting settlement. 

You have our full support, Mr. Secretary-General, as you renew your 
effort. Not only does it deserve to succeed, but it is in the crucial 
interest of Europe and the international community that it should succeed. 
In the medium term we have to build a stronger system of collective 
security. And here, everybody looks, rightly, to the United Nations. But as 
the Secretary-General has pointed out, we are in danger of loading the 
Organization with too heavy a burden: a burden of intervention and a burden, 
in effect, of partial administration. 
"Something must be done." That phrase is on many lips; it is the impulse 
which we all feel as we read about or as we watch on television screens some 
fresh evidence of man's inhumanity to man. But we have to realize where that 
impulse, that phrase "Something must be done", leads us. We should not wander 
down that road without serious thought because it would involve a 
restructuring of armed forces so that they could take a full part in the 
growing number of peace-making and peace-keeping exercises of the United 
Nations. It would mean a massive increase in the funds which the United 
Nations and its humanitarian agencies would require from Member States from 
us: from all of us in regular contributions and in aid, in times when many 
Member States face severe budgetary problems. These are just two of the 
implications of the course on which the world is beginning to propel the 
United Nations because "something must be done". 
How do we prevent these demands from getting out of hand? The best way, 
of course, is to prevent those conflicts which give rise to the demands - in 
short, diplomacy: preventive diplomacy. I know that diplomacy is 
unfashionable in the world of the knee-jerk reaction and the dogmatic 
sound-bite on television. Diplomacy lacks news value; it lacks glamour; it 

involves compromise; it takes time; it is easy to mock. It just happens to be 
indispensable. 
That is true, to take one example of many one could take, of conflicts in 
the Middle East. There the parties have from time to time tried to cut the 
knot; they have tried to resolve their disputes by force, but in vain. This 
is a critical moment in the Arab-Israel peace process, which we in Europe 
strongly support. We in the Community know that all concerned must seize this 
opportunity; the tide must be caught. The negotiation of a final settlement 
based on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) will take time 
yet, will take hard work yet. What is important in the immediate future is 
for all parties to work towards visible progress, building step on agreed step. 
Diplomacy is partly a matter of institutions and strengthening them. 
Speaking as a European on behalf of Europeans, I hope that one day the 
Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) will be effective in 
the prevention of conflict throughout Europe. With the adoption of the 
Helsinki document the CSCE has begun to give itself the tools to tackle 
problems by conciliation before they slide into violence, and to manage crises 
once they develop. That document shows that the CSCE is a regional 
arrangement according to Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter. That 
makes a crucial link between European and global security. 
But of course the United Nations is the centre of this thinking, and 
reform of the United Nations is crucial to its performance. Early this year 
the Secretary-General made a determined start on administrative reform. I 
believe that will turn out to be a decisive step. This is being followed up 
both in the Secretariat and in the vast superstructure of intergovernmental 
bodies which have grown up over the past 40 years in the economic, social and 
other fields. 

We welcome the work of the General Assembly to which I know that you 
personally, Mr. President, are devoted to rationalize its agenda. All this 
is welcome; all this has to be carried forward. 
A summit of the Security Council met last January at the initiative of my 
Prime Minister to consider next steps. We asked the Secretary-General to 
prepare a report on the ways in which the United Nations could help tackle the 
new challenges of which I have spoken. On 17 June, you, 
Mr. Secretary-General, published your ideas on preventive diplomacy, 
peace-keeping, peace-making and what you called peace-building. This 
collection of ideas is going to turn out to be a turning-point in the history 
of our Organization. You tried to address a need which is not some distance 
ahead, but which is here and now. I believe you are in the extraordinary 
position of someone who is being asked to manufacture a vehicle while he is 
driving that vehicle on the road. It is not easy, but it is necessary. 
The general debate should be a genuine debate on the ideas advanced in 
the report. All United Nations bodies, notably the Security Council and the 
General Assembly, should follow up swiftly in the light of the debate. 
Preventive diplomacy I have already mentioned. Obviously, it is 
quicker. It is more helpful to peoples about to be embroiled in conflict than 
even the most successful peace-keeping operation which comes after the 
outbreak of violence. It is also less costly in terms of lives and in terms 
of cash. The Secretary-General should be ready to make full use of his powers 
under Article 99 of the Charter to draw the attention of the Security Council 
to any matter which in his opinion may threaten international peace and 
security. Greater use is already being made of fact-finding missions; we 
would like to encourage this trend. 

Preventive deployment of troops might take place to deter aggression or 
conflict between States, possibly involving deployment to only one side of an 
international border. Of course there may be difficulties about timing the 
dispatch of such a force in a given crisis, but we believe this is essentially 
a sound idea that could be applied case by case. 
I warmly welcome what President Bush said yesterday on his initiatives to 
strengthen the peace-keeping work of the United Nations. 
In the European Community we want to follow up the idea of preventive 
deployment in the event of an internal crisis, where the Government concerned 
requests help, with humanitarian assistance or conciliation. No two cases 
would be the same. There would need to be careful discussions with 
Governments and the parties concerned before the international community could 
usefully deploy monitors. 
Recognizing that, the European Community and its member States have 
already decided in principle to send civilian monitoring missions to States 
which want them where this could avert a crisis and possible bloodshed. In 
South Africa, for example, with the agreement of all the parties, established 
during a recent visit of the troika, the United Nations will be joined by the 
European Community and by the Commonwealth in sending observers to reinforce 
the national peace accords there. 
Of course, part of this prevention of conflict must involve prevention of 
the proliferation of armaments, especially weapons of mass destruction. We 
welcome the agreement on a global convention on chemical weapons. This is a 
step towards a safer and more secure world. 

We recognize that peace-making brings pain to some. Bringing pressure -
even peaceful pressure, say, of sanctions on warring parties, means 
sacrifice for innocent third parties. We understand the economic difficulties 
often caused to third parties by the imposition of sanctions under 
Chapter VII. Countries which need balance-of-payments help, countries which 
may also at the same time be carrying out prudent adjustment programmes, can 
be badly affected. The international financial organizations are in the best 
position to assess and then take into account the effects of United Nations 
mandatory sanctions when the;_' design support packages for the countries 
concerned. 

The Secretary-General's report contains a number of proposals for Member 
States to earmark forces for enforcement action and for peace-keeping. All 12 
States members of the European Community have responded to his questionnaire 
on this and all Members of the United Nations should, we believe, keep it 
under regular review. 
Then there is money, financial contributions. The Secretary-General 
rightly, continuously underlines the importance of financial as well as 
military contributions to peace-keeping. The figures speak for themselves. 
The 12 States members of the European Community are supposed, under the rules, 
to contribute one third of the cost of peace-keeping operations financed 
through assessed contributions. At the end of August we, the Twelve, had in 
fact given not 33 per cent but over 40 per cent of total contributions 
actually collected so far for the various new operations launched or expanded 
since the end of the last session of the General Assembly. Those European 
Community member States, of which mine is one, joining in the new operation in 
Bosnia, will bear all their own costs. We believe we are doing our bit so far 
as this is concerned in Europe, and look to others to do the same. The 
Secretary-General is quite right: the financial problems of the United 
Nations must not be allowed to slide, must not be allowed to fester. We 
support the proposed peace-keeping reserve fund, subject to negotiation on the 
detail, and we believe the General Assembly must follow this up. 
The role of the United Nations does not stop once a conflict is over. 
That is why the Secretary-General's study entitled "An Agenda for Peace" 
rightly looks at how we can build peace after a conflict. Take El Salvador, 
an illustration that has already been used by His Excellency the President of 
the Republic of Korea. The promotion of free elections and democratic 

institutions is a key part of such peace-building, and so, to take a very 
different example, is de-mining. Is it not a sad commentary on the state of 
the world that the removal of mines in the aftermath of conflict has to be 
high on our agenda, whether in Cambodia, northern Somalia or Angola? 
But we of the European Community welcome the emphasis the 
Secretary-General gives to human rights, democracy and development. Perhaps 
during the cold war some of us tended to concentrate exclusively, or almost 
exclusively, on abuses of human rights in the Soviet bloc. Elsewhere there 
was lip-service when there should have been action. But all people are 
entitled to full human rights. We want the World Conference on Human Rights 
at Vienna in June 1993 to take real steps in that direction. 
We warmly welcome as part of that effort what we see as the tide of 
political reform now flowing in the continent of Africa. We are helping to 
promote good government and sound human rights and electoral practices. Both 
at the national and the Community level, we have already shown that we are 
ready to meet requests for help in election monitoring, notably in Ethiopia, 
the Congo and, later this year, in Kenya and Ghana, and also in the 
inter-parliamentary work going on in Namibia. 
But of course in the longer term collective security can be undermined by 
deeper economic and social forces, such as poverty and environmental 
degradation. Relief must be followed by recovery or else the countries 
afflicted will be overwhelmed by despair. Is that not what we see in 
Somalia? This appalling tragedy is a warning of what could happen elsewhere, 
of what could become widespread, because Somalia is just the most extreme form 
of a problem now affecting large parts of sub-Saharan Africa. 

I say this all the more strongly because at the beginning of this month I 
led a European Community Troika visit to Mogadishu. What we saw there is what 
many colleagues have spoken of, and I echo their voices. We saw the 
disintegration of a society. We marked the absence of all legitimate 
authority. We witnessed the collapse of a State and of all services connected 
with a State. Instead of order, instead of law, teenage gangsters roam the 
streets, toting their Kalashnikovs and offering protection at a price. 
Instead of a distribution system, whether capitalist or socialist, there is 
blackmail and looting. 
Against that background we saw the new humanitarian relief arrangements 
being put into place by Mr. Eliasson and many other devoted people. We saw 
how the United Nations has to work naturally, intimately and without rivalry 
with non-governmental organizations. We saw how urgently the Somalis need a 
reconstruction of civil authority. We fully support Ambassador Sahnoun's 
efforts in Mogadishu, in Somalia. He is an outstanding civil servant on 
behalf of us all. Last month the Security Council rightly voted to strengthen 
the United Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM) so that its security units 
will be better able to distribute aid. Among the States Members of the 
European Community, Belgium, with the support of all of us, plans a 
substantial contribution to that security. 
Of course not all disasters are man-made, though it looks as if an 
increasing proportion are. There is the drought in the Horn of Africa and 
southern Africa, which will require a major international effort over the 
coming year. 
For the first time, over the last two or three years, the environment has 
become a priority for all countries. I have to say that the road from Rio de 
 
Janeiro may be harder than to the road to it. The United Nations Conference 
on Environment and Development in Rio attracted the world's leaders, the 
world's media and the world's imagination. But sustainable development has to 
stay at the top of the international agenda. That is why, immediately after 
his return from Rio de Janeiro, Prime Minister Major proposed an eight-point 
follow-up plan picking up the key elements agreed upon at Rio de Janeiro. 
That initiative was broadly endorsed at our European Council in Lisbon and at 
the Economic Summit in Munich. 
The Sustainable Development Commission, which is to be set up by the 
General Assembly, will be crucial to the follow-up. The Assembly must create 
an effective instrument to ensure that the impetus built up at Rio is not 
dissipated and lost. 
To conclude, for the medium and long term we need to turn hope into 
reality. In the short term, time after time, in place after place, we must 
bring hope to what is already a grim reality. The legacy of the cold war is a 
mixed one. In facing it, the international community must be realistic, 
because history cannot be denied, cannot be uprooted. The solving of problems 
which have their roots deep in the centuries is a slow, frustrating business. 
After the brief gleam of optimism in 1989 and 1990, when all seemed easy, 
we are now more realistic. Progress towards a more decent, orderly world will 
never be without effort. Our best hope is to take two steps forward for each 
step back. Even that imperfect progress will require the rapid strengthening 
of our institutions and in particular of the family of institutions called the 
United Nations - not essentially by more conferences and more speeches, but by 
the practical effort which the United Nations, under the guidance of the 
 
Secretary-General, mounts today in Somalia, Yugoslavia, Cambodia and countless 
other troubled places. 
The trucks of our agencies, painted white, and the blue berets of our 
United Nations contingents do not bring magic or instant happiness, but they 
bring a glimmer of hope where till then there may have been despair. In the 
effort of bringing hope, in the short term and in the longer term, the 
European Community and its member States will take a persistent, energetic and 
worthy part. 
May I, at the outset, congratulate you. Sir, 
on your assumption of the presidency of the General Assembly at this session. 
I should also like to express our appreciation for the stewardship of the 
forty-sixth session of the General Assembly by your predecessor. 
Ambassador Samir Shihabi of Saudi Arabia. 
This is the first session of the General Assembly since 
Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali assumed the office of Secretary-General of the 
United Nations, and I take this opportunity to pay tribute to his dynamism, 
diplomatic skills and zeal for reform. 
I should also like to welcome into our midst the new Members of the 
United Nations and wish them success in their multifarious efforts and tasks. 
There have been dramatic changes world wide since the Assembly last met, 
in 1991. Some of these changes augur well, while others present uncertain 
prospects. While the cold war and the East-West confrontation are now, 
happily, but aberrations of the past, the shadow of conflict and suffering 
looms large in Yugoslavia, in Somalia and, indeed, in many other parts of the 
world. 
We cannot, therefore, be complacent or euphoric. What should have made 
the world safer has at the same time unleashed tendencies ethnic, sectarian 
and other - that threaten to keep it unsafe. The efforts of developing 

countries to improve their socio-economic conditions remain hamstrung by the 
inequities of the present international economic order. 
Therefore, what we need to work for is a new international order free 
from war, poverty, illiteracy and injustice. In this great endeavour the 
United Nations has a central role to play. Some eight and a half months ago, 
in this very city of New York, at the summit of the Security Council, 
Prime Minister Narasimha Rao pointed out that 
"Lasting peace and security necessarily require comparable levels of 
human happiness across the globe. It is impossible to think of a United 
Nations functioning usefully or harmoniously while humankind continues to 
be riddled with ever-increasing disparities". (S/PV.3046. p. 96) 
That is the concern that animates and reinforces our commitment to a United 
Nations dedicated as much to peace and stability as to progress and prosperity. 
The international community's efforts in this direction are none the less 
haunted by the shadow of continuing violence and conflict around the world. 
India has been deeply concerned at the conflict in Yugoslavia. The tragedy of 
Bosnia and Herzegovina demands redress. Its people must be given the chance 
to lead their lives in peace. India believes that the good work the United 
Nations is doing in that region deserves all our support. We also trust that 
decisions taken here will not complicate either the search for peace or the 
functioning of the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) in a difficult 
and dangerous situation. 

Somalia's tragedy is equally heart-rending. The wretchedness of its 
people, caught in a seemingly endless cycle of violence and misery, cries out 
for redress. The United Nations has instituted a valiant and generous 
operation there to provide relief to those affected. India believes that all 
the Somalian parties should work together to bring the conflict to an end so 
that tranquillity can be restored and the people of Somalia can be given the 
chance to work out their own destinies in peace. 
After years of suffering, the people of Cambodia aspire to build a 
sovereign, independent, non-aligned nation for themselves. The United Nations 
cannot falter in Cambodia, and the parties concerned in that country have a 
responsibility to ensure the success of the United Nations efforts. 
India has consistently supported the sovereignty, territorial integrity 
and non-aligned status of Afghanistan. We hope that all the parties there 
will work to restore peace and harmony so that the people of Afghanistan can 
have the opportunity, free of violence and conflict, to work for their own 
well-being. 
A glimmer of hope is visible on the West Asian horizon, with Israel and 
its Arab neighbours settling down to a dialogue. The numerous resolutions 
adopted by the Security Council and the General Assembly provide the necessary 
goals for those negotiations. The occupation of Arab lands should be vacated 
and the restitution of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, 
including their right to establish an independent State, as well as the 
security of all States in the region, should be assured if a genuine 
settlement with lasting peace is to be achieved in that part of the world. 
What the United Nations was able to do in restoring to Kuwait its 
independence and sovereignty was a singular achievement. India has 

traditionally enjoyed the warmest of relations with Kuwait, and we trust that 
following the restoration of its sovereignty Kuwait will also be able to 
recover the prosperity that it formerly enjoyed. 
I should like to add here that India feels sympathy for the civilian 
population of Iraq, and we believe that its needs should be looked at with 
generosity. Iraq's sovereignty as a State and its territorial integrity 
should be respected. 
The recent unfortunate violence in South Africa and the setback to the 
negotiations there for the elimination of apartheid will, we hope, be 
temporary. It is encouraging that the parties concerned have welcomed the 
catalytic role of the United Nations, which is fully committed to the 
objective of establishing a democratic, non-racial and united South Africa. 
As the country that first brought the question of apartheid to the United 
Nations in 1946, India is hopeful that the presence of United Nations 
observers will help to end the violence there and to get the negotiating 
process going once again. 
India has noted the recent changes in Fiji. I hope that the Government 
of Fiji will eschew racial and ethnic discrimination and revert to democratic 
governance at an early date. 
The Secretary-General has been able to record some progress on the issue 
of Cyprus. The acceptance by the parties concerned of the Secretary-General's 
"set of ideas" is significant. We share the Secretary-General's hope that the 
next round of direct talks in October will be the conclusive one. 
At this session the Assembly will take up the matter of the recently 
negotiated chemical-weapons Convention. The Convention opens up possibilities 
for similar action in other areas of disarmament. In this context, India in 

1988 proposed an action plan for nuclear disarmament within a specified 
time-frame. As an immediate step, the United Nations should envisage the 
following: a convention on the non-use of nuclear weapons, a verifiable 
freeze on the production of fissionable material for weapons purposes, a 
suspension of nuclear-weapon tests and negotiations on general and complete 
disarmament. 
Non-proliferation is a laudable objective, and India's commitment to it 
has been affirmed time and again. But there should be no distinction between 
nuclear-weapon States and non-nuclear-weapon States when it comes to rights 
and obligations. The geographical spread of nuclear arsenals has, as it were, 
nuclearized the globe. Therefore, the international community's efforts 
should be directed against that global menace. As part of them, regional 
non-proliferation should be considered only within the context of a properly 
specified region, taking into account the security concerns of the countries 
of the region, whose prior agreement should be obtained. 
Human rights have gained emphasis in recent times, and deservedly so. 
India welcomes the changes around the world that have strengthened human 
rights and fundamental freedoms. In line with our democratic traditions, 
independent judiciary and press and alert public, India has decided to set up 
a national human-rights commission further to safeguard and promote 
fundamental human rights in India. 
I should like to point out here that one of the most vicious forms of 
human-rights violations today is the violence unleashed by terrorists. And 
terrorism assumes a particularly pernicious character when it is aided, 
abetted and sponsored from abroad. Such sponsorship is against the principles 
of the United Nations Charter, and should be vigorously opposed by all. 

The United Nations recognizes its responsibilities for providing 
humanitarian assistance to Member States facing grave humanitarian crises. 
The newly created capacity of the United Nations to deal with such situations 
has performed creditably. It is important in this context that we mobilize 
the United Nations to address the root causes of many such disruptions: 
poverty, illiteracy and lack of development. It is equally important for the 
United Nations to be seen to be acting correctly and impartially in this field 
and at the request of the country concerned. 
The report of the Secretary-General entitled "An Agenda for Peace" 
(A/47/277) articulates the wealth of experience that the United Nations has 
gained in recent years in peacemaking and peace-keeping, and is an important 
and welcome input into our study of how the role of the United Nations in the 
maintenance of international peace and security can be strengthened. India, 
given its traditional and long-standing contribution to United Nations 
peace-keeping forces, takes a special interest in the matter. I trust that we 
shall be able to respond positively and constructively, in keeping with the 
United Nations Charter, to the Secretary-General's ideas. It should be 
ensured that the measures envisaged do not lead to the abridgement of the 
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States. They should also respect the 
cardinal tenet of non-interference in the internal affairs of States. 
Just as international activism should not violate accepted norms of 
international relations, the principle of self-determination has to be seen in 
the context of respect for national sovereignty. Self-determination can apply 
only to peoples under colonial or alien domination or foreign occupation, and 
not to integral parts of sovereign nations. 

The implementation of the proposals made by the Secretary-General will 
mean a more vigorous Security Council. An enhanced mandate for the Council 
requires matching transparency and democracy in its functioning. This cannot 
be done without an expansion of the membership of the Council to reflect the 
increased membership of the United Nations over the past few years, as well as 
the realities of the many changes in the international situation. And here I 
would submit that along with economic criteria, other relevant criteria should 
be given due weight in this context. 
The expansion in membership that I referred to is all the more essential 
if the Council is to ensure its moral sanction and political effectiveness. 
As the Secretary-General points out in his report on the work of the 
Organization 
"Democracy within the family of nations means the application of its 
principles within the world Organization itself." (A/47/1, para. 169) 
Similarly, the General Assembly has to be made more effective so as to 
represent not only the changes in its membership, but also the significant 
character of its universal composition. 
An agenda for development is as important to the United Nations as an 
agenda for peace. Any effort to assign to the United Nations only a 
complementary role in the economic and social field is, in fact, contrary to 
the letter and spirit of the Charter. The United Nations should continue to 
have a central role in macroeconomic policy formulation and implementation, 
because this is the only forum for reaching an international consensus on 
development. Developing nations around the globe, including India, are 
engaged in major reforms of their internal economic policies and mechanisms 
with a view to integrating their economies with the global economy. These 

reforms will have very limited meaning unless the external economic 
environment becomes conducive to the growth and development of developing 
countries. 
The Secretary-General, in his report on the work of the Organization, 
makes it clear that 
"the Organization's responsibilities and commitments in the political and 
security area should not be carried out at the expense of its 
responsibilities in the development field ..." (A/47/1, para. 66) 
This underpins and reinforces the continuing commitment of the United Nations 
in the field of development, particularly of the developing countries. 
The world economy is integrating both globally and regionally. But in 
the process, the needs of the developing countries are not finding the 
attention and response that they deserve. Hence, it becomes imperative that 
certain international events succeed such as the Uruguay Round of 
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, whose early, successful and balanced outcome 
would inject growth impulses into the world economy as a whole. The 
North-South dialogue is languishing and deserves reactivation. There are 
various other inequities in global economic interaction - such as poor 
commodity prices, monetary imbalances and others that call for urgent 
redress. The developing countries look to the United Nations for correctives 
in these fields. Socio-economic progress in developing countries will, in 
turn - I have no doubt about it enrich the prosperity of the developed world 
itself. 
Here, may I mention a disquieting aspect in this field, namely the 
tendency to impose non-economic conditionalities in international development 
assistance. They should be avoided so that the effectiveness of development 
assistance may not be impaired. 

My delegation sees merit in a number of proposals in the area of the 
developmental activities of the United Nations put forward by various groups, 
particularly the Nordic countries. In our view, one of the principal 
objectives of the exercise should be to decentralize the operational 
activities of the United Nations system so that countries and regions with 
their special characteristics and levels of development may be able to 
implement programmes suitable to them. Also, adequate resources should be 
found to promote development in the developing countries. 
The process of the restructuring of the United Nations should take into 
account the additional responsibilities assigned to the United Nations by the 
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) that was held 
this year. The concept of sustainable development has to be translated into 
workable strategies and policy measures. In the pursuit of sustainable 
development, developing countries need resources and, what is more, technical 
assistance, as well as environmentally sound technologies on preferential and 
concessional terms. I do hope that the establishment of a Commission on 
Sustainable Development in the course of the present session will lead to 
effective follow-up of UNCED. The creation of a Planet Protection Fund, which 
places on all countries, except the least developed, an obligation to acquire 
and develop environment-friendly technologies, will facilitate universal 
participation in the collective effort to attain sustainable development. 
The non-aligned countries, meeting at the level of Heads of State or 
Government in Jakarta earlier this month, issued the Jakarta message, which 
states: 
"A shift in focus of international relations to strengthen multilateral 
cooperation based on genuine interdependence, mutuality of interests and 
shared responsibility, has become indispensable." 

If we, in the international community and here at the United Nations, are to 
cooperate to combat global menaces and inequalities, we will need to forge a 
global partnership. And here, I am reminded of what the Prime Minister of 
India stated at the recent summit of non-aligned countries to which I have 
referred: 
"We are happy to note that the United Nations, at last, is coming into 
its own in the fifth decade of its existence. While even today there is 
a tendency to subordinate the global agenda to narrow national concerns, 
we are happy to note that the United Nations is more effective than ever 
before. The question now is to make it even more effective." 
Let us also hope that the Assembly as its present session will promote 
the effectiveness of the United Nations even further by shaping it as an 
instrument of international consensus and action and of common benefit in all 
matters of international concern. 
Let me begin by congratulating you, Sir, and 
the nation of Bulgaria, on your assumption of the presidency of the United 
Nations General Assembly. May I also congratulate the Secretary-General, 
Mr. Boutros-Ghali, on his leadership in the struggle for peace. I wish him 
success in his endeavours. 
Today I speak for an Israel that has chosen to step out of the shadows of 
the past to prepare for the invitation of a new future. The world is alive 
with the impulse for change. The end of conflict is no longer a Utopian 

fantasy. It is the dictate of realism and of universal self-interest. We 
look to the future in a world that wants peace. 
Like a hidden Samson, the forces of change have pushed aside the pillars 
of conventional wisdom, which proclaimed that military power is the source of 
national strength and prestige. This is no longer true. The cost of 
maintaining a significantly large army can deplete the resources of the 
richest countries, even if the weaponry remains unused. Around our changing 
world, the flow of knowledge has superseded military might as the source of 
real strength and social stability. 

The flow of knowledge no longer stops at national frontiers. It is not 
possible in the age of modern communications to shield peoples from truth and 
reality. Eventually, even dictators must face the fact that the best censors 
cannot block the free flow of ideas. But knowledge cannot be acquired without 
the right to doubt, the readiness to change. Knowledge is not available 
without freedom, and so democracy is prevailing throughout the world. 
In this new era, the era of knowledge, the governing principles are those 
of democratic structures, market-based economies, open borders, demilitarized 
international and regional relations, and respect for human rights. But while 
all nations should embrace these new principles, national traditions and 
identities retain their power. Nation-States will remain the focus of 
allegiance and social pride. 
To reconcile national identity, regional cooperation and universal 
solidarities is the central issue of contemporary life. 
The United Nations was established in an era that no longer exists. Yet 
its ideals and structures can meet the challenges and dangers of this new 
age. We support the "Agenda for Peace" offered by the Secretary-General. We 
support and will participate in the attempt to build a global protection 
system. 
The United Nations must be the headquarters for an all-embracing struggle 
to safeguard the environment against new threats. It must be a powerhouse to 
arrest starvation. It must develop the institutions and the ability to 
intervene when necessary to stop otherwise insoluble civil wars. The United 
Nations must reorganize to face these problems in a global capacity. 
In our own region, we must understand that even if our geography and 
people have not changed, the world has changed. No longer can we live on 

disappearing premises. For generations, the conflicts in the Middle East were 
nurtured by global conflicts by the cold war and hot competition. Within 
the context of super-Power rivalry, the belligerents in the Middle East were 
generously supplied with shining armour. But where there were once evil 
empires, we now see only the desire for a peaceful world. Russia has 
changed. The United States has emerged from the cold war with renewed respect 
from the world for its democratic drive for peace. The third world is 
changing, with many nations ending old hostilities and building new 
economies. In Africa, the forces of racism are being gradually driven out. 
In the Middle East itself let's face it the peace between Israel and Egypt 
is attaining the respect of age. There is a fresh atmosphere in our time. 
The time is now upon us for the nations of the Middle East to come to 
terms with the new realities, to make a living on their own. We can learn to 
benefit from peaceful coexistence. If we are to survive, we must understand 
that the dangers and opportunities we face are regional rather than national. 
In an age of long-range missiles, national defence must be a collective 
effort. To provide our people with modern standards of living we must have 
open borders and mutually beneficial exchanges. 
For too long the Middle East has been caught up in national conflicts and 
national rivalries for the glorification of national leaders. We need to 
build a new Middle East of, by and for the people. In our effort to build 
this new future for the Middle East, Israel does not ignore its still existing 
disagreements with our neighbours. The record shows that we are working to 
solve them humanely, honourably and, wherever possible, permanently. We are 
currently engaged in bilateral negotiations to bring an end to the conflicts 
of the past and multilateral negotiations to lay the foundation for the future. 

In the bilateral negotiations, we are negotiating with the Jordanians, 
the Palestinians, the Syrians and the Lebanese. The committed leadership of 
the United States has played a central role in bringing all the parties into 
face-to-face negotiations. 
With the Jordanians, the solutions are awaiting the parties. We face 
common problems we must confront together, including the possible Jordanian 
connection to Palestinian self-government and beyond. Our relations with the 
Hashemite Kingdom have seen open hostilities but also tacit efforts to 
overcome these hostilities. We look forward to a complete peace with the 
Kingdom of Jordan in the near future. 
With the Palestinian people, our conflict has been long and painful. We 
seek to end this conflict. We are looking for a bridge to cross the gulf of 
bitter memories, painful hatreds and emotion-laden suspicions. We have 
offered to negotiate an interim or transitional goal. There is no difference 
between the two. In fact, one can note with satisfaction that the 
Palestinians have agreed to this gradual approach. The direction is clear, 
even if the bridge will be built slowly. 
The suggested path is an interim self-government arrangement, as 
conceived at Camp David. We know that this proposal is imperfect in some 
respects. Self-government is less than independence. But it offers the 
flexibility of an arrangement that will last no more than five years. During 
this limited period of time, Palestinians in the territories will enjoy 
self-government. The opportunity to select, through democratic political 
elections, a Palestinian administrative council will enable the Palestinian 
people to exercise a double measure of freedom: the freedom to govern their 
own lives and to do so politically and democratically. 

But instead of attempting to draw a map of a self-governing territory 
and it is doubtful that this could be achieved now we have suggested a 
definite timetable. So, while this proposal lacks the clarity of a map, it 
provides the commitment of a calendar. This proposal is clearly a departure 
from the present situation. It has the dynamics of a voyage to a new destiny, 
a bridge which begins at one shore and reaches another. 
I know it will not be an easy choice for either side. But neither the 
existing situation nor the foreseeable future contains a more promising 
alternative. I am speaking for an Israeli Government that has firmly made up 
its mind and seeks the expeditious implementation of this proposal. 
In negotiations, the parties tend to scrutinize every letter, every dot. 
I hope that the Palestinians will also perceive the spirit of our intent, 
which is to extricate ourselves from the position of domination over another 
people. We have never in our history as a people sought domination over 
others. We wholeheartedly seek a future where the children of both peoples 
will escape the agonies of a distorted past and live under a clear sky of 
security and hope. 

With the Syrians, we have begun a dialogue in full daylight for the first 
time in 44 years. It is necessary now to translate the change in the mood 
between our two nations into viable and carefully constructed accords 
expressing a mutual interest in security and cooperation. 
We call for a departure from old dogmas and all-embracing dictates, and 
we hope the Syrians will adopt the same approach. We understand the need to 
safeguard the security and freedom of both nations, theirs and ours. It is 
our responsibility to ensure that those who have survived the wars of the past 
will have the opportunity to open a new peaceful chapter in the history of the 
two peoples. 
The leaders of both countries should be directly involved in these 
negotiations, which are in need of a new approach and creative thinking. I 
call on the President of Syria to set aside his reservations and meet with the 
Prime Minister of Israel. 
We have made clear to the Syrians that Security Council resolutions 
242 (1967) and 338 (1973) contain a territorial dimension, combined with other 
components of peace and security which must be equally respected. 
We believe in a comprehensive solution involving all issues and all 
parties. Yet we do not consider it wise to link one negotiation to another, 
or to postpone an agreement with one country because of delays elsewhere. One 
negotiating process should not be handcuffed to another. 
With respect to Lebanon, Israel holds no territorial claims; nor does it 
seek to influence the political destiny of that country. We recall peaceful 
relations with Lebanon at a time when it was internally balanced and 
tranquil. We hope that such a time will return again. The moment Lebanon 
finds peace within itself and independence from outside intervention, Lebanon 
and Israel will live in peace again. 

Looking at the bilateral negotiations, we recall that the success of our 
negotiations with Egypt stemmed from dialogue at many levels of society: 
decision makers, leaders, businessmen, academicians. We appeal to all our 
Arab neighbours to establish the same dialogue today. There is no room for 
timidity, reluctance or boycotts in a peace process. Peacemaking should not 
be a hideaway operation. 
I hope our neighbours realize that Israel has implemented unilateral 
confidence-building measures. We have drastically changed our settlement 
policies, altered our policies towards the Palestinian people, offered new 
proposals for self-government and suggested target dates for the 
implementation of this process. We have done these things unconditionally. 
Yet confidence-building measures call for reciprocity. We seek an end to the 
unjustified economic boycott and the cessation of terror. 
We shall not allow ourselves or our adversaries to escape this chance for 
peace. Yet we cannot turn our region into a new Middle East by just 
negotiating old disputes. Our new challenges are on our horizons, not only in 
our frontiers. 
We say to our Arab neighbours: the real danger is not Israel. The real 
danger is poverty. The real danger is poverty that creates protest, even if 
it is occasionally cloaked in a religious mantle. Poverty and protest 
endanger both the Arab nations and Israel. Israel does not want to become an 
isolated island in an ocean of resentment. 
Two hundred forty million people live today in the Middle East. The 
majority of them live in a state of want. In 30 years, there will be 
500 million people in the region, two thirds residing in Africa, one third in 
Asia. 
 
The poverty of the Middle East has nothing to do with geography. It has 
to do with the use and misuse of available and potential resources in the 
region. The gap between wealthy and poor nations is wide: the more 
prosperous nations enjoy a per capita income 10 times greater than their 
poorer neighbours. The earth beneath us will continue to tremble if the 
wealthy remain oblivious to the needy, both within and beyond national borders. 
The multilateral negotiations are composed of five areas: economics, 
arms control, refugees, ecology and water. Progress in these areas will more 
likely be attained if we can restructure the multilateral talks, which 
initially created two advantages: the cluster of issues and the participation 
of many Arab countries. But the talks suffer as well from loose organization, 
which has resulted in seminars rather than negotiations, and from the lack of 
a concentrated thrust to coordinate their work. We suggest the following 
changes. 
First, the separate negotiations should be conducted in a coordinated 
manner. 
Secondly, participation in the steering committee should be raised to the 
ministerial level. 
Thirdly, the multilateral negotiations should be intensified through more 
frequent meetings for longer periods of time. 
Fourthly, the Syrians and the Lebanese should participate. 
Fifthly, discussion of human rights and pluralistic values should be made 
part of the talks so as to combine the discussion of well-defined practical 
issues with the pursuit of common values very much akin to the Helsinki 
accords. 

And finally, the parties should agree not to postpone progress in the 
multilateral talks until the conclusion of the bilateral negotiations. Early 
planning can save crucial time for all parties without forcing irreversible 
commitments. And lost time cannot be regained. 
The bilateral negotiations are essentially political. The multilateral 
negotiations are essentially economic. We live in an age when financial 
assistance in itself is no longer the answer to the economic needs of the 
Middle East. In the past, belligerency created dependence upon the financial 
assistance of other nations. By diminishing the need for arms and building 
the right economic structure, we will be able create wealth of our own. There 
is no need to impoverish the wealthy in order to enrich the poor. Opening 
borders, paving roads, introducing modern communications, and exchanging 
technology will generate economic growth in the Middle East. 
Trade across borders is essential for economic growth. Markets transcend 
national boundaries. Water, tourism and commerce do not subjugate themselves 
to political maps. The Middle East should follow the example of the "seven 
tigers" in Asia, the European Common Market and the North American Free Trade 
Agreement. Let us understand: these regions are our competitors and they are 
far ahead of the Middle East in facing the new realities of the international 
economy. We have to build an open regional economy, for the same reasons and 
with the same promise that led others to do so. We have to build a common 
market in the Middle East. 
 
We have to set out upon the long and complicated road to arms control. 
That we can learn from the East-West negotiations and other attempts at arms 
control. We have to follow the patient path of confidence-building measures 
in the geographical and technical domains until we are able to rid the Middle 
East of the terror presented by weapons of mass destruction, both conventional 
and non-conventional. Israel has proposed the creation of a nuclear-free zone 
in the Middle East numerous times, and we stand ready to pursue this goal 
today. 
We should address the problems of refugees, not by threatening to destroy 
the existing demographic balance, but by exploring a range of possibilities 
for restoring the dignity of refugees and offering them a new life. 
We should act to save our fresh air and historic landscape. Ecological 
pollution does not respect borders, and so we have to marshal forces to save 
our region from the danger of uncontrolled deterioration. 
Finally, the Middle East possesses vast desert land but meagre water 
resources. The land is static, the population is increasing and water 
resources are declining. Available water should be reused, and new fresh 
water produced from the sea. Either the land will be salinized by the sea or 
the sea water will be desalinized through available technology. The 
technology is available, and the necessary credit is attainable. We can 
satisfy the needs of man and land. The Middle East can be made green. It 
depends upon us. 
Here, I believe, are the pillars of wisdom for a new Middle East: 
economic growth, arms control, dignity for the refugees, environmental 
protection and water resources, coupled with religious freedom, pluralistic 
values and human rights. The nations of the Middle East must work 
individually and collectively to meet these challenges of a changed world. 

The agenda is ambitious. Is it merely a dream? No. It is a blueprint, 
and the necessary elements are within our grasp. Will these goals be achieved 
in our lifetime? We dare not hesitate, because the world will not wait for 
the Middle East. We are tragically late in making peace. If we do not face 
our economic challenges, we will be left hopelessly far behind. 
The agenda is new. The vision was already mentioned in Proverbs: 
"Wisdom builds the house. 
"Good judgment makes it secure." (The Holy Bible. Proverbs 24:3) 
"Wisdom prevails over strength; knowledge over brute force." (The Holy 
Bible. Proverbs 24:5) 
We have to go to work. For us, the Jewish people, this is Rosh Hashanah, 
the New Year. We pray that the year to come will bring peace, freedom and 
prosperity to build a new Middle East for all of its people Muslim, 
Christian, Jewish, Arab, Israeli for us, and for our children. 
Mr. President, New Zealand congratulates 
you on your election to lead the Assembly and offers you its support in your 
task. 
One year ago I stood on this rostrum and spoke about the Gulf crisis and 
the way in which the United Nations, with strong leadership from the Security 
Council, had shown a firmness of judgement and a commitment to the ideals of 
the founders of the United Nations that reinforced the status and authority of 
the Organization. 
I spoke of my own country. New Zealand, a small nation in the south-west 
Pacific, which supported the United Nations, in keeping with our tradition of 
opposing tyranny and supporting freedom. 
This year I have returned to this Organization even more confident of the 
vital role of the United Nations in today's world, of the important 
contribution each nation, be it large or small, can make to the achievement of 
its ideals. Most important, however, I want to affirm the commitment of New 
Zealand, a founder member of the United Nations, to ensuring that this 
Organization adapts to meet the challenge of a world that has changed, is 
changing and will continue to change in the years ahead. To do that, the 
 
United Nations requires a vibrant, active General Assembly and a Security 
Council that truly reflects the different regions and the different peoples of 
the world. 
The Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros-Ghali,, has made his views clear in 
putting before this Assembly his report, "An Agenda for Peace". His message 
is summed up in paragraphs 75 and 76, where he says: 
"With the cold war ended we have drawn back from the brink of a 
confrontation that threatened the world and, too often, paralysed our 
Organization. 
"Even as we celebrate our restored possibilities, there is a need to 
ensure that the lessons of the past ... are learned and that the 
errors ... are not repeated. For there may not be a third opportunity 
for our planet ... ." (A/47/277, paras. 75-76) 
New Zealand endorses that conclusion. 
We can also take hope from the fact that at last both the Security 
Council and the Assembly have the chance to work as they were originally 
intended, free from crippling ideological competition. Through the Security 
Council, and with the support of all the Members of the United Nations, we 
have seen decisive action to implement collective security measures on a scale 
never before possible. 
There is much still to be done, but no longer need the people of the 
world despair about impotence and inaction on the part of the United Nations. 
In Cambodia, in Somalia, in the Balkans, in the Middle East, the United 
Nations has moved to assist in the vital battle for human survival where 
before there was only the prospect of continued death and destruction. 
 
In our view, the Agenda for Peace will succeed only if we support an 
agenda for action. This is no time for complacency. The heavy cloud of the 
cold war has lifted. But over the years that cloud concealed many smaller 
conflicts and tensions regional, national and ethnic. Freed from being 
bottled up by the cold war, a growing and frightening tendency is exposed to 
settle ancient differences by the use of force. 
The Agenda for Peace also reminds us that there are other critical issues 
which threaten not only the security of Member States but also the future of 
the planet itself. 
Poverty, disease, malnutrition, crippling levels of debt and negligible 
economic growth are scourges in themselves. They can unleash despair and 
anger that will destabilize political and social institutions. 
Environmental degradation does not threaten only our immediate 
surroundings and livelihoods; problems such as the depletion of the ozone 
layer, the spread of toxic chemicals, climate change and the overfishing of 
the seas put at risk the well-being of whole communities, and even the very 
survival of certain small island countries. 
Weapons of mass destruction continue to proliferate. We must take a 
stand against those who are blind to the lessons of the past and remain 
determined to acquire or expand their stocks of nuclear or other weapons of 
mass destruction. 
The Secretary-General reminds us, too, that 
"social peace is as important as strategic or political peace". 
 
It is clear that a root cause of insecurity and conflict at the international 
level is the existence of social structures, policies and systems within 
States which marginalize minorities or other groups. Such tension will be 
resolved only when the social needs of the underprivileged are addressed. The 
proposed United Nations social Summit could have a catalytic role to play in 
this area. I suggest that it is only through tolerance and through talking to 
one another that we can all encourage and achieve full respect for human 
rights and implement the international standards as they were intended. 
 
The other very important issues raised by the Secretary-General must be 
considered thoroughly. This session of the Assembly provides the first 
opportunity to debate them and I wish to outline New Zealand's views. 
First, let me refer to peace and security. New Zealand stands very 
firmly behind the United Nations as an instrument for collective action when 
security is threatened. The situations which the world wants the United 
Nations to respond to today are not the same as those of the cold-war era. 
New Zealand supports concepts such as preventive diplomacy, peace-keeping and 
peace-building. As a world body we know that consensus is important but 
collectively we must be bold, we must be innovative. 
New Zealand believes it is vital that the United Nations respond to 
situations which threaten the peace or cry out for global action, wherever in 
the world they may occur. We cannot, we must not, allow parts of the world to 
be marginalized or thought less important than others. The tragedy in Somalia 
is different from, but of equal horror to, that in what was Yugoslavia. 
Secondly, I want to endorse strongly the conclusion that there is an 
inextricable link between security and economic development. This is not a 
new or radical idea. Every political leader knows from domestic experience 
that a nation feels more secure when its economy is performing strongly. 
People in every country have rapidly growing expectations, but with the global 
economy very sluggish leaders are finding it difficult to satisfy these 
ambitions. 
Further, we need major sustainable growth in the global economy if the 
development concerns identified at the Earth summit at Rio are to be achieved. 
One fact, though self-evident, must be repeated: sustainable and 
equitable economic growth and development will be possible only if there is an 
open and fair international trading system. 

As a world community we need the courage to pull down the artificial 
barriers to economic growth. The solution is in our hands. We need leaders 
to say "Yes" to fair trade and "No" to their protectionist lobbies. If we 
knock out the selfish and inward-looking tendencies to protectionism and 
subsidization, we will create a surge in global trade and real growth in the 
global economy. It will provide the opportunities we all want - so let's do 
it. 
The alternative is bleak. History shows only too clearly what can happen 
if there is a deep and prolonged global recession. Political extremists come 
to the fore and begin to manipulate desperate people. Disintegrating 
economies fall into the hands of dictators, and international peace and 
security are quickly put at risk. 
But this need not be so. It is not inevitable. A breakthrough in the 
multilateral trade negotiations, the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on 
Tariffs and Trade (GATT), is achievable, given the right degree of political 
will. There is a risk that the political will may ebb away, that the focus 
may be lost, that excuses for delay may become more important than reasons to 
press on. Should that prove true, then the bold reform set out in the Dunkel 
text will go down as one more lost opportunity. We cannot afford that so we 
New Zealand - continue to urge the European Community and the United States to 
resolve their differences and to put the GATT talks back on track for a 
successful conclusion. For world economic growth, it is not an optional 
extra; it is essential. 
Just as economics and security are closely linked, the world seems to 
have accepted, just in time, that there is a third element to this equation. 
It is the environment. Everything we do has an impact on the environment. If 

we cripple the environment, it will affect our economies, our societies and 
our security. Moreover, these impacts will not respect national boundaries. 
Before the Earth summit, some important first steps were taken. The 
Montreal Protocol proved that the world had the political will to deal with 
the problem of ozone depletion. The General Assembly itself responded to the 
challenge of drift-net fishing and has secured a moratorium on that 
ecologically-destructive technique of fishing. 
The Earth summit, under the auspices of the United Nations, has given us 
a challenging work programme, "Agenda 21", to match the Secretary-General's 
proposals, "An Agenda for Peace". But international agendas only work if 
nations are committed to their success. 
New Zealand went to the Earth summit committed to working for consensus 
solutions to the problems of environment and development which ultimately 
threaten us all. 
New Zealand is a country endowed with a rich environmental inheritance. 
But we understand that our good fortune does not give us the moral right to 
point the finger at other countries which are struggling for their very 
survival. At the same time, our considerable experience in sustainable 
resource management - for example, in the development of new forests can be 
helpful in the search for practical solutions to problems of resource 
depletion. 
As part of New Zealand's commitment to environmental protection and to 
providing sustainable resources, we have just agreed to go ahead with the 
planting of another 200,000 hectares of forest. 
At the Earth summit, we accepted a commitment to augment our aid 
programme as soon as possible in order to assist in the prompt and effective 
 
implementation of Agenda 21. Our development assistance projects, based on 
consultation with our partner countries, particularly in the South Pacific, 
have always had a strong focus on the environment and on sustainable 
development. 
But aid alone is not enough. New Zealand, like many countries which 
depend on agricultural exports, has been severely disadvantaged by a world 
trading system which handicaps non-subsidized and efficient producers. We 
therefore strongly support the call in Agenda 21 for an open, transparent and 
non-discriminatory trading system that reveals the real environmental costs of 
unsustainable production and enables all countries to pursue truly sustainable 
development on a secure and equitable basis. 
To achieve that would be to achieve a real foundation for peace and 
progress. I am not making these observations from an ivory tower. For its 
part. New Zealand already has one of the most open economies in the world. 
Yes, there was a short-term cost in achieving that, but now we are reaping 
rewards through higher productivity and international competitiveness. 
Despite the progress made from the ending of the cold war, we have not 
yet removed the threat from weapons of mass destruction. 
New Zealand warmly welcomed the agreement reached by President Bush and 
President Yeltsin in June. The two largest nuclear arsenals are to be reduced 
by some 70 per cent. That is remarkable progress and both leaders deserve and 
have our thanks. They have made historic progress but we must keep the 
momentum up. Unless we take decisive action, the dangers from nuclear 
proliferation will increase. 

Therefore we must build on the leadership shown by two nuclear-weapon 
States in declaring moratoriums. We must advance the goal, which New Zealand 
has unwaveringly pursued, of a comprehensive test-ban treaty. We must 
strengthen the International Atomic Energy Agency's safeguards regime. And we 
must secure an indefinite extension of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons in 1995. 

France's decision to suspend testing has been widely welcomed by New 
Zealand and Pacific island countries in the South Pacific Forum region. It 
has opened the way for significantly more positive relations between France 
and the region, which I welcome. We hope the moratorium will be maintained, 
and copied by others. 
Another milestone approaches, with the presentation to this session of 
the General Assembly of a treaty banning another class of weapons of mass 
destruction: chemical weapons. Patient and persistent efforts over 20 years 
will have their reward. New Zealand has strongly supported those efforts and 
intends to be an original signatory to the treaty. We urge other countries to 
take the same step. 
And we must not ignore the continued proliferation of conventional 
armaments. There are legitimate concerns about the levels and availability of 
highly destructive conventional weapons. The implementation of the United 
Nations Register of Conventional Arms would be a useful first step on the way 
to greater accountability in this area. 
Finally, I want to touch on the institutional issues the 
Secretary-General has raised. We strongly endorse the role that is envisaged 
for the United Nations to work with, and on occasions through, regional 
organizations that have some special contribution they can make. Already in 
South Africa we see cooperation between the United Nations and the 
Commonwealth beginning to bear positive fruit. In Somalia the Organization of 
African Unity (OAU), the League of Arab States and the Organization of the 
Islamic Conference have contributed positively to the United Nations mission. 
In the Americas the Organization of American States (OAS) has played an 
increasingly effective role. 

The United Nations role in Cambodia is of particular importance in this 
regard. The operation is unique and deserves the highest praise. But the 
countries of the region - which include New Zealand, with 100 men and women in 
the United Nations force have also played a major part in bringing about the 
conditions necessary for a successful United Nations involvement. Regional 
organizations such as the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) have 
been indispensable in this process. 
The fact of the matter is that the United Nations cannot do everything. 
Neither do I expect it to do everything - but free from the shackles of the 
past it now has a new authority which it must exercise wisely. To maintain 
its authority we must ensure that democratic principles are applied to the 
workings of the United Nations itself. That means that the small must be 
represented in major United Nations decision-making as well as the large. 
It means that there must be fair and regular rotation among Member 
States. And it means we must evolve processes that will allow constructive 
communication between the Security Council and the wider United Nations 
membership so that broad coalitions in support of Security Council action can 
be forged while preserving room for quick and decisive actions where necessary. 
New Zealand's commitment to a strong, effective and democratic United 
Nations has never wavered. At the beginning, at the San Francisco Conference 
in 1945, New Zealand championed the broadest possible participation in 
decision-making. Over the years we have backed up our words with a real 
commitment to United Nations peace-keeping efforts. We have participated thus 
far in 15 such operations: New Zealanders have worn the blue beret in Croatia 
and Bosnia, Lebanon, Cyprus, India, Pakistan, Iraq, Iran, Namibia, Angola, 
Cambodia, the Congo and Yemen. In addition. New Zealand supplied personnel to 
assist the United Nations with mine removal in Afghanistan. 

In conclusion, I want to return to the two agendas which are before this 
Assembly and which seek to achieve a new partnership of nations. Nothing is 
more important than the Agenda for Peace and the Agenda for the Environment 
and Sustainable Development. The United Nations Secretary-General and the 
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development have both identified 
monumental challenges for the General Assembly for several years to come. 
They also highlight the reality of global interdependence. The way ahead has 
to lie in cooperation rather than confrontation, in a recognition that the 
future of each of us is tied up with the future of us all and that no agenda, 
no matter how noble its goals, will succeed unless first and foremost we are 
prepared to work for them. New Zealand is. 

First, I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your election to this 
important post. The fact that a representative of Bulgaria has assumed this 
post at the head of the Assembly at precisely this time is a sign of the 
importance that the world community attaches to the peaceful democratic 
revolution in Eastern Europe. And we are proud that our countries, linked by 
ties of traditional friendship, are treading this path together. 
The democratic movement has prevailed in the cold war. For the first 
time in history unprecedented opportunities have opened up for the 
implementation of the principles proclaimed by the United Nations. 

The post-confrontational and post-communist world is not a 
pax Sovietica. a pax Americana, a pax Islamica or a pax Christiana, nor is it 
a monopolistic system of any kind, but rather the multipolar unity in 
diversity that the United Nations has symbolized from the very outset. 
For the present, such a world is only a possibility yet to be realized 
through our joint efforts. Realism leaves no room for euphoria. A difficult 
period of transition lies ahead. But realism compels us to reject any 
alternative to the democratic choice. 
Russia, which has rejected communism, has, perhaps more than any other 
country, learned from its own experience that there can be no alternative to 
democratic development; our country voted for democracy during the first 
nation-wide presidential election in its history, and defended it at the 
barricades around the Moscow White House. Neither the President, nor the 
Government, nor the majority of Parliament, nor the country at large will turn 
aside from the path of reform, no matter how difficult it may prove. 
Totalitarianism robbed Russia both of its unique identity and of the 
possibility of self-fulfilment in its relations with other nations. Through 
its self-imposed isolation, the richest country of Eurasia became the sick man 
of Europe and Asia. In contrast, only an open society and a policy of 
openness will enable Russia to find and play to the fullest extent its unique 
and historic role. 
This policy has its roots in an age-old Russian idea. Back in the 
thirteenth century Saint Alexander Nevsky, one of the founders and defenders 
of the Russian State, said: "God is to be found not in power but in truth". 

Today this is the policy of the true national interests of the Russian 
State as a normal rather than an aggressive great Power, as one that 
recognizes and shoulders its responsibilities as a permanent member of the 
Security Council. 
The basic elements of this policy are as follows: partnership and 
alliance for democracy and a dynamic market economy with countries that share 
these values; good-neighbourly relations with all neighbouring States; 
comprehensive strengthening of the Commonwealth of Independent States, 
strategic partnership with Ukraine, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan and all 
other countries created in the place of the former Soviet Union; and 
solidarity and mutually advantageous cooperation with all the members of the 
world community. 
Russia intends to act in support of United Nations efforts to address 
the twofold task of the democratization of societies and the renewal of 
international relations. This is consonant with the concluding statement of 
the summit meeting of the Security Council, with Secretary-General 
Boutros Boutros-Ghali's report "An Agenda for Peace" and with the first 
statements already made from this rostrum. Russia is ready to give practical 
support to the proposals made yesterday by George Bush, President of the 
United States. 
First of all, it is necessary to extinguish armed conflicts. 
The Russian Federation will increase its efforts to eliminate conflicts 
inherited from the past in the territory of the former USSR, bearing in mind 
the special interest and responsibility of Russia in strengthening the 
civilized principles of the United Nations and the Conference on Security and 
Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) in this part of the world. 

Russia supports the participation of the new independent States in these 
two organizations and other international forums. We welcome their 
representatives in this Hall. 
We categorically reject imperialistic ambitions, diktat and violence, 
both in the area of the former USSR and in other parts of the world. Should 
political means fail, force can and should be used to separate the warring 
sides, to protect human rights and humanitarian missions and to restore peace 
in strict conformity with the Charter of the United Nations. 
Agreements for cease-fires and for the establishment of peace-keeping 
forces, concluded with Russian participation, are already in effect in 
Ossetia, the Dniester region and Abkhazia, where Russian soldiers are carrying 
out their peace-keeping duties. Together with CSCE, we will strive to end the 
war and bring peace to Karabakh and to secure the integrity of Tajikistan and 
bring national reconciliation to that country. In all those efforts we count 
on continued active cooperation with the United Nations. 
We support efforts aimed at forcing Iraq to implement the decisions of 
the United Nations and ensuring at the same time the territorial integrity and 
the peaceful nature of that State. For that purpose, Russia has sent two 
naval vessels to the Persian Gulf. 
We also must ensure that the demands of the Security Council are 
complied with by all the Yugoslav sides and must enable them to maintain 
contact with the United Nations. A Russian infantry battalion is serving 
honourably with the United Nations forces in Yugoslavia. 
I agree with the preceding speaker concerning the need to support the 
efforts of Mr. Panic for the practical implementation of the intentions he has 
declared. 
 
Russia will continue to cooperate actively with the other permanent 
members of the Security Council and with all the parties concerned in 
order to seize the opportunity for a peaceful settlement in the Middle 
East, Cambodia, Angola and other areas of conflict. 
We have no doubt that it is the task of the United Nations to combat 
violence with force based on law, with its potential for enforcing peace. 
The Blue Helmets should take action in response even when they are fired 
upon. 
It is time to strengthen the capacity of the Security Council to 
take swift and decisive action in humanitarian emergency situations 
arising from mass violations of human rights and inter-ethnic clashes, 
including those within national borders. 

It is important to strengthen the preventive component of United Nations 
activities. This includes the establishment of hot lines to United Nations 
Headquarters, the submission of intelligence information to the 
Secretary-General and the further development of fact-finding. 
Enhanced United Nations efforts to safeguard human rights and the rights 
of national minorities are also a priority. In the past it was chiefly the 
victims of totalitarian regimes and ideologies who needed protection. What is 
increasingly needed now is to combat the aggressive nationalism that is 
emerging as the new global threat. 
The replacement of ideological intolerance with national and religious 
intolerance would threaten the world which is increasingly becoming one 
world - with rifts just as serious and with national, regional and global 
catastrophes. Democratic Russia categorically rejects any form of chauvinism, 
be it Russophobia or anti-Semitism. 
We feel special concern at the growing discriminatory practices against 
Russians, Ukrainians, Jews and all other non-indigenous nationalities in some 
of the new States that have emerged in the territory of the former USSR, 
particularly in Estonia and Latvia. A situation in which 42 per cent of the 
population of the Estonian Republic are disenfranchised is totally 
inconsistent with international law. 
We have raised and will continue to raise these issues in the United 
Nations and other forums. We have the right to do so, among other reasons, 
because the countries in question won their independence, to a substantial 
extent, through the triumph of the democrats in Russia. The practices I have 
referred to can in no way be justified by invoking the problem, inherited from 
the USSR, of the withdrawal of armed forces from the Baltic States. We are 

already working together to resolve that problem, and we intend to resolve it 
as soon as possible; however, due regard must also be given to the rights of 
those who are in military uniform. 
It would be appropriate to give thought to a joint interpretation of the 
international trusteeship system set forth in the Charter of the United 
Nations, particularly since one of its basic objectives is and I quote the 
Charter - "To encourage respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms 
for all without distinction as to race, sex, language, or religion". That 
system has brought many nations to independence. Today national minorities 
desperately need the trusteeship of the world community. 
The fate of former Soviet servicemen taken prisoner in Afghanistan 
remains one of the gravest humanitarian problems. We call upon the General 
Assembly to proclaim its support for the urgent resolution of this problem. 
The rejection of the game of "nuclear roulette" in favour of cooperation 
in the interests of strategic stability for all and with the participation of 
all States concerned is reflected in the agreements on further drastic cuts in 
strategic offensive arms and on a global defense system reached in Washington 
by the Presidents of Russia and the United States of America. 
Reaffirming its commitments under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons, the Russian Federation invites all countries that have not 
yet done so to join the Treaty as non-nuclear-weapon States. It is our belief 
that all the former Republics of the USSR, including Ukraine, Belarus and 
Kazakhstan, will do so. This step should be taken as soon as possible, since 
the entry into force of the treaty on strategic offensive arms depends on it. 

We expect that a sense of high responsibility and a readiness to reach 
compromise solutions will prevail in the decisive phase of the approval of the 
Convention on the banning of chemical weapons. 
Russia is in favour of control, including control through the United 
Nations, over international arms transfers, especially over offensive and 
highly destructive weapons. The approach taken with respect to regimes that 
disregard the standards of international law should be particularly strict. 
There is an obvious need for the development of concrete 
military-industry conversion programmes, not only through the efforts of 
individual countries but also through the combined action of the international 
community. The United Nations and its specialized agencies could play a 
pioneering role in this endeavour. In the long run, real disarmament and the 
conversion of military industries to peaceful production will make it possible 
to release additional resources for the needs of development. 
But development cannot be achieved without ensuring full political and 
economic rights and freedoms, without releasing human creative potential in a 
market environment. Russia has learned this from its own experience. 
For a successful solution of the problems of development, it is extremely 
important to strengthen the interaction between the United Nations and the 
Bretton Woods institutions. Herein lies the key to the harmonization of the 
world community's efforts in such areas as support of macroeconomic reforms 
and technical assistance and the provision of help in resolving social 
problems. Both developing and developed countries will benefit from this. 
The United Nations Conference at Rio de Janeiro reinforced the consensus 
on the need to integrate development policies and environmental protection. 

The task of renewing international relations calls for the 
rationalization of the United Nations itself and of the United Nations 
system. The desire of some States to play a more active role in the United 
Nations is quite natural. The Charter provides ample scope for this. In 
particular, the Charter permits the Security Council to establish auxiliary 
bodies in which many States would participate. We are convinced that the 
United Nations and other international organizations will play a growing role 
in regulating international relations. 
In conclusion, I should like to address you, Mr. Secretary-General. 
Russia supports your efforts to bring about the settlement of international 
crises, to improve the efficiency of the United Nations Secretariat and the 
coordination of the activities of all international agencies. 
Support of the United Nations presupposes the fulfilment of financial 
obligations to the Organization. Despite its economic difficulties, in the 
period from September of this year to March 1993 Russia will pay $130 million 
as partial payment of our arrears to the United Nations and an additional 
$30 million to other agencies. 
Your recent statements in Moscow, Mr. Secretary-General, have confirmed 
the similarity of our vision of the great future of the United Nations. 
Forty-seven years ago I was a young man of 21, and, 
like thousands of others of my generation, I had gone off to war to help keep 
freedom alive. Forty-seven years ago this month the war was finally over, and 
I was looking forward to peace and the chance to begin my life in earnest: 
1945 marked a moment of promise, not just for me, but for all of mankind. A 
great struggle against dictatorship had been fought and won. Across the 
globe, we all looked forward to a future free of war, a world where we might 
raise our children in peace and freedom, and this institution, the United 
Nations, born amidst the ashes of war, embodied those hopes and dreams like no 
other. 
But the hopes and dreams of 1945 remained unfulfilled: communist 
imperialism divided the world in two, our hopes for peace and our dreams of 
freedom were frozen in the grip of cold war, and, instead of finding a common 
ground, we found ourselves at Ground Zero. Instead of living on Churchill's 
The President returned to the Chair. 

"broad, sunlit uplands", millions found that there was, as Arthur Koestler so 
chillingly wrote, "Darkness at Noon". Instead of uniting the nations, this 
body became a forum for distrust and division among nations and, in a cruel 
irony, the United Nations, created to free the world of conflict, itself 
became conflict's captive. 
I too lived through those disputes; I sat where you sit, proudly so; I 
served in this Assembly and I saw, in my time, the consequences of the cold 
war's hot words on the higher missions of the United Nations. Now, 47 years 
later, we stand at the end of another war, the cold war, and our hopes and 
dreams have awakened again. Driven by its own internal contradictions and 
banished by the peoples' undying thirst for freedom, imperial communism has 
collapsed in its birthplace, and today Russia has awakened democratic, 
independent and free; the Baltic States are free; and so too are Ukraine, 
Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan and the other independent States joining the 
nations of Central and Eastern Europe in freedom. 
The fear of nuclear Armageddon between the super-Powers has vanished, and 
we are proud to have done our part to ensure that our schoolchildren do not 
have to practise hiding under their desks for fear of nuclear attack, as the 
generation before them did. I am proud also to salute the courageous leaders 
with nuclear responsibilities Presidents Yeltsin, Kravchuk, Nazarbayev, 
Shushkevich who joined me in ending the super-Power stand-off that risked 
nuclear nightmare. This is the first General Assembly session to seat you as 
truly independent and free nations, and to you and the leaders of the other 
independent States, I say welcome home: we are now truly united nations. 

With the cold war's end, I believe we have a unique opportunity to go 
beyond artificial divisions of a first, second and third world to forge 
instead a genuine, global community of free and sovereign nations, a community 
built on respect for principle, on peaceful settlement of disputes, on 
fundamental human rights and on the twin pillars of freedom: democracy and 
free markets. Already, the United Nations, especially the Security Council, 
has done much to fulfil its original mission and to build this global 
community. 
United Nations leadership has been critical in resolving conflicts and 
brokering peace the entire world over, but securing democracy and securing the 
peace in the century ahead will be no simple task. Imperial communism may 
have been vanquished, but that does not end the challenges of our age, 
challenges that must be overcome if we are finally to end the divisions 
between East and West, North and South, that fuel strife and strain and 
conflict and war. 
As we support the historic growth of democracy around the world, I 
believe the community of nations and the United Nations face three critical, 
interrelated challenges as we enter the twenty-first century. 
First, we face the political challenge of keeping today's peace and 
preventing tomorrow's wars. As we see daily in Bosnia, Somalia and Cambodia, 
everywhere conflict claims innocent lives; the need for enhanced peace-keeping 
capabilities has never been greater; the conflicts we must deal with have 
never been more intractable, the costs of conflict higher. 
Second, we face the strategic challenge of the proliferation of weapons 
of mass destruction, truly the fastest growing security challenge to 
international peace and order. 

Third, we face the common economic challenge of promoting prosperity for 
all, of strengthening an open, growth-oriented, free-market international 
economic order while safeguarding the environment. 
Meeting these challenges will require us to strengthen our collective 
engagement; it will require us to transform our collective institutions; and, 
above all, it will require that each of us look seriously at our own 
Government and how we conduct our international affairs. We too must change 
our institutions and our practices if we are to make a new world of the 
promises of today, if we are to secure a twenty-first century peace. 
 
With you today I would like to discuss these three challenges: 
peace-keeping, proliferation and prosperity. And I should like to use this 
opportunity to begin to sketch how I believe the international community can 
work together to meet these three challenges and how the United States is 
changing its institutions and policies to catalyze this effort. 
Let me begin with peace-keeping. The United Nations has a long and 
distinguished history of peace-keeping and humanitarian relief. From Cyprus 
and Lebanon, to Cambodia and Croatia, the blue beret has become a symbol of 
hope amid all that hostility. And the United Nations has long played a 
central role in preventing conflicts from turning into wars, and strengthening 
peace-keeping capabilities can help buttress these diplomatic efforts. But, 
as much as the United Nations has done, it can do much more. 
Peace-keepers are stretched to the limit while the demands for their 
services increase by the day. The need for monitoring and preventive 
peace-keeping putting people on the ground before the fighting starts - may 
become especially critical in volatile regions. This is especially the case 
because of the rapid and turbulent change that continues to shake Eastern 
Europe and Eurasia. Across the lands that once were imprisoned behind an iron 
curtain, peoples are reasserting their historical identities that were frozen 
in communism's catacomb. 
Where this is taking place in a democratic manner with tolerance and 
civility and respect for fundamental human rights and freedoms, this new 
democratic nationalism is all to the good. But, unfortunately, we need only 
look to the bloody battles raging in places such as the former Yugoslavia to 
see the dangers of ethnic violence. This is the greatest threat to the 
democratic peace we hope to build with Eastern Europe, with Russia and 
 
Eurasia, even more than economic deprivation. We fully support the efforts of 
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the Conference on Security and 
Cooperation in Europe (CSCE), the Western European Union (WEU), the 
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) and other competent regional 
organizations to develop peace-keeping capabilities. 
We are convinced, however, that enhanced United Nations capabilities are 
a necessary complement to these regional efforts, not just in Europe and 
Eurasia, but across the globe. 
I welcome the Secretary-General's call for a new agenda to strengthen the 
ability of the United Nations to prevent, contain and resolve conflicts across 
the globe. Today I call upon all Members to join me in taking bold steps to 
advance that agenda. I will therefore be discussing with my colleagues the 
merits of a special meeting of the Security Council to discuss the 
Secretary-General's proposals and to develop concrete responses in five key 
areas. 
First, robust peace-keeping requires men and equipment that only Member 
States can provide. Nations should develop and train military units for 
possible peace-keeping operations and humanitarian relief and these forces 
must be available on short notice at the request of the Security Council and 
with the approval, of course, of the Governments providing it. 
Secondly, if multinational units are to work together, they must train 
together. Many nations for example, Fiji, Norway, Canada and Finland have 
a long history of peace-keeping and we can all tap into that experience as we 
train for expanded operations. Effective multinational action will also 
require coordinated command and control and inter-operability of both 
equipment and communications. Multinational planning, training, field 

exercises will be needed. Those efforts should link up with regional 
organizations. 
Thirdly, we also need to provide adequate logistical support for 
peace-keeping and humanitarian operations. Member States should designate 
stockpiles of resources necessary to meet humanitarian emergencies, including 
famines, floods and civil disturbances. This will save valuable time in a 
crisis. 
Fourthly, we will need to develop planning, crisis management and 
intelligence capabilities for peace-keeping and humanitarian operations. 
Fifthly, we must ensure adequate equitable financing for United Nations 
and associated peace-keeping efforts. 
As I said, we must change our national institutions if we are to change 
our international relations. So let me assure you that the United States is 
ready to do its part to strengthen world peace by strengthening international 
peace-keeping. 
For decades, the American military has served as a stabilizing presence 
around the globe. And I want to draw on our extensive experience in winning 
wars, in keeping the peace, to support United Nations peace-keeping. I have 
directed the United States Secretary of Defense to place a new emphasis on 
peace-keeping. Because of peace-keeping's growing importance as a mission for 
the United States military, we will emphasize training of combat, engineering 
and logistical units for the full range of peace-keeping and humanitarian 
activities and we will work with the United Nations to best employ our 
considerable lift, logistics, communications and intelligence capabilities to 
support peace-keeping operations. And we will offer our capabilities for 
joint simulations and exercises to strengthen our ability to undertake joint 
peace-keeping operations. 

There is room for all countries, large and small, and I hope all will 
play a part. 
Member States, as always, must retain the final decision on the use of 
their troops, of course. But we must develop our ability to coordinate 
peace-keeping efforts so that we can mobilize quickly when a threat to peace 
arises or when people in need look to the world for help. 
I have further directed the establishment of a permanent peace-keeping 
curriculum in United States military schools. Training, plainly, is a key 
element. The United States is prepared to make available our bases and 
facilities for multinational training and field exercises. One such base, 
nearby, with facilities is Fort Dix. America used these bases to win the cold 
war and today, with that war over, they can help build a lasting peace. 
The United States is willing to provide our military expertise to the 
United Nations to help the United Nations strengthen its planning and 
operations for peace-keeping, and we will also broaden American support for 
monitoring, verification, reconnaissance and other requirements of United 
Nations peace-keeping or humanitarian assistance operations. 
And, finally, the United States will review how we fund peace-keeping and 
explore new ways to ensure adequate American financial support for United 
Nations peace-keeping and United Nations humanitarian activities. I do 
believe that we must think differently about how we ensure and pay for our 
security in this new era. 
While the cold war may have ended, the super-Power nuclear arms 
competition, regional competition, weapons of mass destruction continue. Over 
20 countries have, or are developing, nuclear, chemical or biological weapons 
 
and the means to deliver them. At a time when the United States and its 
former adversaries are engaged in deep, historic cuts in our nuclear arsenals, 
our children and grandchildren will never forgive us if we allow new and 
unstable nuclear stand-offs to develop around the world. 

We believe the Security Council should become a key forum for 
non-proliferation enforcement. The Security Council should make clear its 
intention to stem proliferation and sanction proliferators. Reaffirming 
assurances made at the time the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons was negotiated, I propose that the Security Council reassure the 
non-nuclear States that it will seek immediate action to provide assistance, 
in accordance with the Charter, to any any non-nuclear-weapon State party to 
the non-proliferation Treaty that is a victim of an act of aggression or an 
object of threat of aggression involving nuclear weapons. 
I also call for the indefinite renewal of the nuclear non-proliferation 
Treaty when it is reviewed in 1995. I believe we must explore ways we can 
strengthen linkages between the suppliers "clubs", the nuclear-suppliers 
group, the Australia Group, the missile-technology control regime and United 
Nations specialized agencies. 
Here I would like to note the productive efforts of the United Nations 
Special Commission (UNSCOM) to dismantle the Iraqi weapons-of-mass-destruction 
programme, and the continuing good work of the International Atomic Energy 
Agency (IAEA). But as the United Nations organizations adapt to stop 
proliferation, so too must every Member State change its structures to advance 
our non-proliferation goals. 
In that spirit I want today to announce my intention to work with the 
United States Congress to redirect the United States Arms Control and 
Disarmament Agency (ACDA) to refocus its talents on providing technical 
support for non-proliferation, weapons monitoring and destruction, and global 
defence conversion. Under the direction of the Secretary of State, ACDA 

should be used not only in completing the traditional arms-control agenda but, 
just as importantly, in providing technical assistance on our new security 
agenda. 
Even as we work to prevent proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, 
we must be realistic and guard ourselves against proliferation that is already 
taking place. Therefore, we are working towards a cooperative system for 
defence against limited ballistic missile attacks. We fully intend to have 
other nations participate in this global protection system. 
While expanded peace-keeping capabilities and improved non-proliferation 
efforts will be critical for building an enduring peace, shared economic 
growth is the long-term foundation for a brighter future well into the next 
century. That is why I stated yesterday, during a moment of international 
uncertainty, that the United States would be strongly engaged with its global 
partners in building a global economic, financial and trading structure for 
this new era. 
At the same time, I urged that our global responsibilities lead us to 
examine ways to strengthen the Group of Seven (G-7) coordination process, and 
I affirmed America's support for a European integration that opens markets and 
enhances Europe's capability to be our partner in the great challenges that we 
face in this new era. While the exact form of integration is, of course, for 
Europeans to determine, we will stand by them. 
Economic growth is not a zero-sum process. All of us will benefit from 
the expanded trade and investment that comes from a vibrant, growing world 
economy. To ensure that the benefits of this growth are sustained and shared 
by all, fair and open competition should be the fuel for the global economic 

engine. That is why the United States wants to complete the Uruguay Round of 
the negotiations within the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) as 
soon as possible, and to create a network of free-trade agreements, beginning 
with the North American Free Trade Agreement. 
At the same time, we need to recognize that we have a shared 
responsibility to foster and support the free-market reforms necessary to 
build growing economies and vibrant democracies in the developing world and in 
the new democratic States. This should be done by promoting the private 
sector to build these new economies, not by fostering dependency with 
traditional Government-to-Government foreign aid. 
After the Second World War, foreign assistance often served as a weapon 
in the cold war. Obviously, we will still use critical foreign-assistance 
funds to meet legitimate security needs. And, as our humanitarian operations 
in Somalia and northern Iraq, Bosnia and the former Soviet Union will testify, 
we will continue our robust humanitarian assistance efforts to help those 
suffering from man-made and natural disasters. 
But foreign aid as we have known it needs to be transformed. The notion 
of the handout to less developed countries needs to give way to cooperation 
and mutually productive economic relationships. We know this: the more a 
nation relies on the private sector and free markets, the higher its rate of 
growth; the more open to trade it is, the higher its rate of growth; and the 
better a country's investment climate, the higher its rate of growth. 
To move from what I would call aid-dependency to economic partnership, we 
propose to alter fundamentally the focus of United States assistance 
programmes to building strong, independent economies that can become 

contributors to a healthy, growing global economy. That means that our new 
emphasis should be on building economic partnerships among our private sectors 
that will promote prosperity at home, and abroad also. Working with our 
Congress I will propose a top-to-bottom overhaul of our institutions that plan 
and administer foreign assistance, drastically reducing the bureaucracy that 
has built up around Government-based programmes, streamlining our delivery 
systems and strengthening support for private-sector development and economic 
reform. 
The Agency for International Development (AID), another institution born 
during the cold war, needs to be fundamentally and radically overhauled. 
Promoting economic security, opportunity and competitiveness will become a 
primary mission of the State Department. Our assistance efforts should not be 
charity. On the contrary, they should promote mutual prosperity. Therefore, 
using existing foreign-affairs resources, I will propose creating a $1 billion 
growth fund. The fund will provide grants and credits to support United 
States businesses in providing expertise, goods and services desperately 
needed in countries undertaking economic restructuring. 
I will also support significantly increasing the programmes of the 
Export-Import Bank to ensure that United States products and technology 
promote investment in world-wide economic growth. 
The United States will work with its global partners, especially the G-7 
nations, to enhance global growth at this key point in world history, as we 
end one era and begin another. 
None of us can afford insular policies. Each of us must contribute, 
through greater coordinated action, to building  stronger world economy. 

I realize that what I have outlined today is an ambitious agenda. But we 
live in remarkable times: times when empires collapse, ideologies dissolve 
and walls crumble; times when change can come so fast that we sometimes forget 
how far and how fast we have progressed in achieving our hopes for a global 
community of democratic nations. 

And in the face of today's changes, with the loss of so much that was 
familiar and predictable, there is now a great temptation for people 
everywhere to turn inward and to build walls around themselves walls against 
trade, walls against people, walls against ideas and investment, walls against 
anything at all that appears new and different. 
As the Berlin Wall fell, these walls too must fall. They must fall 
because we cannot separate our fate from that of others. Our peace is so 
interconnected, our security so intertwined, our prosperity so interdependent, 
that to turn inward and retreat from the world is to invite disaster and 
defeat. 
At the threshold of a new century we can truly say a more peaceful, more 
secure, more prosperous future beckons to us. For the sake of our children 
and our grandchildren, for the sake of those who perished during the cold war 
and for the sake of every man, woman and child who kept freedom's flame alive 
even during the darkest noon, let us pledge ourselves to make that future 
real, and let us pledge ourselves to fulfil the promise of a truly United 
Nations. 
Thank you and may God bless you all. 
