At the outset I should like warmly to congratulate
you, Sir, on your election to the presidency of the current
session of the General Assembly. I am convinced that given
your proven talent and extensive experience, and with the
cooperation of all delegations, you will steer our session to
full success. I also wish to express my sincere thanks to
your predecessor, Mr. Stoyan Ganev, for his remarkable
accomplishments during the last session. I would like to
take this opportunity to extend a warm welcome and
congratulations to the new Members which have been
admitted to the United Nations this year.
The world has moved into a transitional period towards
multipolarity since the disintegration of the bipolar structure.
It had been hoped that the end of the cold war would bring
peace and prosperity to the world. Indeed, the prospects of
avoiding another world war and ensuring a lasting peace
have improved. However, contradictions that had lain
dormant during the cold war have begun to emerge, and
manifestations of hegemonism and power politics in
international relations are on the rise. Peace and development, so ardently aspired to by mankind, still face grave
challenges.
The relative stability Europe once enjoyed has been
upset. Many countries are plagued by severe economic
slumps or by political upheaval. Some regions are torn by
ethnic or religious feuds exacerbated by territorial disputes,
leading to intermittent conflicts and armed clashes. A
regional war is raging at the southern end of the Eurasian
land mass. All this can only have a negative impact on
Europe and on the world at large.
In the meantime, a number of developed countries have
developed a "post-cold-war syndrome". Some have sunk
into the longest recession since the Second World War. In
the new setting, internal contradictions have sharpened,
political scandals are rife, racism has reared its ugly head,
trade protectionism is on the rise, and xenophobic violence
is spreading. Public disaffection has been manifest, and the
entrenched political establishment has been shaken. This
trend has adversely affected the stability of the countries
concerned and complicated international relations.
The new international environment has led to an even
more dire plight for many developing countries. Increasing
foreign intervention has heightened various internal factors
of instability, thus compounding their difficulties. Their
rights to independence, subsistence and development have
been neither duly respected nor safeguarded. Therefore,
interference from the outside should cease, and the
international community should give top priority to helping
those countries achieve political stability and overcome
economic difficulties. Lasting world peace and stability will
remain elusive if the developing countries are still beset by
persistent political unrest and if the North-South gap
continues to widen.
There is no denying the fact that peace and
development remain the overriding issues of our time. To
preserve peace and accelerate development has become the
pressing demand of the people of all countries, but especially
of those in the developing countries.
The world we live in is as diversified as ever. There
are now more than 180 independent sovereign States, which
differ not only in social systems but also in stages of
development. Moreover, they have widely diverse
ideologies, cultural traditions, ethnic identities and religious
faiths. We should recognize and respect those differences
and diversities, and treat each other as equal members of the
international community. We should promote interchanges
in the spirit of seeking common ground while setting aside
differences. We should oppose any attempt to impose a
particular model on large numbers of countries, as diverse as
they are.
We believe that there can be genuine peace,
international harmony and common development among
States only when international relations strictly conform to
the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter
and are based on the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence
and other accepted norms of international conduct.
Increased economic and cultural interchanges between States
have deepened their interdependence. It is absolutely
necessary that States open up to each other; enhance
exchanges, mutual understanding and cooperation; and share
the benefit of complementarity. But all this will be possible
only on the basis of mutual respect, equality and mutual
benefit.
In order to attain the overall objective of peace and
development, the Chinese Government has on many
occasions called for the establishment of a new international
political and economic order of peace, stability, justice and
rationality based on the Five Principles of Peaceful
Forty-eighth session - 29 September l993 19
Coexistence and on the recognition of the diversity of the
world and of the differences among States. Under the new
order, mutual respect and cooperation between States on an
equal footing will replace hegemonism and power politics;
peace talks, dialogue and consultations will replace the use
or threat of force; and equality, mutual benefit and
accommodation of each other’s needs will replace trade
protectionism and unequal exchanges. The Chinese
Government is ready to cooperate extensively with all other
countries and will continue to make unremitting efforts for
the establishment of such a new order, and for peace and
development of the world.
The report "An Agenda for Peace" (A/47/277)
submitted by the Secretary-General contains many important,
thought-provokinq recommendations and ideas that deserve
careful consideration. We commend the Secretary-General
for his efforts therein. As a permanent member of the
Security Council, China has always supported the positive
endeavours of the United Nations in preserving world peace
and stability, promoting global development and resolving
international disputes. We support the further enhancement
and strengthening of the United Nations constructive role in
preventive diplomacy, in peacemaking and peace-keeping on
the basis of the purposes and principles of the Charter.
As the frequency and scope of United Nations
peace-keeping operations is growing, we deem it important
and relevant to stress such basic principles of the Charter as
respect for the sovereignty of, and non-interference in, the
internal affairs of Member States. Those principles must be
strictly observed at all times when undertaking preventive
diplomacy, peace-keeping operations or post-conflict
peace-building. Prior consent and pledges of cooperation by
the parties must be obtained, and strict impartiality should
prevail in all peace-keeping missions. Only in this way can
United Nations preventive diplomacy and peace-keeping
operations fulfil the underlying purposes of the Charter and
achieve the desired positive result.
The peaceful settlement of international disputes is an
important principle of the Charter, one which we deem to be
the essence of preventive diplomacy. Everything should be
done to bring the opposing parties to the negotiating table
before the outbreak of conflicts, so that they can start
consultations to achieve a peaceful settlement. All disputes
between States, regional conflicts or even internal conflicts,
however complex they may be, should be amenable to a
political solution, and nothing should be done to aggravate
the situation.
Not long ago, the Palestine Liberation Organization and
the Government of Israel signed an agreement on mutual
recognition and on the question of self-government for
Palestinians. Although just a beginning, the move was a
major breakthrough in the settlement of the Middle East
question, which has dragged on for nearly half a century.
This agreement was the result of efforts by the international
community and by both Palestine and Israel to settle an
international dispute by peaceful means. We sincerely
welcome and wish to express our congratulations at this
development. We can see from this that as long as a
glimmer of hope remains, one must not give up the pursuit
of a peaceful settlement.
Needless to say, one should adopt a very serious
attitude towards, and firmly oppose, any act of aggression
that tramples on the sovereignty of another country, such as
larger States bullying smaller ones or the strong lording it
over the weak in the international arena. We disapprove of
the indiscriminate use of sanctions or force in the name of
the United Nations. We also believe that humanitarian
missions must not be transformed into military operations
and that a war cannot be stopped by
expanding it.
It must be noted that in a world troubled by recurrent
regional conflicts and interwoven contradictions, the United
Nations alone cannot hope to resolve all international
disputes. It has the duty to undertake this task and
maintain international peace and security. But regional
organizations should also be taken into account and
encouraged, as provided in Chapter VIII of the Charter, to
assume greater responsibility and play a more active role in
this regard. In view of the proliferation of United Nations
peace-keeping operations and the concomitant demands on
the Organization and Member States in terms of manpower,
finance and material resources, we deem it essential that the
United Nations act within the limits of its means and
enhance the cost-effectiveness of such operations.
Peace and development are inseparable. Economic
development cannot get off the ground without the
prerequisites of peace and stability. On the other hand,
unless there is sound economic development, there can
hardly be secure or enduring peace and stability. We
maintain that the United Nations should meet the demands
of the developing countries for social and economic
advancement and should give this very high priority. This
is the way to make the United Nations an Organization that
all the countries of the world will support and count on.
This is also the way to enhance further the role and prestige
of the United Nations. Proceeding from this consideration,
20 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
we in China have stepped up preparations for the fourth
World Conference on Women in Beijing, scheduled for
1995. We also give vigorous support to the convening of
the World Summit for Social Development in Copenhagen
the same year.
It must be pointed out that unless the international
community helps the developing countries break loose
quickly from poverty and backwardness, there can be no
sustained growth or prosperity for all. Hence, we call upon
the developed countries to do more to curb trade
protectionism, contribute more funds for development and
environmental protection, cut back debt burden, increase
official development assistance, reduce restrictions on
technology transfer and open their markets wider so as to
create a favourable environment for the economic recovery
and revitalization of the developing countries. This will
prove a boon to the developed countries themselves. At a
time when the world economy has become increasingly
interrelated, the revitalization of the developing countries
will be a boost to the world and will spur to the economic
recovery and growth of the developed countries.
Since the founding of the United Nations, tremendous
changes have taken place in the world and in the
Organization itself. United Nations membership has
increased from the original 51 to 184 now, the majority
being developing countries. The Chinese Government is of
the view that, in keeping with developments, the United
Nations should be restructured, and the composition of the
Security Council could be appropriately enlarged to enable
the Organization better to respond to the changes in the
world, meet the concerns and wishes of the membership and
enhance its own role in international affairs. Reform of the
Security Council should enable it better to discharge its
mandate in accordance with the purposes and principles of
the Charter. It is the collective will and common aspiration
of the membership that in the new circumstances the United
Nations should be better equipped to address major
international issues vigorously and effectively and in a fair
and balanced manner. Therefore, the reform of the Security
Council and other United Nations organs should take due
account of the principle of equitable geographical
distribution and should accommodate the interests of the
developing countries which make up the overwhelming
majority of the membership. Since any reform would affect
the interests of all Member States and involve a revision of
the Charter, views from all quarters must be heard. The
reform plan should undergo extensive discussions and
consultations by the membership and should be generally
acceptable to all.
The Chinese Government has stated on many occasions
that China stands for the non-proliferation of all weapons of
mass destruction. At the same time we hold that the
ultimate objective of mankind should be the complete
prohibition and thorough destruction of those weapons. Now
that the Conventions banning biological and chemical
weapons have been concluded, we deem it high time that the
complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear
weapons were put on the agenda.
The international community has expressed concern
over the issue of a nuclear-test ban. The Chinese
Government has always stood for a total test ban within the
framework of the complete prohibition and thorough
destruction of nuclear weapons. We support an early start
to negotiations for a comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty
and will work in common with other countries towards a
comprehensive nuclear-test ban at an early date.
China has always exercised great restraint in nuclear
testing. The number of our tests is the smallest among all
nuclear Powers. While a nuclear test ban is necessary, to
undertake not to use nuclear weapons at all is far more
crucial, because this will not only make their testing,
development, production or deployment devoid of any
meaning, but will give great impetus to nuclear disarmament,
which will contribute tremendously to world peace and
security. If, however, complete prohibition and thorough
destruction of nuclear weapons cannot be achieved soon
enough, then let the nuclear Powers reach an agreement not
to be the first to use nuclear weapons and not to use them
against non-nuclear-weapon States or nuclear-free zones.
This is entirely feasible and should be done as soon as
possible. This will put nuclear Powers to the test to see
whether they are genuinely willing to treat non-nuclearweapon States as equals. China long ago unilaterally undertook not to be the first to use nuclear weapons at any time
or under any circumstances, and not to use or threaten to use
them against any nuclear-free zone or non-nuclear-weapon
State. We call upon all the other nuclear Powers to make
the same pledge and conclude an international convention to
this effect as soon as possible.
Now there are international arrangements and
conventions that are designed to control arms transfers and
ban certain types of weapons of mass destruction. Such
conventions are aimed at maintaining international and
regional peace, security and stability. The arrangements
designed to control transfers of missile technology should
also take into account such elements as the arbitrary use of
missiles for attacks on other countries. Otherwise, such an
arrangement will become a means by which certain Powers
Forty-eighth session - 29 September l993 21
can maintain military superiority or play power politics. That
is morally unjustifiable. We oppose the all-too-frequent
arbitrary use of sanctions by one country to bring pressure
to bear on another under the pretext of controlling arms
transfers while engaging in massive arms sales of one’s own
which jeopardize the sovereignty and security of the country
concerned. We also denounce the hegemonic conduct of a
self-styled "world cop" that tramples upon international law
and norms of international relations by endangering another
country’s navigational safety and normal trading under the
pretext of enforcing the ban on chemical weapons and in
disregard of the provisions of the relevant international
conventions.
Thanks to the policy of reform and opening to the
world, China’s economy has expanded considerably over the
past 15 years and is now in high gear. Our gross national
product rose 12.8 per cent last year, and the current year’s
growth rate will again be in double digits. Our foreign trade
and economic cooperation have been expanding rapidly.
Total trade volume in 1992 was a 5.2-fold increase over
1978, the year before the start of the reform and opening-up,
and represents an annual growth rate of 13.9 per cent.
Investments from overseas have flowed in rapidly. Nearly
50,000 overseas-funded projects involving $58 billion were
approved in 1992. The momentum has continued into the
current year. High-speed growth has helped basically solve
the problem of feeding and clothing a population of over 1.1
billion and put China on the road towards prosperity. It has
also boosted economic exchanges and cooperation with other
countries. This is good for both China and the world.
But we have encountered some problems as our
economy has picked up speed. These problems will be
resolved by accelerating and deepening our reform. We
have taken a number of measures to strengthen
macro-control and readjust the economic structure to ensure
healthy, rapid and steady economic growth. We are fully
capable of attaining our objective. We are full of confidence
in the future of our development programme.
It is an objective reality that China has indeed achieved
impressive economic success. But it does not tally with the
facts to exaggerate our economic strength. Given China’s
vast land area, huge population and uneven economic
development in different parts of the country, our per capita
gross national product is still quite low. Ours is still a
developing country. It will require several generations
working very hard for many decades before we can attain
the level of an average developed country.
At this juncture, I would like to draw attention to
assertions recently bruited about on the international scene:
that China’s economic success would entail a military
build-up, or that China would move to "fill up the vacuum",
thus constituting a threat, and so on and so forth. This is
utterly groundless. A China with a burgeoning economy is
an important factor contributing to the economic well-being
of Asia and the world at large. The Chinese people had
long suffered under imperialist aggression, and it regained
independence only after horrible sacrifices in countless grim
struggles spanning more than a century. Nothing can make
us forget the episodes of our history when our country was
subjected to foreign aggression, dismemberment and
enslavement. Our ancient sage Confucius, that great thinker
and statesman, admonished: "Do not do unto others what
you would not like others to do unto you".
Even when China becomes more developed, we will
never engage in aggression or expansionism; nor will we
ever seek hegemony. This is a pledge which has been
enshrined in our Constitution and which has become part of
our consistent and firm basic State policy. It has been borne
out by facts that China is a staunch force for world peace
and stability. Our limited defence capability is solely for
self-defence purposes. Many of our military industrial plants
have been converted to civilian production. Our military
expenditures are the lowest among the major countries. We
have neither troops nor military bases on foreign territory.
We are immersed in economic construction. Therefore, we
need an international environment of enduring peace as well
as long-term amicable relations with our neighbours. We are
ready to cultivate and strengthen similar relationships with
all other countries on the basis of the five principles of
peaceful coexistence.
No matter how the wind may change its direction on
the world scene, China will unswervingly play its part in
preserving world peace and promoting common prosperity
and development.
 Please accept my warm
congratulations, Sir, on your election as President of the
General Assembly at its forty-eighth session. I wish you
luck and success in your high office. At the same time, I
extend a cordial welcome to the new Members of our
Organization.
Addressing the Assembly 20 years ago, Willy Brandt
said that the Federal Republic of Germany’s purpose in
joining the United Nations was to help serve the cause of
world peace. That has always been, and will remain, the
fundamental aim of German foreign policy. At that time, in
a bipolar world, Germany was divided. In that year, 1973,
the October war broke out in the Middle East. In South
Africa the inhuman apartheid regime was dominant. Today
my country is united in peace and harmony with our
neighbours. Today we can congratulate Israel, the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO) and neighbouring Arab
countries on a historic breakthrough. Today the policy of
apartheid has been overcome. Without the resolve to seek
peace, these developments would not have been possible.
World peace, which appears to have come closer as
bipolarity has receded, must not remain an unfulfilled vision.
The international community’s desire for peace led to the
founding of the United Nations after the Second World War.
It remains our moral and political obligation to fulfil that
legacy. There can be no more important task. In the quest
for peace we are faced with a new challenge and a new
danger, but we also have a historic opportunity.
We are faced with the great challenge of overcoming
hunger and poverty around the world, of preserving the
natural sources of life, and of creating the foundations for a
long-term global population policy. When people have to
leave their native lands, when human rights are violated,
there can be no peace. Peace is not merely the silence of
guns. Hence, economic and social challenges must be very
high on the global agenda. The world is deeply unjust. The
distribution of mankind’s opportunities is woefully unequal.
This we should not tolerate.
The danger confronting us is that peace in many parts
of the world is threatened by new conflicts, especially those
of an ethnic nature. The continuing proliferation of modern
weapons and weapon technology increases the destructive
potential of these conflicts.
Our opportunity, after the end of the East-West
confrontation, is to develop the United Nations into what its
founding fathers intended it to be: the principal guardian of
peace. In performing that role the United Nations must have
the support of the numerous other international organizations
that are functioning successfully today.
I truly believe that we can master the economic,
ecological and social challenges and overcome the danger of
a relapse into a confrontation of States, peoples, cultures and
religions only if we resolutely seize the historic opportunity
to strengthen the global multilateral system and the United
Nations.
Today no country alone can cope with global
challenges. Hence we must counteract nationalism with
multilateralism. German foreign policy is aimed at
strengthening the multilateral world order. It is committed
to the goal of European integration. Its purpose is to
harmonize and create a fair balance of interests. German
foreign policy is therefore a policy within, in support of, and
together with the United Nations.
I agree with the Secretary-General: Peace can only be
preserved if we strike at the roots of conflict. His proposed
agenda for development must go hand-in-hand with "An
Agenda for Peace". Misery, starvation and poverty are still
the overriding problem in many countries.
At the eighth session of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development and at the Rio Conference, the
developing and industrial countries agreed on a
comprehensive partnership for promoting development and
protecting the environment. For that partnership to be
successful both sides, North and South, must contribute their
share. By carrying out economic and political reforms,
making more efficient use of their funds and cutting military
expenditure, and ensuring greater democratic control and
respect for the rule of law, many developing countries have
embarked on the right course. The World Summit for Social
Development, scheduled to take place in Copenhagen in
14 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
1995, must be a forum for dialogue on the social issues
re-emerging all over the world.
The industrial countries have undertaken to support the
efforts of the developing countries by improving the general
conditions for world trade in a spirit of solidarity. Such
assistance can never be more than help towards self-help.
What is required is more entrepreneurial cooperation with
developing countries, more direct investment, improved
cooperation in the field of technology, the opening of
markets and the elimination of trade barriers. The Uruguay
Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(GATT) must at long last establish reliable rules for free
trade and be brought to a conclusion by December 15.
Germany, one of the leading trading nations, is committed
to these goals. If new trading blocs were to form, with the
attendant conflicting interests, new political confrontations
would soon follow. Protectionism would be the worst
outcome.
The global economy is in the throes of a fundamental
structural change. International competition is becoming
more intense. Many highly industrialized societies are
confronted with fresh challenges. Unemployment and
sluggish growth are unexpectedly severe burdens on their
productive capacity, both domestically and externally. On
the other hand, the trend towards a single world economy
opens up the first opportunity for billions of people to offer
their products in all markets.
All of us, industrial and developing countries alike,
must make peace with nature. The United Nations is called
upon to protect the natural foundations of life. I propose
that the United Nations develop an early-warning system for
environmental disasters. The momentum of the United
Nations Conference on Environment and Development must
be maintained. My country is ready for comprehensive
cooperation. Germany can make a special contribution,
particularly as regards the transfer of environment-friendly
technologies.
The population explosion is a threat to the planet’s
equilibrium. Whereas in the eighteenth century the world
population increased by a quarter of a billion in 75 years, it
is now increasing by this number every three years. Most
of this increase is taking place in countries whose economic
and ecological resources are already strained to the limit.
Family planning must be enhanced, the poverty gap reduced,
and education and knowledge disseminated among women
and men alike. A successful International Conference on
Population and Development, to be held in Cairo next year,
is therefore mandatory.
Respect for human rights is a universal obligation. It
is a focal point of German foreign policy. Human rights and
the protection of minorities belong together. Racism,
cultural arrogance and the delusion of wanting to create
"ethnically clean" areas constitute a threat to peace.
Yugoslavia is a terrible example of this. Where civic,
economic, cultural and religious rights of minorities are
concerned, the majority may not rule by fiat.
The Declaration and Programme of Action of the
Vienna World Conference on Human Rights represent the
consensus opinion of the community of nations. They
reaffirm the universal validity of the human rights. Now it
is important to seek rapid implementation. I wish to
mention five specific points:
Firstly, my country has long advocated the appointment
of a high commissioner for human rights. He should be
authorized to take steps on his own initiative to protect
human rights and to give active support to those countries
seeking to improve the human rights situation.
Secondly, we need an international criminal court. The
International Law Commission has submitted a full draft
statute for such a court. The pressure on those who trample
human rights under foot must be increased now. Those who
torture on this Earth must live in fear of punishment.
Thirdly, in order to prosecute speedily those who are
responsible for the ghastly violations of human rights in the
former Yugoslavia, the Security Council has set up an ad
hoc Tribunal. The elected judges must now begin their work
right away. A chief prosecutor should be appointed without
delay.
Fourthly, the non-governmental organizations have
become part of the world’s conscience and therefore have an
increasingly important role to play in the defence of human
rights.
Finally, the instruments for ensuring respect for human
rights must be given a higher priority in the United Nations
budget.
The crisis in the former Yugoslavia, and especially the
war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, is one of the most
depressing episodes of our time. A Member of the United
Nations has fallen victim to a war of conquest accompanied
by genocide and mass expulsions. For the first time since
the Second World War, frontiers in Europe are being
redrawn by force of arms. The principles of the United
Nations have been treated with contempt. The credibility of
Forty-eighth session - 29 September l993 15
our institutions - indeed the credibility of the United Nations
itself - is being put to the test.
If the fighting continues, the winter will prove to be an
awful disaster for the suffering people. It must therefore be
stopped as quickly as possible and steps taken to ensure that
humanitarian aid is provided. We therefore support the
Geneva efforts to settle the conflict, in spite of doubts about
the current plan, and we express special thanks to the
Co-Chairmen, Lord Owen and Thorvald Stoltenberg, for the
difficult job they are doing.
A settlement now seems within reach, but it must be
accepted by all parties to the conflict. No party must impose
its will on another. The Bosnian Muslims must be given
viable territory. We need an assurance that the community
of nations will be resolutely and actively involved in the
implementation of a settlement.
We cannot tolerate a situation in which the Muslims,
who have lived in Europe for centuries, would have fewer
rights than their Christian neighbours. Through preventive
measures we must ensure that the tragedy of this war does
not spill over into neighbouring regions. What is now
required is proposals for controlled disarmament in the
region. This is a task for the Conference on Security and
Cooperation in Europe (CSCE).
After decades of war and bitter antagonism, the Middle
East is experiencing a historic breakthrough towards peace.
We all want the peace process to become irreversible.
Germany and its partners in the European Community have
undertaken to provide political, economic and particularly
financial support. They have earmarked about a billion
deutschemarks for this purpose.
I should like to express my respect for both sides for
their political courage and their will for peace. I call upon
those who still hesitate to help sustain the peace process. I
appeal to all to renounce the use of force.
The continuing proliferation of arms in many parts of
the world is still highly disturbing. President Clinton’s
proposals have our support. Encouraging progress has been
achieved in the form of the Convention placing a global ban
on chemical weapons and of the agreement reached on a
mandate for negotiations in the Geneva Conference on
Disarmament with a view to a comprehensive test-ban treaty.
The test moratorium must be extended. There must be no
further testing.
The nuclear and non-nuclear Powers alike are urged to
consolidate the non-proliferation regime. When the matter
comes up for decision in 1995, the Non-Proliferation Treaty
must be extended indefinitely. As the representative of a
country which many years ago unilaterally and bindingly
renounced the possession of nuclear weapons and other
means of mass destruction, I appeal to all Members: accede
to the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
The laying of mines in large regions in many countries
has become a scourge for the population. It prevents the
return of refugees and the resumption of farming.
Thousands have been killed or horribly mutilated. It must
be stopped. The European Community has, with our
support, seized the initiative. We need a fund to finance
mine detection and disposal operations.
My country’s European anchorage is indispensable on
both political and economic grounds. My Belgian colleague,
Willy Claes, has already explained the position of the 12
members of the European Community.
Stability in Europe cannot remain a privilege of the
Western nations. The peoples of the reformist countries
fought for their freedom and we encouraged them to do so.
We shall not abandon them now. We must gradually open
the road to the Euro-Atlantic institutions for the countries of
Central and Eastern Europe. Those institutions include the
European Community and the Council of Europe as well as
the Western European Union and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO). I am expecting a clear message from
the NATO summit - which is to take place at the beginning
of 1994 - like the one that came from the European
Community summit meeting in Copenhagen. In this process,
no new ruptures must emerge. A lasting peaceful order in
Europe is not feasible without including Russia.
Over the last four years Germany has made a greater
financial effort than any other nation to help the reformist
countries on their road to democracy, the rule of law and a
free market economy. This assistance, too, is a major
contribution to conflict-prevention and the safeguarding of
peace. In the present critical phase, Russia’s friends and
partners - who include the Germans in particular - must
continue to provide political and economic support for
President Yeltsin’s reforms.
I am concerned about developments in Georgia. We
must achieve a cease-fire and work out a viable political
solution. This is a task for the United Nations in particular.
16 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
The desire for peace makes it imperative for all
countries to seek closer regional cooperation.We support
intra-Africa efforts to resolve conflicts and welcome the
stronger commitment on the part of the Organization of
African Unity.
We are gratified by the democratic changes to be
observed in Latin America in recent years. Nearly
everywhere democracy and free-market principles have
asserted themselves and sources of conflict have, thank God,
been eliminated.
The Association of South-East Asian Nations has
become an important instrument for cooperation in the
Asia-Pacific region. European-Asian cooperation must be
intensified.
"An Agenda for Peace" has become the lodestone for
the world Organization’s further development. I wish to
take this opportunity, Mr. Secretary-General, to express my
thanks for your commitment. The Security Council and the
General Assembly have constructively taken up the Agenda’s
proposals. However, conflict prevention must begin at an
early stage. Preventing fires is better than having to put
them out. We must focus our energy on the possibilities of
preventive diplomacy, confidence-building measures,
fact-finding and the early detection of conflicts.
The CSCE must back the United Nations within its
sphere of jurisdiction. The relations between the two
organizations have been intensified. The CSCE should be
given wider scope for conflict prevention and crisis
management.
In wars and crises, the Blue Helmets have helped to
protect the civilian population, to prevent the spread of
warfare and to initiate the transition to democracy. Some
80,000 troops from more than 70 countries are engaged in
17 peace-keeping missions around the world. They and the
United Nations Secretariat’s Department of Peace-keeping
Operations deserve our thanks.
One of the most successful operations was the one in
Namibia. In Cambodia the United Nations has sponsored
free elections and restored hopes of lasting peace after
decades of terror and oppression. Of course - and it is
important to stress this - not all the hopes placed in the
United Nations can be fulfilled, and it would be wrong to
deny that difficulties have been encountered. But what
would happen without the United Nations and the Blue
Helmets? To the critics I therefore say that we need not less
but more commitment to the United Nations.
In Somalia starvation has been overcome. The
reconciliation process has been overshadowed by incidents
in which troops and civilians have been killed. These are
tragedies, but without the United Nations Operation in
Somalia, hundreds of thousands would have had to die.
Germany has been providing humanitarian aid within the
scope of this major peace-keeping operation, our largest
commitment of personnel so far within the framework of the
United Nations.
Our involvement in such operations has the backing of
the German people. There is a consensus in our country in
favour of widening our scope for contributing to peace. We
are engaged in a passionate debate over proposed
constitutional amendments which would enable Germany to
participate in all United Nations operations without
restriction.
A policy for peace also means strengthening the rule of
law as opposed to the rule of the strong. If the United
Nations is prevented from carrying out its mandate, it will
have to be in a position to authorize the Security Council to
resort to force, as provided for in Chapter VII of the Charter.
However, the use of military means should be
considered only if we have a clear political blueprint for
resolving the conflict. Force must always be the last resort.
Consequently, our contribution to the United Nations will
continue to be of a mainly political and economic nature.
Greater emphasis will have to be placed on United Nations
peace-keeping measures in view of the growing
responsibilities and demands.
First, the United Nations Secretariat’s Department of
Peace-keeping Operations must be improved logistically and
organizationally and in terms of staff. The German
Government is willing to make further experts available to
the Secretariat.
Secondly, effective crisis management presupposes the
ability to react swiftly. The Secretary-General’s initiative for
the establishment of stand-by forces has my support.
Stand-by forces should not be confined to military units but
should include civilian personnel and experts ranging from
police to election observers. But participation must always
be voluntary and be subject to the fulfilment of national
conditions.
Thirdly, enhancing the efficiency of the United Nations
presupposes a link-up of military forces. The North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) has declared its willingness to
Forty-eighth session - 29 September l993 17
make its capacities available. The same holds true for the
Western European Union (WEU).
Fourthly, in many countries military training is geared
solely to the traditional duties of the army. The specific
tasks of peace-keeping require a completely different kind of
training. The national preparation of "Blue-Helmet" forces
needs to be coordinated to a greater degree by the United
Nations. For this, common training guidelines are needed.
The United Nations should also create its own training
capacity; that is my view. Common training and exercises
are, at the same time, important steps in confidence-building.
Fifthly, peace-keeping operations require sound
financing. The responsibility for peace also includes the
prompt and complete payment of contributions by all
Members.
Humanitarian concerns have been of pivotal importance
for Germany’s involvement in United Nations activities from
the very start. In the Middle East, in Africa, in South-East
Asia, in the Gulf region, in Somalia and in former
Yugoslavia we are providing humanitarian assistance. We
have assumed responsibility for transport, medical care, the
monitoring of disarmament measures and the repatriation of
refugees. Together with our partners in the European
Community we have called for the creation of a post of
coordinator for humanitarian assistance.
Part of our humanitarian commitment is the readiness
to assist refugees from the civil war, whose situation is very
distressing. We have admitted more than 350,000 refugees
from former Yugoslavia. I urge the General Assembly to
use every opportunity to strengthen the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). Mrs.
Ogata deserves high praise for the job she is doing. More
international solidarity and burden-sharing is called for. We
must not abandon those countries which, as neighbouring or
target countries for the refugees, are particularly affected.
The aim must be to offer shelter to refugees from civil wars
or other disasters near their home countries in order to
facilitate their early return to those countries. For this we
need binding rules. I therefore propose the drafting of an
international convention to regulate large-scale refugee
movements.
Another focal point of our involvement in United
Nations activities has been what the Secretary-General refers
to in his "Agenda for Peace" as post-conflict peace-building.
Lasting peace depends on the establishment of democratic
and market-economy structures based on the rule of law.
Investment in the democratization process is an investment
in peace. My country, Germany, sees this as a priority of its
commitment to development. That is why Germany
participates in missions to observe elections, provides
economic experts, and assists in the creation of democratic
administrative, judicial and police institutions.
I should like to stress that a culture of peace is another
prerequisite for lasting peace. Not only governments but
also individual citizens must develop the will for peace if we
want to overcome racial hatred and religious conflict. A
culture of peace encompasses a dialogue between ethnic
groups as well as between religions and cultures. The
Europeans live next door to and in close contact with Islam.
We need bridges of mutual understanding, not new enemy
images. We need to promote education for peace. The
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO), with its mandate to foster relations
between nations, therefore deserves comprehensive support.
Germany advocates the strengthening of all United
Nations bodies. We do not want a never-ending discussion
on reform, but greater efficiency. We welcome the
Secretary-General’s efforts to reorganize the Secretariat.
The efforts to revitalize the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council also meet with our full
support. We would be happy if the United Nations were
better represented in Germany and have therefore made an
offer for the relocation of institutions of technical
cooperation to Bonn.
The most important decisions on security and peace are
today made in the Security Council. This is what the
Charter envisaged right from the start. Anyone who wants
peace must strengthen the Security Council.
In its response to the Secretary-General’s request, the
Federal Government has stated that efficiency and credibility
are of equal importance for the future composition of the
Security Council.
Germany is prepared to assume responsibility as a
permanent member of the Security Council also. I stated
this at the last session of the General Assembly. However,
we will be able to maintain and strengthen the credibility of
the Council only if, in deliberating on reforming it, we also
take into consideration the growing importance of the third
world.
Finally, let me state that Germany wants to be and will
be a driving force in efforts to strengthen the United
Nations. We need to achieve a basic consensus for the
important tasks ahead of us. In my view this consensus lies
18 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
in the rule of law. The law protects the weak and
legitimizes force where it is unavoidable. The law is an
expression of partnership and is opposed to tyranny and
hegemony. It is the acceptance of law that creates justice.
Only where justice reigns can peace flourish.
I
should like first to say, Mr. President, that France is pleased
to see the General Assembly meeting under your guidance
this year. Your election is just testimony to the esteem in
which the international community holds your country. It
also affords us the opportunity to welcome the "silent
revolution" that has been taking place in Latin America over
the past few years, which has put many States back on the
path of national reconciliation, democracy and economic
development.
22 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
The year which is ending will have been as rich in
promise as it has been fraught with danger. Conflicts once
thought to be insoluble suddenly seem to be on track
towards resolution. On behalf of my country, I should like
to pay tribute to the men in the Middle East, in South Africa
and in Cambodia who found the courage to take the path
towards reconciliation and peace: Yitzhak Rabin and Yasser
Arafat, F.W. de Klerk and Nelson Mandela, His Majesty
King Norodom Sihanouk and all those, known and unknown,
who accompanied or even preceded them on this courageous
path.
The agreement between Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO) opens the way to the
settlement of a conflict which some had despaired of seeing
resolved, and makes it possible to conceive of a radically
new future for the entire region. This revolution gives us
new reason to believe in human will and encourages us
never to consider the hope for peace as a chimera. From us,
it calls for collective effort, including financial effort, in
order to translate this hope into reality as soon as possible.
It also invites us to erase the aftermath of conflicts as
reflected in past resolutions of this Assembly.
But the end of what was for years called the balance of
terror has also led to new kinds of uncertainty and disorder.
Russia is going through a political and economic
transition that could lead to serious internal difficulties, as
the events of the past few days have shown. In that context,
I should like to reaffirm France’s support for the process of
democratization and reform courageously undertaken by
President Yeltsin.
In the former Yugoslavia war has been raging for two
years, with its attendant death, suffering and destruction.
Other regions in Africa, Central Asia, the Balkans and the
Caucasus are falling or could fall victim to this new type of
conflict, resulting from the break-up of States and the
resurgence of nationalist, ethnic or religious passions.
Elsewhere, States put under a sanctions regime by our
Organization for failing to comply with the obligations of
international law or with commitments they have made
persist in refusing to take the measures that would permit
them to regain their place in the international community.
Almost everywhere, the proliferation of weapons is a
fearsome factor for instability.
In the face of the promises and dangers I have just
outlined, France bases its foreign policy on a few guiding
principles. Whether they are found reassuring or disturbing,
I should like to recall them to the Assembly.
The first principle is the desire for independence.
France has amply demonstrated that it is ready to act in
concert with others where the ends are genuinely collective.
But, needless to say, it does so in complete sovereignty.
Exercising freedom of judgement and choice, France refuses
to follow the orthodoxy of the moment or to succumb to
pressures resulting from relative material strengths.
The second principle, shared by many in this Hall, is a
commitment to our fundamental interests. Like every other
State in this Organization, France has its own strategic,
commercial and cultural interests which it seeks to preserve.
While we are open to negotiation and to the mutual
concessions it implies, we cannot be made to give up
anything we consider to be an essential element of our
security, our prosperity or our culture.
The third principle is devotion to law and justice.
Beyond its own interests, France aspires to help ensure that
certain fundamental principles first inspired by France,
among others, triumph throughout the world: the right of
peoples to self-determination and security, human rights and
the right to development.
Finally, one last aspect of our diplomacy, in the service
of the others, is France’s perseverance, and at times
stubbornness. May I recall our resolve - despite obstacles -
in opening up the path that would eventually lead to the
restoration of peace in Cambodia, and our determination to
see institutional legality restored in Haiti.
These unchanging principles dictate the two main lines
of the policy which my country hopes to implement on the
international stage.
Our ambition concerns Europe first of all.
Whatever the present difficulties, whatever the
prevailing scepticism, France will not falter in its resolve to
build with its neighbours a strong, prosperous, democratic
and generous Europe, capable of making its voice heard and
of contributing to world peace. This is an irrevocable choice
for us because the peoples of Europe need a plan that brings
them together, and European unity is the only goal that
measures up to the values they share. Moreover, the
building of a united Europe is the only way to avert the
dangers threatening our continent at this time: dangers
arising from the resurgence of the most implacable forms of
nationalism and from the persistence of unacceptable
economic disparities. Europe’s success will serve as an
example for other regions of the world as did in its day the
Forty-eighth session - 29 September l993 23
reconciliation between France and Germany sought by
General de Gaulle and Chancellor Adenauer.
I have already spoken of the conflict raging in the
former Yugoslavia.
France has spared no effort to put an end to it. As you
know, France initiated most of the Security Council
resolutions designed to discourage or punish aggressors.
Together with its partners, France provides an essential part
of the humanitarian aid sent there. Its soldiers represent the
largest of the contingents made available to the United
Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR), and more than a
dozen of them have paid for their generous presence there
with their lives. It has so far been the only country to send
reinforcements in accordance with resolution 836 (1993) in
order to contribute to the security of the protected areas and
the Muslim populations there. France was, as well, the first
nation to deplore the inadequacy of the actions taken by the
international community in regard to the former Yugoslavia.
The efforts it has made entitled it to tell those who have
been free with their advice and lessons that they might be
better heard if they were agreeing, when they are able to do
so, to commit their own troops to the field. Once in contact
with the realities of the situation, they would undoubtedly
better appreciate the fact that between negotiated peace and
chaos there is no middle ground.
Let us learn the lessons of this painful experience. It
is essential for us to acquire the means to avoid the
repetition of such a conflict, and to ensure, without waiting
for future progress in the construction of a united Europe,
that preventive diplomacy, military openness and respect for
the rule of law prevail wherever latent tensions remain. This
is the intent of the proposed pact on European stability
which France has submitted to its European partners and to
which it would like to associate Russia, as well as its allies
across the Atlantic, Canada and the United States.
Europe is, of course, far from being the sole horizon of
France’s action. My country has long-standing, close
relations with many parts of the world. For the long-term
organization of the international scene in the aftermath of the
cold war, France naturally turns to the United Nations.
Because it believes in the mission of the United
Nations, France wants a strong and effective Organization.
This goal involves, first of all, the reforming of the
Security Council. Its enlargement, which has become
necessary today in the light of the world’s evolution, must
be envisioned as the way to increase its effectiveness.
France understands and supports the aspirations of some
of its partners to exercise their international responsibilities
more actively, provided that they are ready to commit
themselves in the field. However, the expansion of the
Council should not be achieved at the expense of one or
another group of States; in particular, it must preserve the
capacity of the developing countries to make their voices
heard. In our view, this is an essential requirement.
In their wisdom, those who drafted the Charter
recognized that only a group of limited size could take
prompt measures to restore peace when confronted with an
urgent crisis. We should therefore take care that the
projected enlargement does not lead to a paralysis of the
Council.
France hopes that at its present session the General
Assembly will decide to open discussions on ways to reform
the Security Council. A solution will have to be found that
reconciles the will to reform with the desire for
effectiveness. This is why enlargement, in our view, will
have to be decided according to a formula combining new
permanent members and additional non-permanent members.
The Secretary-General is a key institution of the United
Nations. France would like him to be given the means to
carry through the innovative action he has undertaken.
Allow me to pay a tribute to the energy, authority and
courage with which our Secretary-General is carrying out his
missions.
France approves not only of his political initiatives but
also of his tireless efforts to rationalize the functioning of
our Organization. We must combat the proliferation of
institutions, which consumes our resources and threatens the
coherence of our efforts. We must improve the coordination
of activities linked to development and restore to the
Economic and Social Council its role as a provider of
stimulus and organization. We must combat administrative
waste wherever it exists, without hesitating to punish any
abuses that may be uncovered. Lastly, we must have more
supervision and greater transparency in peace-keeping
operations.
The Secretary-General still does not have all the means
to exercise his responsibility to the full. France calls on the
Member States to provide him with those means without
delay. Strengthening the Department of Peace-keeping
Operations, establishing a mechanism for a true general
inspection, and setting up a court for budgetary discipline
are, in our eyes, indispensable measures.
24 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
The third requirement for strengthening the
Organization is a clean-up of its finances.
Perhaps I should have begun with this point.
According to an old French saying, money is "the sinew of
war". It is also the sinew of peace. Our projects for this
Organization will be no more than empty words unless we
have the courage to adopt the new measures that its financial
bankruptcy requires.
First, Member States which do not pay their
contributions within 30 days following the
Secretary-General’s call for contributions should be
penalized. France proposes that market-rate interest should
be imposed on all late payments. This firm stance seems
particularly necessary because the payment of accumulated
arrears alone would suffice to resolve the financial crisis. It
is also consistent with considerations of fairness and political
morality. One cannot simultaneously speak of United
Nations reform, justice and international development and
exempt oneself from the primary financial obligation
resulting from adherence to our Charter. It is high time to
measure the generosity of words against the yardstick of
arrears due our Organization.
The establishment of a mechanism for a true general
inspection will, as I have said, make it possible to rationalize
the functioning and costs of the United Nations. France will
support all initiatives to supplement the existing procedures
of internal assessment, which have already shown their
limitations despite the judicious reorganization recently
introduced by the Secretary-General.
Lastly, we must adopt an exemplary budget for the
1994-1995 period. We must not hesitate to reduce
expenditures for obsolete activities. We will also have to
provide sufficient funding for the new mandates entrusted to
the Organization. If, from that, it is necessary to consider a
reasonable increase in the ordinary budget, France, which
has never espoused a dogmatic idea of zero growth, will
readily accept this.
These are concrete measures. They require a collective
effort on the part of Member States. But France is
convinced that we can no longer be satisfied, as in previous
years, with marginal adjustments. The very ability of the
United Nations to carry out its mandate is at stake.
France, as you will have realized, is ambitious for the
United Nations. With the support of renovated institutions
and reorganized financing, the United Nations will be able
to meet the great responsibilities incumbent on it: to preserve
peace and collective security, to promote development and
to address global problems whose international scale
removes them from the individual action of States.
Peace is of course the first of our responsibilities.
The present instability in several parts of the world
compels the United Nations to intervene more and more
frequently in order to check the spread of conflicts and allow
a negotiated solution to be sought. France, for its part, has
wished to participate fully in this effort and is today in the
front rank of States participating in peace-keeping
operations.
This commitment obviously does not confer any
privilege on us. But our experience enables us to cast a lucid
eye over the operations in which we have participated and
encourages us to reaffirm certain principles and to propose
certain common-sense measures that might help increase the
future effectiveness of our action.
First, greater political control is needed over operations
that have become increasingly complex. Purely military
considerations should never thwart - or even obscure -
political ends. Naturally, regional or defence organizations
may make useful contributions in terms of expertise,
personnel or matériel. But the use of force presupposes that
the guardian of the law - that is, the Security Council -
exercises its authority in the name of the international
community. This it cannot relinquish. That is why France
insisted that the Secretary-General’s Special Representative
to the former Yugoslavia should have authority over all
operations under international mandate. It is important, it
seems to me, that we should maintain this requirement at all
times. By the same token, France insists that the political
ends of the operation in Somalia should not be lost sight of.
Next, we should systematically consider the question of
the timetable of operations.
As a matter of principle, time-frames should be
explicitly assigned to each operation in the actual resolution
that institutes it. It is also important to know when to
terminate operations that go on and on, needlessly dipping
into the means of the Organization and its Member States.
France fully supports the Secretary-General’s efforts on this
score.
Lastly, we must expand the capacity of the
Organization to react. The time that elapses between our
decision to create a force and the implementation of that
decision is far too long. How many weeks did we have to
Forty-eighth session - 29 September l993 25
wait before the air power authorized by resolution
836 (1993) on Bosnia was eventually deployed? And how
many weeks for the ground reinforcements that had been
announced to reach Sarajevo?
We cannot but note that the current procedures do not
meet the criteria for rapid reaction and flexible use which
are called for in this area.
France does not, however, believe that the Organization
should have its own force. On the other hand, it has
participated in discussions organized by the
Secretariat-General on the concept of stand-by units. These
discussions have resulted in original proposals for "tailormade" forces for the United Nations. In this way, the
Organization could have at its disposal support, transport and
communications capabilities which it currently lacks for
carrying out military actions speedily.
France, which has already offered, in a statement made
by the President of the French Republic, to make available
to the Secretary-General a 1,000-strong contingent for peacekeeping operations at 48 hours’ notice, will take part in this
effort.
These measures will have another advantage. They will
add an extra degree of effectiveness to preventive diplomacy,
which has to be central to the ambitions we have for the
Organization. This policy requires us to develop and put in
place mechanisms for crisis alert, evaluation and prevention.
Several ideas were put forward in the "Agenda for
Peace" - they included use of fact-finding missions and the
effective deployment of United Nations forces - and have
already been applied to certain difficult situations in Africa,
Central Asia and the Balkans.
In this spirit, the United Kingdom and France are ready
to submit to the Secretary-General proposals for compiling
a list of prominent individuals who could intervene promptly
at his request, in liaison with appropriate regional
organizations, and provide them with equipment -
specifically in the communications field - necessary for
carrying out their mission completely.
It is through concrete initiatives of this sort, which may
seem modest at first, that preventive diplomacy will
gradually assume its rightful place in the maintenance of
peace.
The effort made in relation to disarmament in the past
few years, finally, should continue.
Considerable progress has already been made with the
reduction of stockpiles from the cold-war era. But a new
priority is becoming evident: the struggle against the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. To attain this
goal, we must be extremely vigilant in the threefold domain
of nuclear weapons, chemical weapons and ballistic
technologies.
In this light, France welcomes the signing in Paris by
nearly 150 States of the Convention banning chemical
weapons, the first real multilateral disarmament pact of
general scope, and calls on the States which have not yet
ratified this Convention to do so. It supports the efforts
being made by several groups of countries to institute
systems of control of missile technology, nuclear exports and
the sale of so-called sensitive products.
France asks, finally, that the non-proliferation regimes
be strengthened. It reaffirms in particular its desire to see
the Non-Proliferation Treaty prolonged indefinitely and
unconditionally. It continues to believe that it is only the
Security Council that can decide on sanctions against
irresponsible behaviour. This would be the case if North
Korea were to fail to respect its commitments to the
International Atomic Energy Agency.
What guarantees can be given for collective security
and peace if nothing is done to try to resolve the economic
and social disparities that are so often the source of conflict?
We know that there can be no lasting peace without lasting
economic development. That is why the "Agenda for Peace"
unquestionably requires also an "agenda for development".
France, as is known, has consistently spoken for the
interests of the developing countries, particularly the least
developed, in discussion with its industrialized partners. It
has tirelessly pleaded - sometimes as a voice crying in the
wilderness - for a substantial increase in the level of official
development assistance in order to permit these countries to
enjoy trade advantages without reciprocity, to ease their debt
burden and stabilize raw-material prices. Our resolve in this
matter will not weaken: how can we accept, for example, a
situation in which every year the African countries pay the
World Bank more than they receive from it?
Nor can we accept the persistence, and sometimes the
worsening, of the most glaring situations of distress. France
has not forgotten the depth of the crisis in sub-Saharan
Africa, with which it has so many ties. It believes it is
26 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
essential that the basic achievements of cooperation between
the European Community and the African, Caribbean and
Pacific countries, should be maintained, especially with
regard to trade.
Lastly, our third ambition for the United Nations
concerns the vast issue of societal questions, linked naturally
to the requirements of development but distinct from it.
The protection of human rights, the preservation of the
environment, aid to refugees, the struggle against full-scale
epidemics, organized crime and drug trafficking all have a
worldwide dimension. The Organization must address these
problems with the same energy it expends in the search for
peace and the promotion of development.
Several important dates lie ahead of us. Let us apply
without delay the recommendations unanimously adopted at
the Vienna Conference on Human Rights, particularly the
creation of a post of high commissioner for human rights.
Let us prepare for the conferences in Cairo and Beijing and
the social development summit in Copenhagen with all the
necessary determination, so as to reinforce the cooperation
required in addressing demographic problems, the promotion
of women’s rights and the demands for social development.
Great epidemics have always been a threat to the
world’s nations. But the need for full-scale international
mobilization is becoming particularly acute in the case of
AIDS in view of the havoc of all kinds caused by the spread
of this malady. I earnestly hope that, as we approach the
second decade of this struggle, the coherence of United
Nations action, and that of its specialized agencies and of all
States and interested organizations, will be equal to this new
challenge. In this context, France proposes the convening of
a conference next year to bring together the main contributor
countries in the war against this scourge in order to improve
coordination of their efforts and give them a new impetus.
In most cases, these phenomena are not new. However,
the challenge they pose to our societies, in the North and in
the South, is of unprecedented seriousness. They affect
underdevelopment as much as they do the excesses of the
consumer society, and our traditional responses are proving
to be inadequate or ineffective. We need new ideas in this
area. The Secretary-General should have broad power to
take initiatives and make proposals in this matter. France
therefore suggests the formation of a group of prominent
figures chosen for their intellectual and scientific abilities
and moral influence to assist him in this vital task at the end
of our century.
Forty-eighth session - 29 September l993 27
Setting forth such ambitions for the United Nations
might have made the sceptics smile a few years ago. With
the end of the cold war the international community has a
historic opportunity: no longer to dismiss problems but
perhaps to solve them; no longer to limit conflicts but
perhaps to settle them.
Let us remain clear-sighted. This period could be
merely a brief interlude. If we were to hesitate, would it be
long before peoples succumbed to their basest inclinations,
cast off the rules of international law or put themselves - in
the best of cases - under the sole protection of regional,
competing and potentially hostile solidarities?
We do not have unlimited time. It is therefore our duty
to undertake without delay the reforms required to strengthen
our Organization and to realize its new objectives.
I should like to assure the Assembly that in the pursuit
of these twin goals, the United Nations can count on
France’s firm resolve.
Mr. President, may I
first of all congratulate you on your election, and on the
dignified and effective way in which you are already
presiding over this Assembly. You have a burdensome job
and we wish you all good fortune as you discharge it.
I have sometimes heard speakers from this rostrum
patrol the world in their speeches in the general debate,
dealing at length with one continent after another. Indeed,
I have done so myself in past years. There is much to
describe: events in the Middle East and South Africa are
particularly encouraging, and developments in Russia, as we
have just heard from Mr. Kozirev, are particularly important.
But today it seems to me that in the time available, the focus
of interest should not only be on distant events or distant
tragedies, but here, in this building, on this institution.
Never has there been a time when the United Nations has
been so discussed, so misunderstood, so needed.
The international task of this decade is managing
disorder. I believe it is possible. But it demands cool
heads, low voices, and an understanding of what we can and
cannot do. It demands concertation between all countries
that take on part of the responsibility for steering the world
through channels which are certainly strewn with rocks.
This concertation takes place in many forums, but nowhere
with greater legal and political authority than here at the
United Nations.
We can now see the events of 1989 in their true
perspective. They did not usher in a new world order. I
think we have to be sober about this. What happened in
1989 was not the birth of a new world order, it was the
collapse of one super-Power and the end of communism as
a threat to world peace.
The tragedies of the world have continued. Indeed,
they have probably increased since 1989. "Tragedy" is a
better description than the usual, and overworked, term
"crisis", because "crisis" implies a threat to world peace.
Now that the cold war is over and super-Powers no longer
exert themselves on behalf of clients, it is no longer a crisis
in that sense - a threat to world peace - if Sudan, Bosnia,
Angola, Liberia, Georgia, Afghanistan, Rwanda, Somalia,
Tajikistan, Azerbaijan and others are racked by civil war.
But these are appalling tragedies for those who are killed or
driven from their homes, and indeed for all of us, because
we are all diminished when the bell tolls.
18 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
Some of these tragedies are illuminated by the
haphazard light of television. In those cases, millions of our
citizens, in all our countries, share feelings of sympathy,
indignation and horror. But other tragedies equally foul are
played in a darkened theatre: no television, no audience,
little pressure. But all these tragedies are a reproach to those
of us who are convinced that it is possible slowly and
painstakingly to construct a more decent world.
How do we do that? Not, it is clear, by the remaining
super-Power using its superiority to impose its own solutions
by force. In the 10 tragedies that I listed, the United States
has intervened with troops only in one, Somalia - and that
now on a reduced scale and under the United Nations -
because the United States, quite rightly in my view, is not
prepared to send its troops all over the world, as Rome once
sent its legions all over Europe, to fight, to pacify and to
rule. There are British, French, Spanish and other European
troops in Bosnia today under the command of the United
Nations. But their role is to save Bosnian lives - they do
that daily - implementing United Nations decisions.
Likewise, they are not imposing a European imperium on
that country.
If America and its allies are not to exert themselves as
a joint imperial Power, imposing on other countries and
sustaining laws and rulers of their choice, then the answer
can only lie in reforming and making much better use of the
international institutions to which we belong. They were
mostly built after the Second World War for one purpose
and are now, after the end of the cold war, being hurriedly
adapted for another. The British architect Norman Foster
has just been given the responsibility of designing in Berlin
the new parliament house for a united Germany. If his plans
are accepted, he intends to include the old Reichstag
building alongside the line of the Berlin Wall in a splendid
new structure reaching across the old Wall into East Berlin.
There is a parable here for us as well as for Germany.
Inevitably, we have to cope as best we can with what
we have. A man, after all, may take some shelter in an
unfinished building. I do not believe that an international
organization like ours, which is not a colonizing Power, will
ever be able to guarantee solutions to civil wars or even to
that pernicious variant of a civil war which we see today in
Bosnia. But if there are no guarantees of success, the
United Nations can be helped greatly to improve on its
record. With greater experience, greater resources for
preventive action and effectively coordinated humanitarian
efforts, it can act before the situation gets out of control and
the demand grows for the implementation of sanctions and
for peace enforcement.
I hope that within the next few weeks the European
Community will move into a new phase of working together
on a common foreign and security policy once the Treaty of
Maastricht is ratified by all 12 member States. Our
President, Willy Claes, the Foreign Minister and Deputy
Prime Minister of Belgium, has just illustrated that point.
But one of our main aims as European partners must be to
support and strengthen the role and the work of the United
Nations, for the United Nations is not "them"; it is us, all of
us. We have to take responsibility for it and its failures.
If we want the United Nations to work better, it is up
to us to give the Secretary-General the support he needs in
thoughts, words, deeds and money. I suppose there are few
more lonely or more demanding jobs than that of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, and the present
Secretary-General certainly has the misfortune to hold his
office in interesting times. He has already given and
continues to give a firm and effective lead. He needs and
deserves our support.
The United Nations is unique. It alone conveys the
word of the international community. Only the United
Nations has the legal powers to translate those words into
action for the maintenance of world peace. We need, as
President Clinton said yesterday, to look at tasks closely, to
ensure that they are properly defined and that the resources
are there to meet them. We may on occasion have to accept
that a mandate should not be given because in reality it
cannot be fulfilled.
Let me follow that by looking briefly at the way we
carry out peace-keeping operations, the way we deploy
preventive diplomacy and the way we run our finances.
Peace-keeping: United Nations blue-helmets are
deployed on nearly every continent. We can reel off the
statistics, but actually we hear too little of individual soldiers
and small detachments. Who knows, for example, of the
single military observer in a remote part of Cambodia who
found himself not only acting as the local arbiter of family
disputes but also providing a local, much appreciated,
medical service using a handbook called When There is No
Doctor, who kept on securing supplies from his wife in
Germany and the field hospital in Phnomh Penh for his
Khmer community? Or the United Nations military observer
who spent his leave in Bangkok fund-raising for a water
filter for a remote Cambodian village? Now, they happen to
be British, but such servants of the world come from many
countries.
Forty-eighth session - 28 September l993 19
We in Britain are committed to our peace-keeping
contribution. We now have over 3,300 men and women in
blue berets around the world.
In June the Secretary-General asked Member States to
identify for him those areas of United Nations peace-keeping
operations which needed strengthening and for our ideas on
positive steps we could take. I look forward to his report
drawing all those responses together.
Useful steps have certainly been taken. There is now
a 24-hour operations room, improving the ability of those
here in New York to oversee operations around the world.
The standby force planning project has been started. A new
Department of Peace-keeping Operations is responsible for
all United Nations field missions. We can build on these
improvements.
Good organization involves clarity and sobriety in
setting out our objectives. That means that any operation
must have clear and achievable objectives linked to a
political process which offers reasonable hope of a solution,
and to which all parties should be committed. The mandate
should be precise and finite. That means adequate support
at Headquarters for planning and reconnaissance missions.
It means that the Security Council must resist the temptation
to become involved in the detailed conduct of operations. It
means the mandate must not create impossible obligations
for a force commander on the ground. Once an operation is
agreed, command and control relationships could be more
clearly defined.
Unity of command at the highest level is essential.
Where the United Nations is charged with executing as well
as authorizing a peace-keeping operation, all aspects of it
should be handled by a single department in New York.
That is why we have suggested the creation of an expanded
planning and operations staff. This in effect is a general
staff for peace-keeping. These men and women, civilian and
military, would be able together to provide the necessary
core of the United Nations strategic-planning chain. They
would operate mainly here in New York, but also in the
field. They would provide the United Nations with the
nervous system for which its present staff is neither
structured nor resourced.
We are not proposing here some new and heavy
bureaucracy. On the contrary, we are talking about core
staff: trained staff officers, United Nations civil affairs and,
increasingly, humanitarian advisers, and chief administrative
officers. The example of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), of a special
envoy for all humanitarian and refugee aspects of an
operation, is good.
Then, there must be flexibility in running peace-keeping
operations. The more comprehensive a bureaucracy
becomes, the harder it is for it to stay nimble on its feet.
Doctrinal and administrative difficulties in working with
other international organizations can be overcome. For
example, the United Nations is already building valuable
links with the Conference on Security and Cooperation in
Europe (CSCE) and with the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO). Many peace-keeping and
peacemaking operations can be run more effectively by
regional organizations or single countries on behalf of the
United Nations. That depends on the nature of the problem
and on the proposed action agreed by the United Nations.
I am thinking, for example, of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) in Liberia, the Organization
of African Unity (OAU) in Rwanda, and the European
Community and NATO in the former Yugoslavia.
Regional organizations can also be asked to help with
training. We might look at getting certain nations with well-
trained, equipped and available forces to provide the first
wave of a peace-keeping force, allowing other nations the
time to train and equip their forces to the required standard.
A commitment to deploy early would of course need to be
matched by a United Nations commitment to agree a firm
end-date for the deployment, because exits can be as
important as entrances.
What we cannot do, we should not pretend to do. If
we play a game of bluff, we can deceive and disappoint
others, and sometimes we deceive and disappoint ourselves.
Rarely can we attain our ends that way. It is empty to
pretend that we can impose peace with justice on every
disorder, every dispute, outside our national borders.
But what the United Nations can do, it should do well.
Cambodia, for example, is a success story. So was Namibia.
Our peace-keepers have been able to limit, though not stop,
conflict and to assuage, though not bring to and end,
suffering in Bosnia and Somalia. But the authority of the
United Nations will suffer if it fails to approach new
challenges realistically and flexibly.
However important peace-keeping may be, successful
preventive diplomacy would be better. I have just been
reading the book published this week by our Australian
colleague, the Australian Foreign Minister, Senator Gareth
Evans. His new book, Cooperating for Peace, brings this
point out well and is full of fruitful ideas. Defusing trouble
20 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
costs a great deal less than a military operation. You can
field plenty of emissaries for the price of a battalion. But to
be useful, of course, an emissary has to set about his work
before the excitement of violence has taken hold.
The Secretary-General has been energetic here. He has
sent missions to several areas of tension - to Tajikistan and
other regions of the former Soviet Union, to Macedonia, to
South Africa and elsewhere.
But in this as in other parts of the United Nations
system money is tight. Many missions create an acute need
for additional international staff with the necessary skills. I
am thinking not just of eminent people, of retired ministers
or distinguished ambassadors who can head such missions.
The Secretary-General will find them when he needs them.
What he needs from Member States is personnel at a more
junior level with local experience and negotiating skills.
Now, we have discussed this problem in particular with
the French Government, and as an Anglo-French initiative
we stand ready to provide the Secretariat with a list of such
people, people who have experience in Government service -
sometimes outside Government service - and whom we
would be prepared to make available for particular missions.
We would also be prepared to provide a certain amount of
equipment where personnel provided by the United Kingdom
were involved. We are ready to respond to the invitation of
the Secretary-General in "Agenda for Peace" to provide
information crucial to the task of preventive diplomacy. The
British and French Governments are both committed to
support him in this way, and we hope that others may join
in a similar enterprise.
All this work means a financial burden. Of course we
should all pay our assessed contribution in full and promptly.
We do so. So do most of our European partners, the Nordic
countries and those with a long tradition of peace-keeping
like Australia and Canada. But others, not entirely or
always through their own fault, others who share the heavy
burden of international responsibility, do not.
The fact is, the United Nations will always be short
of money. Even if everybody pays up in full and on time,
the United Nations will still have to choose priorities within
the resources available to it. That means - and will always
mean - turning down some good causes, and reappraising
and sometimes bringing to an end existing commitments.
The United Nations needs to conduct a rigorous
scrutiny of what it needs and what it spends. Obviously, it
would be able to afford more operations if it ran the existing
ones more economically. Without thrift, without financial
probity, the authority of the United Nations will weaken and
vanish. So we welcome the Secretary-General’s recent
additional senior appointments at the level of Assistant
Secretary-General, covering administrative and financial
affairs. We support proposals for a system of inspection
with teeth, which can match more delegated financial
authority to the field.
I mention these three areas - peace-keeping, preventive
diplomacy and finance. If we can tackle these three areas
constructively and vigorously, there is no reason why even
under present strains the authority of the United Nations
should not grow as strikingly as the burden of expectations
now placed upon it. People will always continue to turn to
the United Nations, even if they will always expect more of
us than is conceivable.
We are discussing, in that context, reform, and we in
Britain welcome the debate on Security Council reform. We
are discussing positively the enlargement of the Council.
This will be complex, as our debate already makes clear,
because there are many currents and cross-currents of view.
I do not doubt that if there were to be consensus on
enlarging the Security Council there are some countries
which, because of their global interests, their contribution to
international security, their contribution to United Nations
peace-keeping, could undertake the full range of
responsibilities of a permanent member and can certainly be
expected to do so.
I have concentrated simply on this Organization for the
reason which I gave. Few tasks are more important than
improving the way the United Nations works if we are to
secure a more stable world. We have lived through the
events of these last few years. They have been dramatic and
exhilarating, they have changed the political and strategic
landscape, but they have not removed from us our
responsibility to work constructively for a better United
Nations. This better world order will not happen because we
make a few speeches or pass a few resolutions. It will be
constructed steadily, brick by brick, learning always the right
lessons from the past, developing steadily our international
institutions and our international relations.
It is fair to say that in the last four years, with its ups
and downs, we have come a long way, and I believe that,
together, we have the will and the wisdom to continue along
that road.
Mr. President, your
unanimous election as President augurs well for the forty-
eighth session of the General Assembly. I extend my
heartiest congratulations to you and best wishes for success.
Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, the Secretary-General, has
given a new vision and a new impetus to the United Nations
at a crucial time in its history. We wish him well in his
efforts.
My Government is deeply touched by the sympathy and
compassion expressed by the leaders of several delegations
on the devastating earthquake in India on
30 September 1993, and, with your permission,
Mr. President, I shall have to go back to India immediately.
The United Nations will soon be 50 years old. It has
had many achievements to its credit: decolonization; efforts
to alleviate poverty; peace-keeping; disarmament; devising
an accepted code of international law; respect for human
rights and concern for the environment. I would like to
reiterate India’s faith in and consistent support for the United
Nations and its efforts to establish peace and the well-being
of peoples. We take note that the United Nations is trying
to evolve so as to better serve the principles and purposes of
the Charter. We support the Secretary-General’s efforts to
make what he has called a transition from the old to the new
United Nations, which would be particularly useful and
fruitful for the less developed and less fortunate States.
The euphoria generated by the end of the cold war has
in the past two years given way to concerns about the
difficulties of achieving a new global equilibrium and
stability. Essentially, we can see these difficulties arising
from the contradictory pulls and pressures exerted by the
forces of positive integration and harmony on the one hand
and fragmentation and discord on the other.
The end of the divisions of the cold war and the efforts
to halt and reverse the arms race have generated some of the
integrative forces. Some forces of integration have also been
at work in the global economy, which has been characterized
by the globalization and interdependence of countries’
factors of production and of issues of trade, money, finance,
technology, environment, population and development. The
desire of the developing countries to participate more
actively in the growth of the world economy and the
building-up of free-market, liberalized economies for
themselves adds another positive dimension. Issues of
common concern and global survival - economic
development and regeneration, environmental sustainability,
demographic management, technological dynamism and
health for all - have provided a sense of common destiny.
The communications revolution has resulted in greater
cultural intermingling and openness around the world.
These forces of integration are, unfortunately, opposed
by those of fragmentation. Represented by sectarian and
subnational aggression, racism, religious fundamentalism,
bigotry, terrorism, drug trafficking and arms smuggling, they
pose a threat to peace, global security, democracy, human
rights and economic and social development. We are also
witnessing strife, conflicts and cruel, unceasing and irrational
civil wars in many parts of the world. Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Somalia and Afghanistan cause us anxiety and
concern. The proliferation of such local conflicts and the
ever-increasing flow of refugees across national frontiers re-
affirm the truism that peace, like freedom, is indivisible and
that the disruption of peace anywhere is a danger to peace
everywhere.
These divisive forces have caused not only political
instability but also economic collapse in several instances.
Conversely, economic sluggishness and lack of development
in several cases have led to political upheavals. Inward-
looking, exclusivist and narrowly self-centred global
economic policy-making has been in evidence at a time
when the global economy is overshadowed by recession and
lack of dynamism. Macroeconomic coordination is at its
weakest. Protectionist tendencies are strong. The potential
of developing countries to act as vigorous engines of growth
for revitalizing the world economy stands largely ignored.
In developing countries, absolute and deepening poverty,
hunger and malnutrition, disease, illiteracy and the lack of
shelter and sanitation for a large portion of the population
have caused political and social tensions. The structural
imbalances and flaws of the post-Second-World-War
international economic order persist and prevent the
maximization of the benefits of interdependence and
globalization.
Against this backdrop, the task of the United Nations
should be to construct a new global equilibrium by fostering
positive integrative forces and discouraging, if not
counteracting, the forces of fragmentation and discord. For
this, the new United Nations will have to reiterate the
fundamental and immutable principles on which it was built:
respect for the national sovereignty, territorial integrity and
sovereign equality of nation States. I am glad that the
12 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
Secretary-General stated in his report to the forty-eighth
session:
"National sovereignty is the art of rendering
unequal power equal. Without State sovereignty, the
very instrument of international cooperation might be
destroyed and international organization might itself
become impossible." (A/48/1, para. 16)
The United Nations will have to set an example for the
conduct of relations amongst nation States on the basis of
respect for the rule of law, democracy and pluralism. Any
international framework, whether it be associated with peace
or development, must be transparent and must deal with
issues of global concerns on a non-selective and non--
discriminatory basis.
In the final analysis, the institutions, concepts and
agencies that represent the new world order will be judged
by their ability to harness and channel the beneficial and
creative forces of integration for the benefit of peace and
development for all and by the ability of the United Nations
to ensure that the interests of its weaker Member States are
fully reflected therein. In these still perilous times, they
would have to promote development cooperation and
effectively arrest the plunge into insecurity, strife and chaos,
particularly when these threaten the very foundation of
Member States, where ultimately the United Nations is
rooted.
There have been references in this Assembly to all
these conflicts, big or small, local or with international
dimensions, describing them in the generic terms of ethnic,
religious and civil wars. The plurality and complexity of our
post-cold-war world do not permit such generic labelling.
Nor are these conflicts amenable to generic and instant
remedies. A number of instances of strife or aberrations are
part of the historical legacies inherited by Member States.
Each is posited in a different socio-economic and cultural
matrix of causation; each is caught up in a different cycle of
circumstance and violence. The imposition of peace through
unilateral external intervention will only perpetuate situations
embodying the Orwellian logic of "peace is war" that we see
in many parts of the world today.
Wisdom lies in overcoming conflict situations with a
positive vision animated by peace and amity and in creating
the necessary confidence and will for peace among countries
and peoples. It is in this spirit that India is ready to initiate
a dialogue with Pakistan to build mutual confidence and to
promote a climate of stability in our region. I can only hope
that Pakistan will respond to this, and have a dialogue with
us, instead of trying to go around the world accentuating
differences that will be difficult to resolve later.
We welcome the recently concluded peace accord
between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO), and earnestly hope that this will be a true harbinger
of further positive developments aimed at establishing lasting
peace and prosperity in West Asia. We also welcome the
announcement by Mr. Nelson Mandela that irreversible
progress towards a non-racial, democratic South Africa has
been made. In response to his suggestion, India, which had
imposed trade sanctions against South Africa as early as
1946, has initiated action to lift those sanctions and to
normalize relations with South Africa.
We trust that the recognition by the Security Council of
the international boundary between Iraq and Kuwait will
contribute to the stabilization of the situation in the Gulf
region. We hope that the faithful implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions will lead to the
alleviation of the present difficulties of the peoples of the
region.
In Somalia, a whole population has gone through a
protracted civil war and famine with hardly any
governmental machinery to tackle the situation. This made
it imperative for the United Nations to act. As an
unprecedented humanitarian mission, the multilateral action
in Somalia enjoyed the support of the entire world, including
the factional Somali leaders themselves. India, for its part,
has contributed one of the largest contingents to this mission.
Now that the situation has improved and starvation has been
averted, the United Nations operation faces new problems.
It is necessary for the United Nations to reassure all sectors
of the people of Somalia about its role in the country,
intensify the process of political reconciliation and adhere
strictly to the original objectives of the mission.
The phenomenal increase in peace-keeping operations
in the post-cold-war period and their inclusion as an element
of the new agenda for peace is at once a matter of comfort
and concern. It is a matter of comfort because the United
Nations at long last has started playing its Charter role in the
area of peace and security. In the altered international
political environment, we would like the United Nations to
realize its full potential. At the same time, the involvement
of the United Nations on an unprecedented scale with peace-
keeping operations causes us concern because operationally
the United Nations is not fully prepared and equipped to
discharge this role effectively. And, legally and
conceptually, the limits, procedures and rules of the
involvement of the United Nations are not clearly defined.
Forty-eighth session - 1 October l993 13
For peace-keeping operations to be successful, it is
necessary to follow certain guidelines and criteria. All
avenues of pacific settlement of disputes, as laid down in
Chapter VI of the Charter, should be fully explored and
exhausted before resorting to peace-keeping operations under
Chapter VII. Decisions on such operations should be taken
in a democratic and broad-based manner, and after thorough
consideration of all aspects. To command universal
endorsement and maintain their non-partisan character,
United Nations peace-keeping operations must be based on
the consent of all the States parties to a dispute. They
should be undertaken with a specific mandate and a clear
time-frame. Greater efficiency should be achieved in both
planning and execution of peace-keeping operations. The
Foreign Minister of the Russian Federation, in his address to
the General Assembly a few days ago, put forward a few
proposals in this respect which merit consideration by the
General Assembly. The concept of invoking humanitarian
relief as a basis for peace-keeping operations may have to be
approached with a great deal of caution and circumspection.
Any new United Nations operation for providing
humanitarian relief must be completely non-partisan - in fact
and in the perception of the parties involved.
That consideration must also guide any discussion or
decision on preventive deployment. The United Nations
must not allow itself to be burdened indefinitely with
obsolete and ineffective peace-keeping operations. Every
possible measure should be taken to ensure the safety of
peace-keeping personnel.
Another aspect of the agenda for peace which we
would like to underline is the particular importance we
attach to Article 50, which enjoins the Security Council to
find solutions to the special economic problems faced by
third States on account of the implementation of sanctions
imposed by the Security Council. We call for an automatic
mechanism that would put remedial action in place
simultaneously with the imposition of sanctions.
An integral element of any agenda for peace in our
time is the achievement of disarmament, particularly nuclear
disarmament. Having endorsed the Chemical Weapons
Convention, the United Nations should move on to consider
similar steps in other areas of disarmament.
We welcome the unilateral decision of the United States
to extend its moratorium on nuclear testing until the end
of 1994. The focus of the nuclear-weapon Powers should
now be on the early conclusion of a universal, verifiable and
comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty leading to the
elimination of all nuclear weapons.
India’s commitment to non-proliferation is complete
and unequivocal. India has an unblemished track record.
India’s proposal made in 1988 for an action plan for nuclear
disarmament within a specific time-frame is of continuing
relevance in our bid to rid the world of the global scourge
of nuclear weapons. We believe that a new, just and
uniformly applicable regime for non-proliferation which does
not discriminate between the nuclear-weapon and the
non-nuclear-weapon States should be considered at an early
date. Such a treaty should place equal obligations on all
States. For a non-proliferation regime to be truly
meaningful, it must also address the questions of a
convention on the non-use of nuclear weapons, a verifiable
freeze on the production of fissionable material, a total ban
on nuclear-weapon tests and negotiations on general and
complete disarmament. The global spread and reach of
nuclear weapons reduce to a travesty the objective of
achieving genuine peace and security within a narrow
regional framework. It is our hope that the United Nations
will take firm action in this direction to achieve this in the
sense I have mentioned.
One area of concern for developing countries is the
question of ad hoc and unilateral export controls and other
restrictions being placed on the transfer of dual-use and high
technology with the ostensible purpose of curbing
proliferation. Non-proliferation concerns must not be made
a pretext for denying developing countries access to
technologies critical for their development. There is,
therefore, need to evolve multilateral, non-discriminatory and
transparent arrangements to regulate the transfer of such
technologies so that peaceful uses and dissemination of some
key technologies are not denied to the developing world.
There is perhaps merit in convening a special session
on disarmament to examine the whole gamut of
disarmament-related issues that arise in the new context of
today. The question of a peace dividend arising from
disarmament in the form of financial and technical resources
for the enhancement of international development
cooperation in the context of the United Nations could be
one of the issues that special session could address.
It is obvious that there can be no global security unless
development is ensured, and we therefore attach as much
importance to an agenda for development as to the "Agenda
for Peace". Agenda 21 of the Rio Declaration, outlining the
plan and programme for global cooperation in ensuring
sustainable development; the outcome of the Final Act of the
eighth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development (UNCTAD VIII), on the partnership for
development between the North and the South; and the
14 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
forthcoming Conference on Population and Development, as
well as the World Summit on Social Development, provide
the international community enough opportunity to promote
economic and social development and environmental
sustainability, particularly in developing countries. The work
on an agenda for development should build on all these
development-related action programmes and provide a new
impetus to development cooperation, both under United
Nations auspices and in bilateral and other multilateral
contexts. Enhancement of the role, resources and
capabilities of the organs and agencies dealing with
development in the United Nations system should be
stressed. The United Nations should also be enabled to have
a more interactive relationship with the Bretton Woods
institutions in a spirit of finding considered and innovative
solutions to global economic problems and pooling all
available resources for that purpose.
Comprehensive and constructive dialogue between the
North and the South and the strengthening of a global
partnership for development are the needs of our times if we
are to avoid the replacement of the East-West divide by a
North-South one. India has always participated in the
ongoing North-South dialogue through the Group of 77 and
the Non-Aligned Movement and in keeping with the
requirements of a more focused dialogue. India has become
part of the new group of 15 developing countries for
South-South consultation and cooperation, the G-15. We are
acting as host to the fourth summit meeting of that group at
New Delhi in December. Representing the developing
countries, we have had a promising start through an informal
dialogue with the G-7 and we hope to build on those
beginnings in a spirit of "global partnership for global
benefit", as was stated by my Prime Minister,
Mr. P. V. Narasimha Rao in his message to the
G-7 Chairman.
Some key issues where there is an ongoing dialogue but
which none the less need further consideration and
implementation include: participation of developing
countries in global macroeconomic coordination and
decision-making; reciprocation by the North of the efforts of
the South at restructuring and economic liberalization
through the pursuit of expansionist policies conducive to
long-term growth and opening them up to global competition
in goods, services and manpower through reduction and
elimination of protectionist barriers; increased capital flows,
both official and private, bilateral and multilateral, to
developing countries to offset the crippling effects of the
debt burden and to accelerate growth and development; and
a balanced, successful conclusion of the Uruguay Round,
which should ensure substantial enhancement of market
access for developing-country exports and of their access to
the tool of competitiveness.
The profoundly humanistic traditions of the Indian
civilization, with its emphasis on tolerance, harmony,
non-violence and the inviolability of the individual, have
found their modern expression in the setting up of a
democratic, secular and egalitarian polity and society in free
India.
Being the largest practising democracy and effecting a
synthesis between a multiplicity of ethnic, religious and
linguistic groups and peoples has been no easy task, as some
in the West are themselves realizing even in the context of
their relatively lesser diversities. The Constitution of free
India consolidated this humanistic tradition and is indeed a
veritable bill of human rights. A strong and independent
judiciary and a totally free press have also been watchdogs
of democracy and human rights in India.
India’s commitment to the effective protection of
human rights has now received another institutional impetus
with the establishment of a National Human Rights
Commission comprised of a retired Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court of India, a retired judge of the Supreme
Court of India, a former Chief Justice of the State High
Court and other eminent persons as well as the chairmen of
the three separate national commissions which already exist
to protect the interests of scheduled castes and scheduled
tribes, women and minorities. The Commission has been
mandated to inquire into allegations of violations of human
rights and has been invested with wide-ranging powers,
including the power to establish special investigation teams
to carry out effective investigations. The findings of the
Commission are to be published from time to time besides
being reflected in its annual report, which will also be laid
before Parliament. The law also provides for the
establishment of human rights commissions by the State
Governments, on the pattern of the national Commission, as
also special courts for the speedy trial of cases involving
human rights violations.
I am confident that members of the Assembly will
accept that India has established the most appropriate human
rights commission to ensure that there will be full human
rights protection in the country.
Our commitment to universally acceptable
non-discriminatory norms of human rights and their
protection and promotion cannot be questioned. It was in
that spirit that we participated actively in the World
Conference on Human Rights, which recognized the
Forty-eighth session - 1 October l993 15
importance of this issue. We are however pained that not
enough emphasis is put on a major threat and impediment to
the realization of human rights, namely, terrorism, especially
the kind that is aided and abetted by one State against
another. Why is it that a few so-called human rights
advocates and Member States of the United Nations choose
to focus on the human rights of terrorists - those who
indulge in senseless murder, destruction, pillage, the
disruption of civilized existence and the undermining of
democratic institutions? Why do they virtually turn a blind
eye to the violation of the human rights of the victims of
such terrorism - innocent civilians or those upholding law
and order and the territorial integrity of States? Can they in
true conscience allow terrorists and their supporters to usurp
the moral high ground on human rights?
The United Nations will have to take strong action
against terrorists because terrorists engage in all kinds of
violence. They try to upset democratically taken decisions
in a country by using force and killing people. This must be
totally condemned by the United Nations and stopped
completely so that people can live in peace and in
democracy and express their views in accordance with the
constitution of their country.
In sum, we believe that international cooperation in the
protection of human rights can succeed only if it is within
the framework of respect for the sovereignty and integrity of
States and of a vigorous global programme for anti-terrorist
action. We would, however, like to point out that any
unilateral use of human rights as an instrument of political
pressure or intervention, or as an obstacle to trade or a
condition for development cooperation and aid, in fact serves
the opposite purpose and impedes the full realization of the
human rights of people of affected countries.
The enhanced role of the United Nations in
international affairs calls for the restructuring and redefining
of the functions of its principal organs.
The responsibilities of the Security Council have grown
dramatically in the past few years, requiring a greater degree
of participation by the overall membership of the United
Nations in the Council’s decision-making process. We must
recognize that the membership of the United Nations has
grown enormously over the years. A more balanced and
expanded representation for Member States in the Council is
therefore inevitable. Unity of purpose among its members
rather than size determines the efficiency of any
organization. The expansion should not be done selectively
or in a piecemeal manner. The principles or criteria of
expansion of the permanent and non-permanent membership
should be agreed upon by consensus. For the selection of
additional States in an expanded Council, the population -
which represents the principle of democracy and an element
of power - the size of the economy and the future potential
of the countries concerned should be taken into account,
along with equitable geographical distribution and the
contribution to the maintenance of international peace and
security. There is virtual unanimity among those who have
responded to the Secretary-General that an expansion of the
Council is imperative. Interesting suggestions have been put
forward by several countries. The logical next step would
be to start a process of consultations to arrive at a suitable
and fair formula that commands universal support.
The permanent members should be responsive to the
aspirations of developing countries represented in the
General Assembly on the basis of equality. It is therefore
essential also to revive the role of the General Assembly, as
was originally envisaged in the Charter.
We stand on a decisive threshold incomparable to any
in history, a moment in time when we must bring to bear a
larger vision and foster the forces of positive integration,
democracy and cooperation at national and international
levels.
My Prime Minister has, in characterizing the 1990s as
watershed years in global affairs in the realm of political,
economic and environmental challenges and changes,
conveyed an unequivocal message:
"We cannot go wrong if we make coexistence
and peace our watchword, and common universal
good our objective".
It is my Government’s belief that this quest for the common
good, jointly undertaken, will be central to the success of
our endeavour and for the achievement of the Charter’s
objective of harmonizing the actions of nations in the
attainment of these common ends.
I should like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your unanimous election to preside over
the forty-eighth session of the United Nations General
Assembly.
We feel strongly that the time has come for all of us -
communities, nations, peoples, families - finally to lay the
last collective wreath on the tombs of the fallen combatants
and on the monuments of our beloved. It is the right way to
honour their memories and to answer the needs of the newly
born. We have to lay the foundations for a new Middle
East.
The peace agreement between us and the Palestinians
is not just an accord signed by political leaders. It is an
ongoing, profound commitment to the next generation of
Arabs and Israelis, Christians, Muslims, Jews and people of
all other faiths.
We know it is not enough to declare an end to war.
We have to try to eradicate the roots of all hostilities. If we
only bring violence down but ignore misery, we may
discover that we have traded one menace for another peril.
Territorial disputes may have been the reason for wars
between nations, and poverty may again become the seed of
violence between peoples. While signing the documents on
the lawn of the White House, I could almost sense the
breeze of a fresh spring, and my imagination began to
wander to the skies of our land, which may have become
brighter to the eyes of all people, both those who agree and
those who oppose. On the lawn one could almost hear the
heavy tread of boots leaving the stage after a hundred years
of hostility. One could have heard the gentle tiptoeing of
new steps making a debut in a world awaiting peace.
Yet we could not depart from reality. I know that the
solution to the Palestinian issue may be the key to a new
beginning, but it is in no way the answer to the many needs
awaiting us upon our return home.
The last decade saw great changes, including the end of
East-West confrontation and the opening of the way for the
gradual disappearance of North-South polarization. The
great continent of Asia and the picturesque continent of
South America introduced the dynamics of an economic
development of their own. The dramatic event in South
Africa is a declaration to the same effect. So, contrary to all
assumptions, it has been demonstrated that neither geography
nor race is a hindrance or an advantage to economic
promise.
We witnessed the end of some wars only to discover
that the warriors did not reach their own promised land.
Some colonized people gained their independence, but they
hardly enjoyed its fruits. The dangers may have been over,
but their hopes evaporated. We have learned that the end of
a war should be the beginning of a new genesis, which will
be the end of belligerency and will put an end to
psychological prejudices.
No nation, rich or poor, is able nowadays to attain
security unless the region in which it exists is secure. The
scope of regional security must exceed the range of ballistic
missiles, which may hit each and all of us.
As we strive to achieve a comprehensive peace, no
wound must remain unhealed.
Geographically speaking, we live side by side with the
Jordanian Kingdom, and what is so obvious geographically
must become clear politically. We have already agreed with
the Hashemite Kingdom on many complicated issues, and
there is no doubt that we can complete the story fully, that
we can offer the people on both sides of the river full peace,
that the Dead Sea can become a spring of new life and that
the old waters of the River Jordan can be a source of
prosperity flowing from each side to the other.
We hope - as a matter of fact, we are determined - to
make peace with Syria, yet we ask the Syrian leadership, if
it has chosen peace, why it refuses to meet openly. If Syria
is aiming for the Egyptian fruits of peace, it must follow the
process that led to them. Both of us have to look ahead and
realize that the threats of war are no more than an illusion
that one can return to an unbearable past.
We shall not give up our negotiations with our
Lebanese neighbours. We do not have any territorial claims
or any political pretensions concerning Lebanon. We pray,
together with many Lebanese, that their country will no
longer be a back yard for troublemakers. It is for Lebanon
to make a choice between Hizbollah, on the one hand, which
operates from its territory and then takes orders from another
Government, and, on the other, insisting on having one
army, one policy, and offering real tranquillity to its people
and security to its neighbours. Lebanon does not need a
license to regain its independence, and Lebanon should not
postpone its return to its balanced, traditional policy.
I am not sure whether there is a new order in the
world, but all of us feel there is a new world awaiting an
order. We are encouraged by the new attempt of the United
Nations and its Secretary-General to answer the social and
22 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
economic call of the present era. The United Nations was
created as a political answer; today it must face social and
economic questions.
The Middle East, which has been an important agenda
item in United Nations history, must become prosperous, not
only peaceful. To construct a modern Middle East we need
wisdom no less than financial support.
We have to rid ourselves of the costly follies of the
past and adopt the principles of modern economy. Who
will, and who should, pay the cost of oversized armies?
Who will, and who should, bear the price of an arms race
whose cost has reached $50 billion annually? Who will, and
who should, pay for the inefficiencies of old systems? Who
will, and who should, compensate for outmoded censorship
of mail and control of trade and travel? And who will
comply with the State where suspicion intercepts the
enterprising spirit of the people?
We can, and we should, turn to the promises of
scientific development, the market economy and
comprehensive education. We must base our industry,
agriculture and services on the highest of today’s
technologies. We have to invest in our schools. Israel, a
country of immigration, is blessed with many scientists and
engineers. We shall gladly make this human wealth
available as a contribution.
I know that there is suspicion; that, when referring to
a common market in the Middle East or announcing an
Israeli contribution, it may be perceived as an attempt to win
preference or to establish domination. May I say sincerely
and loudly that we did not give up territorial control to
engage ourselves in economic superiority. The age of
domination, political or economic, is dead. The time of
cooperation has begun.
As a Jew, may I say that the virtue and the essence of
our history since the times of Abraham and the
commandments of Moses have been an uncompromising
opposition to any form of occupation, domination and
discrimination. For us, Israel is not just a territorial
homeland, but a permanent moral commitment as well.
There are other questions, concerning the building of a
common market in the Middle East, as to how to attain this
when governments are so varied and economies are so
different. The differences in governments and economies
should not prevent us from doing together what can be done
together: combating the desert and offering fertility to an
arid land.
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations declared that the Middle East must double its
agricultural production in the 25 years to come. The
population of the region in the same period will double itself
anyway. The land is cut by many and large deserts and its
water resources are stingy and scarce. Yet we know that in
a similar period of time - the 25 years between 1950 and 1975 -
Israel was able to increase its agricultural output twelvefold -
an increase unprecedented in history.
During the past decade, 95 per cent of the growth of
our agriculture resulted from research, planning, training and
organizing. High technology permits nations to attain real
independence and to experience genuine freedom, political
as well as economic. There is nothing new about the
scarcity of water in our midst. Jacob and Esau drank from
the same wells even when their paths were separated. But
then, unlike today, they could not desalinate the sea water;
they could not computerize irrigation; nor could they enjoy
the potential of biotechnology.
We are meeting again with an entirely different
opportunity. Greening the land can be accompanied by the
creation of many new jobs for all people in the area. The
most promising opportunity may be the development of
tourism. No other branch of modern industry assures an
immediate growth of the Middle East like this one. Our area
is blessed by nature and by history, a history which is still
very much alive: the eternity of Jerusalem, the magnificence
of the pyramids, the symbols of Luxor, the Hanging Gardens
of Babylon, the Pillars of Wisdom in Baalbek, the red
palaces of Petra, the inimitable charm of Marakesh, the old
winds which still blow in Carthage, not forgetting the
beaches of Gaza or the scent of Jericho’s perfumed fruits.
We have to open roads to those wonders and keep them safe
and hospitable. Tourism depends on tranquility; tourism
enhances tranquillity. It makes friendship a vested interest.
Thirdly, we have to build an infrastructure with modern
means so as to avoid the pitfalls of the past. Modern
transportation and revolutionary communications crossing the
air, covering the ground and connecting the seas will turn
geographical proximities into an economic advantage. We
should not ask taxpayers of other countries to finance follies
of our own. We have to correct them ourselves. We do not
have the moral right to ask for the financing of unnecessary
wars or wasteful systems.
If the thumping of hammers replaces the thunder of
guns, many nations will be more than willing to extend a
helping hand. They will invest in a better future. They will
support the replacement of unwarranted confrontation with
Forty-eighth session - 28 September l993 23
much-needed economic competition. Markets can serve the
needs of the people no less than flags can signify their
destinies. The time has come to build a Middle East for the
people and not just for the rulers.
It was not simple to open the locked doors to peace. In
the name of God, let them not be closed again. Let peace
be comprehensive, embracing all issues, all countries, all
generations. We suggest that we all negotiate together as
equals. We offer a common ground of mutual respect and
mutual compromise. Thirteen years have passed since we
made peace with Egypt. We are grateful to Egypt and its
President for expanding understanding, overt and hidden. In
a world in which so many insoluble problems reside, the
Palestinians and we have finally shown that in fact there are
no insoluble problems, only people who tend to believe that
many problems are insoluble.
We have negotiated one of the most complicated issues
of the last 100 years. We are grateful to the United States
for its support and leadership. We are grateful to both
President Clinton and Secretary Christopher for their crucial
role. We appreciate the Egyptian role and the Norwegian
encouragement; the European involvement and serious
contribution; the Asian support and blessing. Maybe we
now have the right to say to other people in conflict: "Do
not give up. Do not surrender to old obsessions and do not
take fresh disappointments at face value." What we did,
others can do as well.
We are determined to make the agreement with the
Palestinians into a permanent success. Israel would consider
the economic success of the Palestinians as though it were
its own, and I believe that a newly achieved security will
serve the aspirations of the Israelis and the necessities of the
Palestinians.
Gaza, after 7,000 years of suffering, can emancipate
itself from want. Jericho, without its fallen walls, can see its
gardens blossom again.
As the twentieth century comes to a close, we have
learned from the United States and Russia that there are no
military answers to the new military dangers, only political
solutions. Successful economies are no longer a monopoly
of the rich and the mighty. They represent an open
invitation to every nation ready to adopt the combination of
science and open-mindedness. We see at the end of this
century that politics can achieve more by good will than by
power, and that the young generation watching their
televisions compare their lot with the fortunes or misfortunes
of others. They see freedom, they watch peace, they view
prosperity, all in real time. They know that they can attain
more if they work harder.
If we want to represent their hopes, we have to
combine wise policies and regional security with market
economies. Historically we were born equal, and equally we
can give birth to a new age.
"Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that the
plowman shall overtake the reaper, and the treader of
24 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
grapes him that soweth seed; and the mountains shall
drop sweet wine, and all the hills shall melt." (The
Holy Bible, Amos 9:13)
So said the Prophet.
The United Nations
is our Organization; we are its custodians, and we have to
adjust to change. We have a huge responsibility to pass it
on in better shape than we found it. Historians in future
years will acknowledge this period of radical change.
But what are the objectives of this Organization of ours
in 1993? Well, they are not very difficult to enumerate,
because they are set out for us and by us in the Preamble to
the Charter, and they remain as valid today as they were
when they were agreed in 1945.
The first, of course, is peace, because without peace
and security no human society can flourish; then human
dignity, because if we do not treat each other with respect as
individuals, we will not do so as nations; justice, because
unless relations between nations are grounded in law, the
powerful will always be able to triumph over the weak;
social and economic progress, because without the sustained
and sustainable development of our economies, all our other
achievements will be as nothing.
I believe that to this list we must now add the
maintenance of a clean and attractive environment. We are
learning, painfully, that our planet also has rights. We
ignore them only at our peril.
These are the foundations for the vision of what the
world should be. In New Zealand, we would say that they
give opportunities to all. When the United Nations came
into existence almost 50 years ago, the vision was sharper
than the reality, but the founders of the United Nations were
certainly not deterred. They were at the watershed in the
affairs of the world. They had just experienced the awful
reality of a global conflict in which millions had died, and
they were determined to do everything in their power to
make sure that such a conflict could never occur again.
They did build well. They embodied their vision not only
in this Organization but also in a whole series of economic,
financial, social and humanitarian institutions, and they gave
it the only strength that counted: their sheer determination,
as men and women from very different countries, to make
it happen.
Only the utmost patience and perseverance has kept that
dream and that determination alive through most of the
50 years since 1945. Progress has been slow and it has been
halting. Some great things were done, but too often the
Members of the United Nations could agree only at the
lowest common denominator, a reflection of the political
gaps and strains within the United Nations membership.
There are, however, four reasons why I believe that that
long, grey era has closed.
The first is that the cold war, that shadow and threat of
a global conflict, is now over. Freed of that constraint, the
United Nations can operate, as it was intended that it should,
as the ultimate guardian of the security of all its Members,
the ultimate arbiter of world peace.
Secondly, democracy, one of the most effective
guarantors of peace between nations, is spreading. We
welcome the establishment of democratic institutions and
processes in countries that have for too long been without
them.
The third point is that in the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade Uruguay Round of multilateral trade
negotiations, the world has a major opportunity to turn its
back on protectionism and lock in the prospects for
economic growth through trade and other forms of economic
integration. Freedom and free trade go hand in hand.
Fourthly, and last, the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro
and Agenda 21 contain a global consensus, a universal
determination to act to preserve our environment.
This combination of developments marks a new
watershed; if we are to keep faith with the founders of this
Organization, we must do what they did in 1945 at their
watershed, and build well, not just for ourselves, but of
course for those who follow.
On the issue of security and peacemaking, the first
point that I raised was that the elimination of confrontation
between the super-Powers has opened up new possibilities
for the practice of collective security and peacemaking. The
unfortunate consequence of 50 years of super-Power
confrontation is, paradoxically, that we are not yet very good
at working together: like a novice sports team, we are really
rather uncoordinated, sadly lacking in strategy, sadly lacking
in team skills or knowledge of the new rules, and sadly
lacking in collective determination. We cannot correct these
deficiencies overnight, but we must keep on trying to
improve.
Forty-eighth session - 29 September l993 39
The other paradox is that peace has not broken out
simply because the former Soviet Union and the United
States have stopped squaring off against each other. There
have been unexpected consequences: some would liken the
result to taking the lid off a pressure-cooker. Conflicts,
internal and between neighbours, seem to have burst out
everywhere. These consequences, in human terms, are
horrific.
So here we are, in the United Nations, underresourced,
undertrained and facing an enormous peacemaking, peace-
building and peace-keeping challenge. We really have no
alternative to learning as we go, and I believe that we are
doing so.
During the past year, I have spoken to soldiers and
relief workers in the field in United Nations missions as
widely spread as Somalia and Croatia, and I pay my highest
tribute to their dedication under some of the most adverse
circumstances. United Nations people are trying there, as
elsewhere, to create conditions where their work will
ultimately no longer be required. They are actually trying to
do themselves out of a job.
The Secretary-General’s document "An Agenda for
Peace" is now in a consolidation phase. The problems are
clear: rising expectations; machinery due for reform; lack of
funds; and the lack of ready, well-trained and well-equipped
forces. Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali has already made some
thoughtful proposals, including sending teams to Member
States to help identify in advance resources available for the
United Nations operations. New Zealand is willing to
respond positively to this approach.

The Secretary-General has also made organizational
changes in the Headquarters departments that support peace-
keeping. The revamping of the Department of Peace-
Keeping Operations is a very good start, providing we
recognize that we need more than just a shifting of the
resources. The new philosophy of peace-building and
peacemaking must work in tandem with the well-tried and
successful peace-keeping philosophy of the past.
On the issue of safety and security of United Nations
personnel, recent peace-keeping operations have highlighted
the risks to United Nations personnel working in dangerous
and unstable situations. That does not help the recruitment
of peace-keepers, and it does not help the recruitment of
contributing countries. The United Nations must have the
means to hold personally responsible and accountable those
who attack or commit other acts of violence against the
United Nations and associated personnel.
Earlier this year the New Zealand Government took the
initial step of calling for all possible measures to ensure the
safety of United Nations personnel. We asked the Secretary-
General to report on the adequacy of existing arrangements.
His report makes a number of positive recommendations.
He has highlighted the need for the General Assembly to
elaborate a new multilateral instrument on the role the
Security Council might play in setting the appropriate
conditions designed to improve the safety of personnel.
I was very pleased just this afternoon to participate in
a Security Council meeting that adopted a resolution
welcoming the Secretary-General’s report and spelling out
the conditions the Council will impose in the future for the
protection of United Nations personnel. I was also delighted
that the General Assembly last week agreed to New
Zealand’s proposal to include a new item on the safety of
personnel in this year’s agenda. I hope that the Sixth
Committee will establish a working group to consider the
issue and make urgent progress. I hope the subject will also
be very fully discussed in all other relevant United Nations
bodies.
Of course, any mechanisms for protecting peace-keepers
must also require that parties to any conflict respect the
integrity of those personnel that have been deployed on their
behalf. Such an undertaking should, in principle, form part
of the mandate for any peace-keeping operation. The recent
practice of the Security Council of establishing clear
mandates for peace-keeping operations at the outset of
deployment is especially welcome, but there remains an onus
on a host State both to explain carefully to its people the
reason for the United Nations presence and also to take
active steps to ensure the safety of United Nations personnel.
But the purpose of peace-keeping or peacemaking and
peace-building is not solely to deal with conflicts that have
already arisen, urgent though that task is. We must improve
our capacity to prevent conflicts before they break out, and
I should like to acknowledge here the importance and
timeliness of recent improvements in conflict-resolution
mechanisms and the ongoing work on preventive diplomacy.
I welcome very warmly the contribution made by my
Australian colleague, Senator Gareth Evans, to the debate on
this subject. He has given us much food for thought and
some helpful suggestions for concrete steps we can take to
improve our performance in this area.
40 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
Disarmament measures remain a key element in conflict
prevention. This year, as the international community
moves towards the extension - I hope for an indefinite
period - of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, the Assembly will have non-proliferation as one
of its major themes. In this regard, North Korea’s continued
evasion of its responsibilities under that Treaty demands a
firm international response.
We welcome very strongly the restraint being shown by
the nuclear-weapon States on testing and their positive
attitude towards the launching of negotiations for a
comprehensive test-ban treaty. It is not before time. New
Zealand has sponsored a draft resolution on comprehensive
test-bans for many years. Its purpose now is on the brink of
fulfillment. The subject needs to be taken up in the
Conference on Disarmament. Given the importance of the
tasks now on the agenda of the Conference on Disarmament,
membership of the Conference must be open to all who have
the will to participate constructively.
In respect of conventional weaponry, we applaud the
enhancement of controls through the commencement of the
Register of conventional-arms transfers. We now have a
chemical weapons Convention in place alongside the
biological weapons Convention.
It is timely to consider what similar work can be done
in respect of conventional weapons. As disarmament moves
from the realms of Utopia into the achievable, we must lend
every effort, here in the United Nations and outside it, to
ensure disarmament’s more rapid progress. No sensible
proposal should be discarded simply for outdated ideological
reasons.
The spread of democratic institutions to every corner of
the globe is, I believe, one of the most encouraging
phenomena of recent years, and the pace is astonishing. In
the space of just 24 hours last week, the Parliament of Israel
approved a Declaration of Principles on Palestinian self-
government; the Parliament of South Africa enacted
legislation establishing the Transitional Executive Council to
take charge of that country until a democratically elected
Government is in office; and a constitutional Government
took office in Cambodia.
We welcome these historic events and the promise they
hold for a more just and prosperous existence for the peoples
of those nations. As delegations will remember, the Middle
East and South Africa dominated the political agenda of the
Assembly for many years. These positive developments in
both regions will give a new cast to the Assembly’s
deliberations.
We can also take heart from progress on another front
of long-standing concern to the Assembly. The United
Nations is now three years into the International Decade for
the Eradication of Colonialism. The good news is that we
are already seeing evidence that the goals and objectives of
the United Nations in this area are almost completely
realized. The number of Self-Governing Territories on the
United Nations list is now very small, and many of these are
exploring innovative ways to complete the decolonization
process. The recent United Nations Seminar on Colonialism,
held in Papua-New Guinea in June, confirmed this trend. It
also revealed that in some cases some very small Non-Self-
Governing Territories do not want fundamental constitutional
change thrust upon them.
New Zealand has always been a strong advocate of the
principle that in all cases decisions on self-determination are,
of course, for the local people to make. We are comfortable
with the notion that certain Territories, such as the Tokelaus,
may finally choose to develop concepts of self-government
and free association that further develop models that have
already been successfully employed for other very small
former Territories.
In that connection, and consistent with New Zealand’s
principled approach to all matters of decolonization, I am
pleased to confirm that the New Zealand Government and
the people of the Tokelaus have extended an invitation to the
United Nations to send a further visiting mission to the
Tokelaus early in 1994 to meet local leaders and, of course,
discuss recent developments.
Democracy is a sure foundation for peace between
nations. It is the political expression of that universal
respect for human rights to which we are all committed.
The Vienna Declaration and Plan of Action arising out of
this year’s World Conference on Human Rights gives some
direction to steps the Organization can take to strengthen the
observance of human rights.
I believe we should move quickly to approve a high
commissioner for human rights. The United Nations needs
an officer with a mandate to play a constructive role in
preventing, monitoring and alleviating human rights abuses
throughout the world. The Centre for Human Rights should
be given the resources to match the immense task it will
have before it. There is a clear need for an enhanced
programme of advisory services and technical assistance to
Forty-eighth session - 29 September l993 41
help countries build up their national human rights
infrastructure.
Human rights is also about recognizing the rights of
peoples to self-identity. In this, the International Year for
the World’s Indigenous People, I would like to support a
proposal that the United Nations declare a decade for
indigenous peoples. We need to build on what has been
achieved, first at Rio de Janeiro and subsequently during the
International Year world wide. This is a long-term task. It
will require a sustained and very coordinated effort.
Unhappily, our task is not just to enhance the
observance of human rights. In this last decade of the
twentieth century, we seem at times to be actually moving
backwards, witnessing the abuse and deprivation of human
rights on a scale that we really believed we had put a long
way behind us. The suffering of millions of refugees
displaced by conflict is beyond our comprehension but
cannot and should not be beyond our compassion. This
dimension is starkly evident in nearly every issue now
before the Security Council. Last June, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees put the
figure at 19 million people - 19 million displaced people
around the world - and it continues to rise.
It is appropriate to pay a special tribute to Mrs. Ogata
and her staff for the way in which they are meeting, often in
dangerous and trying circumstances, the challenges which
this problem brings. New Zealand has responded to these
increased demands by making a special provision for
refugees from Bosnia, Somalia and Cambodia by
establishing special programmes for particularly vulnerable
groups, such as women at risk, and by providing aid. We
now have one of the highest per capita resettlement ratios in
the world. But this is, of course, addressing the symptoms,
not the cause. The ultimate objective must be to create or
recreate conditions that allow refugees to return in safety and
dignity to their own homes and homelands.
Nor can we neglect the need to bring to justice those
who have brought about such suffering. The establishment
of a war crimes Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia is
certainly a central pillar in the international response to this
particular conflict. The full achievement of the Tribunal’s
mandate is of the highest priority. At the same time, and in
a broader context, New Zealand also welcomes the
consideration being given to the creation of an international
criminal court. We would like to see further progress on
this issue made during this session of the Assembly.
Sustainable economic growth for all countries is
essential for stability and peace in the world. A principal
determinant for that is an open, healthy and international
trading system, a system that encourages closer economic
relations and strengthened North-South exchanges. There is
no greater assistance developed countries can give to the
developing countries than to open their markets. A
satisfactory conclusion to the Uruguay Round of multilateral
trade negotiations would be of immense benefit to us all and
has been mentioned, I believe, by just about every speaker
on this rostrum during this debate.
Progress to that end in the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade, of course, has been slow, as we know.
Many deadlines have come and many deadlines have gone
without resolution. We should not be under any illusion.
Come this December, after seven years of negotiations on
the Uruguay Round, either we will have the liberalization of
multilateral trade with a benefit to all or the prospects of
avoiding global economic warfare will have suffered the
most serious setback. The New Zealand Government sees
the purpose of these negotiations being to lock in place
today the politically attainable, and to build on what might
be possible tomorrow. In preparing for that, we also have
to focus our attention on what is needed to ensure that all
countries are placed where they can reap the benefits of the
future.
We still have much to follow up from the Rio
Conference on Environment and Development. But time is
not on our side. Environmental degradation continues to
pose a serious threat to the planet and its resources, and no
country - no country - is immune from its impact. The
levels of responsibility for environmental damage may differ
from country to country, but we must face up to their
consequences together. We must meet the objectives of
Agenda 21 and the Rio Declaration. All countries should
move to ratify the climate and biodiversity Conventions, a
step that New Zealand took just recently. New Zealand will
contribute to the global environmental facility that is to fund
both of those Conventions. We have begun work to reduce
carbon dioxide emissions and are developing a
comprehensive strategy for reducing net greenhouse gas
emissions. We are also making excellent progress on
phasing out consumption of ozone-depleting chemicals.
New Zealand is ready to share its expertise on biological
diversity with other countries to assist them in meeting
obligations under the Conventions.
I suppose that one of the most useful exercises that we
can conclude here is to draw some lessons from the
experiences and views that I have set out. The most obvious
42 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
one to me is that, however important it is to deal with the
particularities of human aspirations for peace, respect for the
individual, economic well-being and a good, clean
environment, one should never lose sight of the connections
between them all. The Secretary-General has pointed out
how peace, development and democracy form a mutually
reinforcing circle, and we agree. Getting the linkages right
can be as important for success as the elements of each.
Peace and security are not likely to be soundly based if
people are hungry. Economic growth cannot last if the
natural resources used to create it are not conserved. People
are not likely to make the effort required by economic
restructuring if the important choices are made for them.
Economic growth cannot be sustained if countries keep
coming up with new pretexts, such as environmental
protection, to justify excluding outside competition from
their own markets.
Human aspirations and human security must be seen in
the round. That is one of the major challenges facing the
membership of this Organization. The work done by the
United Nations in post-peace-keeping situations, I believe,
deserves renewed attention. For those countries where there
is still a need to foster economic, political and social
development, we should look at establishing a partnership
arrangement between the United Nations and the sovereign
Government. A coordinating body comprising the
Governments and a group of friends of the Secretariat could
help to ensure that the gains of peace-keeping are taken
through to reconstruction. I believe that we need a new
institutional framework to graduate problems out of the
security area and into a forum more able to cope with the
needs of redevelopment and reconstruction.
The second lesson is that we need to keep looking at
how well the United Nations is fitted to meet the challenges
it is facing and be prepared to change it where necessary.
Membership of the United Nations has continued to grow
and I warmly welcome the newest Member States.
Many speakers have referred to Security Council
reform. The Security Council is in need of early reform.
We support a modest increase in membership and a fresh
look at the institution as a whole. The possibility of some
members representing regional groupings for, say, a 10-year
period is worth considering. New Zealand will continue to
oppose any extension of veto rights.
Another imperative is for the Council’s work methods
to be improved. Wider consultation with the broader
membership of the United Nations is essential. United
Nations agencies are also ripe for restructuring. The General
Assembly has made a good start on itself. We have
streamlined the Committees, but we also must streamline the
overall workload. It is unmanageable at present.
For several years now, we have been looking hard at
ways to fund new demands on the Organization by making
compensating savings elsewhere. We still need to ask hard
questions about whether all that has been done traditionally
still needs to be done. I welcome the fact that the Secretary-
General’s budget proposals already envisage some major
steps in this area. He has also identified better contracting
as a source of further savings.
At the end of the day, however, all that can be done to
increase efficiency and cut costs will come to naught if the
financial commitment by Member States is lacking. New
Zealand pays its dues on time; most others do not. I urge
them to do so. Let us certainly go on talking about financial
reform, but let us also secure the financial basis of the
Organization while we are doing so.
But what is the real dream that all of us have? I would
urge all members to keep making, from year to year, real
progress towards satisfying those basic human aspirations I
mentioned at the outset and to do so with a strong, well-
equipped and well-focused United Nations. Specifically, I
want to see a reshaped Security Council, a more tightly
focused General Assembly, better peace-keeping practice, a
Secretariat equipped to handle peace-building and partnership
arrangements, and financial arrangements built on efficiency
and punctuality. Would that not give a point to the fiftieth
anniversary celebrations that lie ahead in 1995, and would it
not make the United Nations of the next 50 years a more
effective, more dynamic and exciting place to do the world’s
business in than the conditions of the last 50 years have
allowed? The deprived of this world expect no less. The
well-off know the world is too small for the huge gap that
now exists amongst all people to remain.
First of all, I should like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your election to your important post. I see
it as a manifestation of respect for the peace-loving policy
of Guyana, and as a tribute to the growing role of Latin
American and Caribbean countries in international affairs.
Last year demonstrated the great potential for drama
inherent in the post-confrontational and post-communist
world. We have seen that the very highest levels of
cooperation are achievable. We see truly exciting prospects
in yesterday’s address by President Bill Clinton of the
United States and in other statements already delivered from
this rostrum.
At the same time, developments in the former
Yugoslavia, Abkhazia and Karabakh have also revealed the
true depths of barbarism and the significant new threat of
aggressive nationalism.
Outbursts of violence caused by xenophobia, even in
traditionally prosperous countries, have shown that no one is
safe from this danger. It is no less serious a threat to peace
today than nuclear war was yesterday. The world
community mustered the strength to stave off the nuclear
danger. An important guarantee against this was the
Russian-American START II Treaty. Nowadays we all
confront the equally formidable challenge of a new
generation of conflicts and wars triggered by nationalist,
political and religious intolerance. That is why democracy
and peacemaking must be the key terms defining the strategy
of the world community as it moves into the twenty-first
century.
The United Nations is now turning to face this new
challenge. The successful United Nations operation in
Cambodia was one of the largest in the history of the
Organization. Life is returning to normal in a country so
long torn by civil war. We stand ready, together with other
members of the international community, to help the people
of Cambodia to rebuild their country.
Forty-eighth session - 28 September l993 15
We have seen a political and psychological
breakthrough in the solution of the key problem of the
Middle East settlement, which is the problem of Palestine.
We pay tribute to the courageous leaders of Israel and the
PLO who have taken the first and most difficult step towards
mutual recognition and reconciliation. We are ready to
participate in an international conference on the economic
development of self-governing Palestinian territories.
Russia, as a co-sponsor of the Conference on the Middle
East, will spare no effort to advance the peace process in all
other areas.
However, the key to the settlement of many conflicts
has not yet been found. Russia will continue to encourage
the parties to the Bosnian conflict not to lose the chance of
a peaceful settlement and will contribute to the operation for
its implementation under United Nations command.
Twice during wartime I have had occasion to visit
Sarajevo. I propose that the United Nations should place the
city under its moral and political protection and that it
should be declared a centre of coexistence and a meeting
point for Islam, the Orthodox Church, Catholicism and other
religions. The city should become a symbol for the whole
world, a reminder that political violence and intolerance
under the banner of religion are the worst possible crimes
against religion itself and the human spirit. In any case, it
is surely time to think of establishing closer contacts
between the United Nations and the world’s leading
religions.
The international community seems to have turned a
blind eye to Afghanistan and Angola as soon as they ceased
to be pawns in the cold war. The United Nations has no
right to leave millions of people who live there in the grip
of an epidemic of ethnic, clan and religious extremism and
to forget their economic and humanitarian problems,
including that of the liberation of former Soviet prisoners of
war.
We must learn the lessons of the United Nations
operation in Somalia and considerably improve its
effectiveness. Conscious of its special responsibility for
maintaining peace, Russia has made peacemaking and the
protection of human rights, particularly those of national
minorities, the priority of its foreign policy, first and
foremost in the territory of the former USSR.
We will spare no effort to strengthen the
Commonwealth of Independent States and make it a positive
factor, not only regionally, but globally. I call upon
Members of the United Nations to support proposals
submitted jointly by the members of the Commonwealth of
Independent States to the present session, relating in
particular to the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, the struggle against international terrorism and
the protection of the environment.
Our peacemaking efforts are already yielding their first
results. For more than a year now there have been no
hostilities in the Transdniester region and South Ossetia.
With our participation, the process of normalization of the
situation and national dialogue has started in Tajikistan.
Russia is making active efforts to put an end to the
Abkhazian and Karabakh conflicts and to render
humanitarian assistance to their victims.
All these problems are too serious and too tragic for
speculation about neo-imperial plans of Russia, diplomatic
rivalry, or the search for new spheres of influence by
neighbouring and distant Powers. The United Nations, the
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE),
and all States truly interested in peace, along with Russia,
will have enough work to do together. We want to see
much more active assistance for our peacemaking efforts,
not in words, but in deeds.
In most cases this means that the United Nations should
give a mandate for operations conducted at the request of
conflicting parties on the basis of appropriate agreements.
For this, close interaction with the United Nations and the
CSCE missions is essential. Also, our minds should be open
to non-traditional methods, such as the participation of
contingents of the conflicting parties themselves and those
of a neighbouring mediating State. The pragmatic nature of
such a model was shown in particular in the Transdniester
region and in South Ossetia. This model should be used,
and not disregarded, in other regions, in the interests of the
United Nations, which is facing an overload of peace-
keeping operations. The collective peacemaking forces of
the Commonwealth of Independent States could also interact
with the United Nations itself. It is in any case time to
establish closer relations between the two organizations.
In material and financial terms the burden of
peacemaking borne by Russia alone today in the territory of
the former USSR must be lightened. This could mean
establishing a voluntary fund for this purpose. Of course,
Russia realizes that no international organization or group of
States can replace our peacemaking efforts in this specific
post-Soviet area.
16 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
By and large, taking into consideration the wide
experience gained throughout the world, it is time to think
of a modern overall strategy of peacemaking which would
be integrated with "An Agenda for Peace" proposed by the
Secretary-General.
The Russian Federation, as an initiator of the statement
of the President of the Security Council on peacemaking and
peace-keeping issues, made on 28 May 1993, makes the
following proposals.
The first is to define a clear-cut concept of political
leadership by the Security Council, create an effective
military command under the supervision of the Secretary-
General and establish a procedure for involving, on that
basis, regional organizations.
The second is to establish under Article 29 of the
United Nations Charter a special Security Council committee
on improving peace-keeping operation practices. This could
include those States which have already gained considerable
experience in this area of United Nations activity.
Our third proposal is to set up United Nations stand-by
forces which would be at the disposal of Member States and
used in peacemaking operations with the consent of their
Governments on a case-by-case basis at the request of the
Secretary-General.
All these questions directly relate to the process of
renewal of the United Nations. The reform of United
Nations bodies, including the Security Council, will make
sense and be effective if it allows for a more adequate
response to new challenges in the field of peacemaking.
The settlement of conflicts should go hand in hand with
the international protection of their victims. As a follow-up
to the Geneva International Conference on the Protection of
Victims of War, we propose that international legal
restrictions be imposed on the use in internal conflicts of the
most destructive and indiscriminate types of weapons,
primarily military aircraft and artillery-rocket systems. We
should also eliminate or call a halt to the use of mercenaries
and volunteers both in domestic and international conflicts.
We propose the establishment of a permanent
international tribunal to deal with crimes against humanity.
The inevitability of punishment will help to prevent the
recurrence of such atrocities.
It has become crucially important to address
comprehensively the problem of refugees and to specify the
relevant principles of international law at a special
conference.
Peacemaking cannot be separated from the protection
of human rights. The international community is duty-bound
to condemn strongly "double" or lower standards of human
rights protection, the theory and practice of the superiority
of rights of an "indigenous" nation and the creation of mono-
ethnic States. The time has come to establish a United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. Following
the example of the Conference on Security and Cooperation
in Europe, it is time for the United Nations also to have a
Special Rapporteur on National Minorities. We support the
proposals of the Secretary-General in the field of human
rights protection.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction would
directly contradict the peacemaking efforts of the United
Nations. This poses an ever growing threat not only in the
future but even at the present. We are ready to cooperate
with the United States and other countries in solving the
problems connected with cutting off fissionable material
production and banning the construction of facilities for such
production, particularly in conflict areas.
We are in favour of transforming the Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Treaty into a universal agreement of
unlimited duration. The United Nations should also work to
ensure the universality of and strict compliance with the
Convention on the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
Russia reiterates, from this rostrum of the General
Assembly, its intention to adhere to the international regime
of non-proliferation of missile technology. In the very near
future, we intend to take concrete steps to strengthen our
relevant domestic legislation, going so far as to envisage
criminal prosecution for violations of the rules governing the
export of missile equipment and technology. We call on all
States that possess such technology to join the Missile
Technology Control Regime (MTCR). It is also necessary
to provide for equality of rights and obligations of the
participants, so as to enable them freely to export peaceful
space technology.
Successful economic reform is one of the guarantees of
peace. This is of particular relevance to the many developing
countries and to the post-communist States. Easier access to
world markets for countries with transitional economies,
including Russia, and the lifting of all discriminatory
restrictions is becoming an issue of the highest priority. We
Forty-eighth session - 28 September l993 17
believe that the General Assembly should express its support
for efforts in this direction. We also propose the
establishment of a mechanism to coordinate programmes
carried out by the institutions of the United Nations system
in support of economic reforms in countries in transition.
The strengthening of democracy is the principal
guarantee of security and socio-economic development in the
world today. This has been true in Europe, Asia, Africa and
Latin America, although the process is not proceeding easily
and automatically everywhere. Peoples who have risen up
against totalitarianism are threatened by the risk of political
violence and ultra-nationalism.
We categorically reject such an alternative. Russia is
peacefully transforming itself in accordance with the
fundamental principle of democracy: free elections. In 1991,
the people of Russia elected their country’s first democratic
President, and they confirmed their confidence in his policies
at the April referendum this year. On the basis of this
twofold mandate, the President has taken decisive measures
to ensure democratic elections to the Parliament in
December of this year. Thus, the old totalitarian system of
power will be definitively dismantled and replaced by a new
system of power elected by the people and responsible only
to the people. We invite international observers to monitor
the elections to the Parliament.
In building a new democratic Russia, we of course must
first of all rely on our own potential. Yet we very much
appreciate the solidarity the democratic community has
shown us. Such solidarity is neither an act of interference
in our domestic affairs nor the whimsical gesture of
romanticists in international politics. It is simply an
expression of the human duty to protect the rights of
individuals in other countries.
Next month will mark the fiftieth anniversary of the
Moscow Conference when, in the turbulent year of 1943, the
foundation was laid for the establishment of the United
Nations, which was conceived as an organization of
democratic countries having triumphed over Nazi
totalitarianism. Half a century later, the success of
democracy in Russia and many other countries has made it
possible for the first time to realize fully the lofty destiny of
the United Nations and to help it become a truly efficient
peacemaking Organization.
We should not allow political short-sightedness, current
economic difficulties, egoism and conceit to make us lose
the chance to transform the still fragile post-communist
world into a democratic one. I hope that this session will
move us closer to an understanding of this goal and of the
ways of reaching it in the interests of all States and nations.
Let me first congratulate you,
Sir, on your election as President of the General Assembly
for this session.
Mr. Secretary-General, distinguished representatives and
guests, it is a great honour for me to address you and to
stand in this great Hall, which symbolizes so much of the
twentieth century - its darkest crises and its brightest
aspirations.
I come before you as the first American President born
after the founding of the United Nations. Like most of the
people in the world today, I was not even alive during the
convulsive world war that convinced humankind of the need
for this Organization, nor during the San Francisco
Conference that led to its birth. Yet I have followed the
work of the United Nations throughout my life, with
admiration for its accomplishments, sadness for its failures
and the conviction that, through common effort, our
generation can take the bold steps needed to redeem the
mission entrusted to the United Nations 48 years ago. I
pledge to you that my nation remains committed to helping
make the United Nations vision a reality.
The start of this session of the General Assembly offers
us an opportunity to take stock of where we are as common
shareholders in the progress of humankind and the
preservation of our planet. It is clear that we live at a
turning point in human history.
Immense and promising changes seem to wash over us
every day. The cold war is over. The world is no longer
divided into two armed and angry camps. Dozens of new
democracies have been born.
It is a moment of miracles. We see Nelson Mandela
stand side by side with President de Klerk proclaiming a
date for South Africa’s first non-racial elections.
We see Russia’s first popularly elected President,
Boris Yeltsin, leading his nation on its bold democratic
journey.
We have seen decades of deadlock shattered in the
Middle East as the Prime Minister of Israel and the
Chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization reached
past enmity and suspicion to shake each other’s hand and
exhilarate the entire world with the hope of peace.
We have begun to see the doomsday weapons of
nuclear annihilation dismantled and destroyed. Thirty-two
years ago President Kennedy warned this Assembly that
humanity lived under a nuclear sword of Damocles that hung
by the slenderest of threads. Now the United States is
working with Russia, Ukraine, Belarus and others to take
that sword down, to lock it away in a secure vault, where we
hope and pray it will remain for ever.
It is a new era in this Hall as well. The super-Power
standoff that for so long stymied the work of the United
Nations, almost from its first day, has now yielded to a new
promise of practical cooperation.
Yet today we must all admit that there are two
powerful tendencies working from opposite directions to
challenge the authority of nation States everywhere and to
undermine the authority of nation States to work together.
From beyond nations, economic and technological forces all
over the globe are compelling the world towards integration.
These forces are fuelling a welcome explosion of
entrepreneurship and political liberalization. But they also
threaten to destroy the insularity and independence of
national economies, quickening the pace of change and
making many of our people feel more insecure. At the same
time, from within nations, the resurgent aspirations of ethnic
and religious groups challenge Governments on terms that
traditional nation States cannot easily accommodate. These
twin forces lie at the heart of the challenges, not only to our
national Governments, but also to all our international
institutions. They require all of us in this Hall to find new
ways to work together more effectively in pursuit of our
national interests and to think anew about whether our
institutions of international cooperation are adequate to this
moment.
Thus, as we marvel at this era’s promise of new peace,
we must also recognize that serious threats remain. Bloody
ethnic, religious and civil wars rage from Angola to the
Caucasus to Kashmir. As weapons of mass destruction fall
into more hands, even small conflicts can threaten to take on
murderous proportions. Hunger and disease continue to take
a tragic toll, especially among the world’s children. The
malignant neglect of our global environment threatens our
children’s health and their very security. The repression of
conscience continues in too many nations. And terrorism,
which has taken so many innocent lives, assumed a
horrifying immediacy for us here when militant fanatics
bombed the World Trade Center and planned to attack even
this very Hall of peace.
Let me assure the Assembly that whether they be the
plotters of those crimes or the mass murderers who bombed
Pan Am flight 103, my Government is determined to see that
such terrorists are brought to justice.
At this moment of panoramic change, of vast
opportunities and troubling threats, we must all ask ourselves
what we can and what we should do as a community of
nations. We must once again dare to dream of what might
be, for our dreams may be within our reach.
For that to happen, we must all be willing honestly to
confront the challenges of the broader world. That has never
been easy. When this Organization was founded 48 years
ago, the world’s nations stood devastated by war or
exhausted by its expense. There was little appetite for
cooperative efforts among nations; most people simply
wanted to get on with their lives. But a far-sighted
generation of leaders from the United States and elsewhere
rallied the world. Their efforts built the institutions of post-
-war security and prosperity.
We are at a similar moment today. The momentum of
the cold war no longer propels us in our daily actions. And
with daunting economic and political pressures upon almost
every nation represented in this room, many of us are
turning to focus greater attention and energy on domestic
needs and problems, and we must.
But putting each of our economic houses in order
cannot mean that we shut our windows to the world. The
pursuit of self-renewal in many of the world’s largest and
most powerful economies - in Europe, in Japan, in North
America - is absolutely crucial, because unless the great
industrial nations can recapture their robust economic
growth, the global economy will languish. Yet the industrial
nations also need growth elsewhere in order to lift their own.
Indeed, prosperity in each of our nations and regions also
depends on active and responsible engagement in a host of
shared concerns: for example, a thriving and democratic
Russia not only makes the world safer, it also can help to
expand the world’s economy; a strong GATT (General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) agreement will create
millions of jobs world wide; peace in the Middle East,
buttressed as it should be by the repeal of outdated United
Nations resolutions, can help to unleash that region’s great
economic potential and calm a perpetual source of tension in
global affairs; and the growing economic power of China -
coupled with greater political openness - could bring
enormous benefits to all of Asia and to the rest of the world.
We must help our publics to understand this distinction:
domestic renewal is an overdue tonic; but isolationism and
protectionism are still poison. We must inspire our peoples
to look beyond their immediate fears towards a broader
horizon.
Let me start by being clear about where the United
States stands. The United States occupies a unique position
in world affairs today: we recognize that and we welcome
it. Yet, with the cold war over, I know many people ask
whether the United States plans to retreat or remain active
in the world; and if active, to what end? Many people are
asking that in our own country as well.
Let me answer that question as clearly and plainly as I
can. The United States intends to remain engaged and to
lead. We cannot solve every problem, but we must and will
serve as a fulcrum for change and a pivot point for peace.
In a new era of peril and opportunity, our overriding
purpose must be to expand and strengthen the world’s
community of market-based democracies. During the cold
war, we sought to contain a threat to the survival of free
institutions; now we seek to enlarge the circle of nations that
live under those free institutions.
For our dream is of a day when the opinions and
energies of every person in the world will be given full
expression, in a world of thriving democracies that cooperate
with each other and live in peace.
With this statement, I do not mean to announce some
crusade to force our way of life and doing things on others
or to replicate our institutions. But we now know clearly
that throughout the world, from Poland to Eritrea, from
Guatemala to South Korea, there is an enormous yearning
among people who wish to be the masters of their own
economic and political lives. Where it matters most and
where we can make the greatest difference, we will therefore
patiently and firmly align ourselves with that yearning.
Forty-eighth session - 27 September l993 9
Today, there are still those who claim that democracy
is simply not applicable to many cultures and that its recent
expansion is an aberration, an accident in history that will
soon fade away. But I agree with President Roosevelt, who
once said: "The democratic aspiration is no mere recent
phase of human history. It is human history."
We will work to strengthen the free market democracies
by revitalizing our economy at home, by opening world
trade through GATT, the North American Free Trade
Agreement and other accords, and by updating our shared
institutions, asking with you and answering the hard
questions about whether they are adequate to the present
challenges.
We will support the consolidation of market democracy
where it is taking new root, as in the States of the former
Soviet Union and all over Latin America, and we seek to
foster the practices of good government that distribute the
benefits of democracy and economic growth fairly to all
people.
We will work to reduce the threat from regimes that are
hostile to democracy and to support liberalization of
non-democratic States when they are willing to live in peace
with the rest of us. As a country that has over 150 racial,
ethnic and religious groups within our borders, our policy is
and must be rooted in a profound respect for all the world’s
religions and cultures. But we must oppose everywhere
extremism that produces terrorism and hate.
And we must pursue our humanitarian goals of
reducing suffering, fostering sustainable development and
improving health and living conditions, particularly for our
world’s children.
On efforts from export controls to trade agreements to
peace-keeping, we will often work in partnership with others
and through multilateral institutions such as the United
Nations. It is in our national interest to do so. But we must
not hesitate to act unilaterally when there is a threat to our
core interests or to those of our allies.
The United States believes that an expanding
community of market democracies not only serves our own
security interests, it also advances the goals enshrined in this
body’s Charter and its Universal Declaration of Human
Rights.
For broadly based prosperity is clearly the strongest
form of preventive diplomacy, and the habits of democracy
are the habits of peace. Democracy is rooted in
compromise, not conquest. It rewards tolerance, not hatred.
Democracies rarely wage war on one another. They make
more reliable partners in trade, in diplomacy, and in the
stewardship of our global environment. And democracies,
with the rule of law and respect for political, religious and
cultural minorities, are more responsive to their own people
and to the protection of human rights.
But as we work towards this vision, we must confront
the storm clouds that may overwhelm our work and darken
the march towards freedom.
If we do not stem the proliferation of the world’s
deadliest weapons, no democracy can feel secure.
If we do not strengthen the capacity to resolve conflicts
among and within nations, those conflicts will smother the
birth of free institutions, threaten the development of entire
regions and continue to take innocent lives.
If we do not nurture our people and our planet through
sustainable development, we will deepen conflict and waste
the very wonders that make our efforts worth doing.
Let me talk more about what I believe we must do in
each of these three categories: non-proliferation, conflict
resolution and sustainable development.
One of our most urgent priorities must be attacking the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction - whether
nuclear, chemical or biological - and the ballistic missiles
that can rain them down on populations hundreds of miles
away.
We know this is not an idle problem. All of us are still
haunted by the pictures of Kurdish women and children cut
down by poison gas. We saw SCUD missiles drop during
the Gulf War that would have been far graver in their
consequences if they had carried nuclear weapons. And we
know that many nations still believe it is in their interests to
develop weapons of mass destruction or to sell them or the
necessary technologies to others for financial gain.
More than a score of nations likely possess such
weapons and their number threatens to grow. These
weapons destabilize entire regions. They could turn a local
conflict into a global human and environmental catastrophe.
We simply have got to find ways to control these weapons
and to reduce the number of States that possess them by
supporting and strengthening the International Atomic
Energy Agency and by taking other necessary measures.
10 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
I have made non-proliferation one of our nation’s
highest priorities. We intend to weave it more deeply into
the fabric of all of our relationships with the world’s nations
and institutions. We seek to build a world of increasing
pressure for non-proliferation but increasingly open trade and
technology for those States that live by accepted
international rules.
Today, let me describe several new policies that our
Government will pursue to stem proliferation. We will
pursue new steps to control the materials for nuclear
weapons. Growing global stockpiles of plutonium and
highly enriched uranium are raising the danger of nuclear
terrorism for all nations. We will press for an international
agreement that would ban production of these materials for
weapons for ever.
As we reduce our nuclear stockpiles, the United States
has also begun negotiations towards a comprehensive ban on
nuclear testing. This summer I declared that to facilitate
those negotiations, our nation would suspend our testing if
all other nuclear States would do the same. Today, in the
face of disturbing signs, I renew my call on the nuclear
States to abide by that moratorium as we negotiate to stop
nuclear testing for all time.
I am also proposing new efforts to fight the
proliferation of biological and chemical weapons. Today,
only a handful of nations has ratified the chemical weapons
Convention. I call on all nations - including my own - to
ratify this accord quickly so that it may enter into force by
13 January 1995. We will also seek to strengthen the
biological weapons Convention by making every nation’s
biological activities and facilities open to more international
scrutiny.
I am proposing as well new steps to thwart the
proliferation of ballistic missiles. Recently, working with
Russia, Argentina, Hungary and South Africa, we have made
significant progress toward that goal. Now we will seek to
strengthen the principles of the Missile Technology Control
Regime by transforming it from an agreement on technology
transfer among just 23 nations into a set of rules that can
command universal adherence.
We will also reform our own system of export controls
in the United States to reflect the realities of the post-cold-
war world, where we seek to enlist the support of our former
adversaries in the battle against proliferation. At the same
time as we stop deadly technologies from falling into the
wrong hands, we will work with our partners to remove
outdated controls that unfairly burden legitimate commerce
and unduly restrain growth and opportunity all over the
world.
As we work to keep the world’s most destructive
weapons out of conflicts, we must also strengthen the
international community’s ability to address those conflicts
themselves. For as we all now know so painfully, the end
of the cold war did not bring us to the millennium of peace.
Indeed, it simply removed the lid from many cauldrons of
ethnic, religious and territorial animosity.
The philosopher Isaiah Berlin has said that a wounded
nationalism is like a bent twig, forced down so severely that
when released, it lashes back with fury. The world today is
thick with both bent and recoiling twigs of wounded
communal identities. This surge of bitter conflicts has
placed high demands on the United Nations peace-keeping
forces. Frequently, the Blue Helmets have worked wonders.
In Namibia, El Salvador, the Golan Heights and elsewhere,
United Nations peace-keepers have helped to stop the
fighting, restore civil authority and enable free elections. In
Bosnia, United Nations peace-keepers, against the danger
and frustration of that continuing tragedy, have maintained
a valiant humanitarian effort. And if the parties to that
conflict take the hard steps needed to make a real peace, the
international community - including the United States - must
be ready to help in its effective implementation.
In Somalia, the United States and the United Nations
have worked together to achieve a stunning humanitarian
rescue, saving literally hundreds of thousands of lives and
restoring conditions of security to almost the entire country.
United Nations peace-keepers from over two dozen nations
remain in Somalia today - and some, including brave
Americans, have lost their lives - to ensure that we complete
our mission and that anarchy and starvation do not return
just as quickly as they were abolished.
Many still criticize United Nations peace-keeping, but
those who do should talk to the people of Cambodia, where
the United Nations operations helped turn the killing fields
into fertile soil for reconciliation. Last May’s elections in
Cambodia marked a proud accomplishment for that war--
weary nation and for the United Nations. And I am pleased
to announce that the United States has recognized
Cambodia’s new Government.
United Nations peace-keeping holds the promise to
resolve many of this era’s conflicts. But the reason we have
supported such missions is not, as some critics in the United
States have charged, to subcontract American foreign policy,
but to strengthen our security, to protect our interests, and to
Forty-eighth session - 27 September l993 11
share among nations the costs and effort of pursuing peace.
Peace-keeping cannot be a substitute for our own national
defence efforts, but it can strongly supplement them.
Today there is wide recognition that the United Nations
peace-keeping ability has not kept pace with its rising
responsibilities and challenges. Just six years ago, about
10,000 United Nations peace-keepers were stationed around
the world. Today the United Nations has some 80,000
deployed in 17 operations on four continents. Yet until
recently, if a peace-keeping commander called in from
across the globe when it was night-time here in New York,
there was no one in the peace-keeping office even to answer
the call. When lives are on the line, we cannot let the reach
of the United Nations exceed its grasp.
As the Secretary-General and others have argued, if
United Nations peace-keeping is to be a sound security
investment for our nation and for other United Nations
Members, it must adapt to new times. Together, we must
prepare United Nations peace-keeping for the twenty-first
century. We need to begin by bringing the rigours of
military and political analysis to every United Nations peace
mission. In recent weeks in the Security Council, our nation
has begun asking harder questions about proposals for new
peace-keeping missions. Is there a real threat to
international peace? Does the proposed mission have clear
objectives? Can an end point be identified for those who
will be asked to participate? How much will the mission
cost? From now on the United Nations should address these
and other questions for every proposed mission before we
vote and before the mission begins. The United Nations
simply cannot become engaged in every one of the world’s
conflicts. If the American people are to say "Yes" to United
Nations peace-keeping, the United Nations must know when
to say "No".
The United Nations also must have the technical means
to run a modern, world-class peace-keeping operation. We
support the creation of a genuine United Nations peace-
keeping headquarters with a planning staff; with access to
timely intelligence; with a logistics unit that can be deployed
on a moment’s notice; and with a modern operations centre
with global communications.
United Nations operations must not only be adequately
funded but also fairly funded. Within the next few weeks,
the United States will be current on our peace-keeping bills.
I have worked hard with the Congress to get this done. I
believe the United States should lead the way in being
timely in its payments, and I will work to ensure that we
continue to pay our peace-keeping bills in full. But I am
also committed to working with the United Nations to reduce
our nation’s assessment for these missions. The assessment
system has not been changed since 1973, and everyone in
our country knows that our percentage of the world’s
economic pie is not as great as it was then. Therefore, I
believe our rate should be reduced to reflect the rise of other
nations that can now bear more of the financial burden.
That will make it easier for me as President to make sure
my country pays in a timely and full fashion.
Changes in the United Nations peace-keeping operations
must be part of an even broader programme of United
Nations reform. I say that, again, not to criticize the United
Nations but to help improve it. As our Ambassador,
Madeleine Albright, has suggested, the United States has
always played a twin role in regard to the United Nations:
"First friend and first critic."
Today, corporations around the world are finding ways
to move from the industrial age into the information age -
improving service, reducing bureaucracy and cutting costs.
Here in the United States, Vice President Al Gore and I have
launched an effort literally to reinvent how our Government
operates. We see this going on in other Governments
around the world. Now the time has come to reinvent the
way the United Nations operates as well.
I applaud the initial steps the Secretary-General has
taken to reduce and reform the United Nations bureaucracy.
Now we must all do even more to root out waste. Before
this General Assembly is over, let us establish a strong
mandate for an office of inspector general, so that it can
attain a reputation for toughness, for integrity, for
effectiveness. Let us build new confidence among our
people that the United Nations is changing with the needs of
our times.
Ultimately, the key for reforming the United Nations,
as for reforming our own government, is to remember why
we are here and whom we serve. It is well to recall that the
first words of the United Nations Charter are not, "We the
Governments", but "We the peoples of the United Nations".
That means, in every country, the teachers, the workers, the
farmers, the professionals, the fathers, the mothers, the
children, from the most remote village in the world to the
largest metropolis - they are why we gather in this great
Hall; it is their futures that are at risk when we act or fail to
act; and it is they who ultimately pay our bills.
As we dream new dreams in this age when miracles
seem possible, let us focus on the lives of those people, and
especially on the children who will inherit this world. Let
12 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
us work with a new urgency, and imagine what kind of
world we could create for them over the coming generation.
Let us work with new energy to protect the world’s
people from torture and repression. As Secretary of State
Christopher stressed at the recent Vienna Conference, human
rights are not something conditional, bounded by culture but,
rather, something universal, granted by God. This General
Assembly should create, at long last, a high commissioner
for human rights. I hope it will do this soon, and with
vigour and energy and conviction.
Let us also work far more ambitiously to fulfil our
obligations as custodians of this planet, not only to improve
the quality of life for our citizens and the quality of our air,
water and the earth itself, but also because the roots of
conflict are so often entangled with the roots of
environmental neglect and the calamities of famine and
disease.
During the course of our campaign in the United States
last year, Vice President Gore and I promised the American
people major changes in our nation’s policy towards the
global environment. Those were promises to keep, and
today the United States is doing so. Today we are working
with other nations to build on the promising work of the
United Nations Commission on Sustainable Development.
We are working to make sure that all nations meet their
commitments under the global climate Convention. We are
seeking to complete negotiations on an accord to prevent the
world’s deserts from further expanding. And we seek to
strengthen the World Health Organization’s efforts to combat
the plague of AIDS, which is not only killing millions, but
also exhausting the resources of the nations that can least
afford it.
And let us make a new commitment to the world’s
children. It is tragic enough that one and a half million
children have died as a result of wars over the past decade.
But it is far more unforgivable that during that same period
40 million children have died from diseases completely
preventable with simple vaccines or medicines. Every day
- this day, as we meet here - over 30,000 of the world’s
children will die of malnutrition and disease. As the
Director of the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF),
Jim Grant, has reminded me, "each of [those children] had
a name and a nationality, a family, a personality and a
potential".
We are compelled to do better by the world’s children.
Just as our own nation has launched new reforms to ensure
that every child has adequate health care, we must do more
to get basic vaccines and other treatments for curable
diseases to children all over the world. It’s the best
investment we’ll ever make. We can find new ways to
ensure that every child grows up with clean, drinkable water
- that most precious commodity of life itself. And the
United Nations can work even harder to ensure that each
child has at least a full primary education - and I mean that
opportunity for girls as well as boys.
To ensure a healthier and more abundant world, we
simply must slow the world’s explosive growth in
population. We cannot afford to see the human race double
by the middle of the next century. Our nation has at last
renewed its commitment to work with the United Nations to
expand the availability of the world’s family planning
education and services. We must ensure that there is a place
at the table for every one of the world’s children. We can
do this.
At the birth of this Organization, 48 years ago - another
time of both victory and danger - a generation of gifted
leaders from many nations stepped forward to organize the
world’s efforts on behalf of security and prosperity. One
American leader during that period said this: "It is time we
steered by the stars rather than by the light of each passing
ship." His generation picked peace, human dignity and
freedom. Those are good stars. They should remain the
highest in our firmament.
Now history has granted to us a moment of even
greater opportunity, when old dangers are ebbing and old
walls are crumbling. Future generations will judge us, every
one of us, above all by what we make of this magic
moment. Let us resolve that we will dream larger, that we
will work harder, so that they can conclude that we did not
merely turn walls to rubble, but instead laid the foundations
for great things to come.
Let us ensure that the tide of freedom and democracy
is not pushed back by the fierce winds of ethnic hatred. Let
us ensure that the world’s most dangerous weapons are
safely reduced and denied to dangerous hands. Let us
ensure that the world we pass to our children is healthier,
safer and more abundant than the one we inhabit today. I
believe - I know - that together we can extend this moment
of miracles into an age of great works and new wonders.At the outset I should like warmly to congratulate
you, Sir, on your election to the presidency of the current
session of the General Assembly. I am convinced that given
your proven talent and extensive experience, and with the
cooperation of all delegations, you will steer our session to
full success. I also wish to express my sincere thanks to
your predecessor, Mr. Stoyan Ganev, for his remarkable
accomplishments during the last session. I would like to
take this opportunity to extend a warm welcome and
congratulations to the new Members which have been
admitted to the United Nations this year.
The world has moved into a transitional period towards
multipolarity since the disintegration of the bipolar structure.
It had been hoped that the end of the cold war would bring
peace and prosperity to the world. Indeed, the prospects of
avoiding another world war and ensuring a lasting peace
have improved. However, contradictions that had lain
dormant during the cold war have begun to emerge, and
manifestations of hegemonism and power politics in
international relations are on the rise. Peace and development, so ardently aspired to by mankind, still face grave
challenges.
The relative stability Europe once enjoyed has been
upset. Many countries are plagued by severe economic
slumps or by political upheaval. Some regions are torn by
ethnic or religious feuds exacerbated by territorial disputes,
leading to intermittent conflicts and armed clashes. A
regional war is raging at the southern end of the Eurasian
land mass. All this can only have a negative impact on
Europe and on the world at large.
In the meantime, a number of developed countries have
developed a "post-cold-war syndrome". Some have sunk
into the longest recession since the Second World War. In
the new setting, internal contradictions have sharpened,
political scandals are rife, racism has reared its ugly head,
trade protectionism is on the rise, and xenophobic violence
is spreading. Public disaffection has been manifest, and the
entrenched political establishment has been shaken. This
trend has adversely affected the stability of the countries
concerned and complicated international relations.
The new international environment has led to an even
more dire plight for many developing countries. Increasing
foreign intervention has heightened various internal factors
of instability, thus compounding their difficulties. Their
rights to independence, subsistence and development have
been neither duly respected nor safeguarded. Therefore,
interference from the outside should cease, and the
international community should give top priority to helping
those countries achieve political stability and overcome
economic difficulties. Lasting world peace and stability will
remain elusive if the developing countries are still beset by
persistent political unrest and if the North-South gap
continues to widen.
There is no denying the fact that peace and
development remain the overriding issues of our time. To
preserve peace and accelerate development has become the
pressing demand of the people of all countries, but especially
of those in the developing countries.
The world we live in is as diversified as ever. There
are now more than 180 independent sovereign States, which
differ not only in social systems but also in stages of
development. Moreover, they have widely diverse
ideologies, cultural traditions, ethnic identities and religious
faiths. We should recognize and respect those differences
and diversities, and treat each other as equal members of the
international community. We should promote interchanges
in the spirit of seeking common ground while setting aside
differences. We should oppose any attempt to impose a
particular model on large numbers of countries, as diverse as
they are.
We believe that there can be genuine peace,
international harmony and common development among
States only when international relations strictly conform to
the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter
and are based on the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence
and other accepted norms of international conduct.
Increased economic and cultural interchanges between States
have deepened their interdependence. It is absolutely
necessary that States open up to each other; enhance
exchanges, mutual understanding and cooperation; and share
the benefit of complementarity. But all this will be possible
only on the basis of mutual respect, equality and mutual
benefit.
In order to attain the overall objective of peace and
development, the Chinese Government has on many
occasions called for the establishment of a new international
political and economic order of peace, stability, justice and
rationality based on the Five Principles of Peaceful
Forty-eighth session - 29 September l993 19
Coexistence and on the recognition of the diversity of the
world and of the differences among States. Under the new
order, mutual respect and cooperation between States on an
equal footing will replace hegemonism and power politics;
peace talks, dialogue and consultations will replace the use
or threat of force; and equality, mutual benefit and
accommodation of each other’s needs will replace trade
protectionism and unequal exchanges. The Chinese
Government is ready to cooperate extensively with all other
countries and will continue to make unremitting efforts for
the establishment of such a new order, and for peace and
development of the world.
The report "An Agenda for Peace" (A/47/277)
submitted by the Secretary-General contains many important,
thought-provokinq recommendations and ideas that deserve
careful consideration. We commend the Secretary-General
for his efforts therein. As a permanent member of the
Security Council, China has always supported the positive
endeavours of the United Nations in preserving world peace
and stability, promoting global development and resolving
international disputes. We support the further enhancement
and strengthening of the United Nations constructive role in
preventive diplomacy, in peacemaking and peace-keeping on
the basis of the purposes and principles of the Charter.
As the frequency and scope of United Nations
peace-keeping operations is growing, we deem it important
and relevant to stress such basic principles of the Charter as
respect for the sovereignty of, and non-interference in, the
internal affairs of Member States. Those principles must be
strictly observed at all times when undertaking preventive
diplomacy, peace-keeping operations or post-conflict
peace-building. Prior consent and pledges of cooperation by
the parties must be obtained, and strict impartiality should
prevail in all peace-keeping missions. Only in this way can
United Nations preventive diplomacy and peace-keeping
operations fulfil the underlying purposes of the Charter and
achieve the desired positive result.
The peaceful settlement of international disputes is an
important principle of the Charter, one which we deem to be
the essence of preventive diplomacy. Everything should be
done to bring the opposing parties to the negotiating table
before the outbreak of conflicts, so that they can start
consultations to achieve a peaceful settlement. All disputes
between States, regional conflicts or even internal conflicts,
however complex they may be, should be amenable to a
political solution, and nothing should be done to aggravate
the situation.
Not long ago, the Palestine Liberation Organization and
the Government of Israel signed an agreement on mutual
recognition and on the question of self-government for
Palestinians. Although just a beginning, the move was a
major breakthrough in the settlement of the Middle East
question, which has dragged on for nearly half a century.
This agreement was the result of efforts by the international
community and by both Palestine and Israel to settle an
international dispute by peaceful means. We sincerely
welcome and wish to express our congratulations at this
development. We can see from this that as long as a
glimmer of hope remains, one must not give up the pursuit
of a peaceful settlement.
Needless to say, one should adopt a very serious
attitude towards, and firmly oppose, any act of aggression
that tramples on the sovereignty of another country, such as
larger States bullying smaller ones or the strong lording it
over the weak in the international arena. We disapprove of
the indiscriminate use of sanctions or force in the name of
the United Nations. We also believe that humanitarian
missions must not be transformed into military operations
and that a war cannot be stopped by
expanding it.
It must be noted that in a world troubled by recurrent
regional conflicts and interwoven contradictions, the United
Nations alone cannot hope to resolve all international
disputes. It has the duty to undertake this task and
maintain international peace and security. But regional
organizations should also be taken into account and
encouraged, as provided in Chapter VIII of the Charter, to
assume greater responsibility and play a more active role in
this regard. In view of the proliferation of United Nations
peace-keeping operations and the concomitant demands on
the Organization and Member States in terms of manpower,
finance and material resources, we deem it essential that the
United Nations act within the limits of its means and
enhance the cost-effectiveness of such operations.
Peace and development are inseparable. Economic
development cannot get off the ground without the
prerequisites of peace and stability. On the other hand,
unless there is sound economic development, there can
hardly be secure or enduring peace and stability. We
maintain that the United Nations should meet the demands
of the developing countries for social and economic
advancement and should give this very high priority. This
is the way to make the United Nations an Organization that
all the countries of the world will support and count on.
This is also the way to enhance further the role and prestige
of the United Nations. Proceeding from this consideration,
20 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
we in China have stepped up preparations for the fourth
World Conference on Women in Beijing, scheduled for
1995. We also give vigorous support to the convening of
the World Summit for Social Development in Copenhagen
the same year.
It must be pointed out that unless the international
community helps the developing countries break loose
quickly from poverty and backwardness, there can be no
sustained growth or prosperity for all. Hence, we call upon
the developed countries to do more to curb trade
protectionism, contribute more funds for development and
environmental protection, cut back debt burden, increase
official development assistance, reduce restrictions on
technology transfer and open their markets wider so as to
create a favourable environment for the economic recovery
and revitalization of the developing countries. This will
prove a boon to the developed countries themselves. At a
time when the world economy has become increasingly
interrelated, the revitalization of the developing countries
will be a boost to the world and will spur to the economic
recovery and growth of the developed countries.
Since the founding of the United Nations, tremendous
changes have taken place in the world and in the
Organization itself. United Nations membership has
increased from the original 51 to 184 now, the majority
being developing countries. The Chinese Government is of
the view that, in keeping with developments, the United
Nations should be restructured, and the composition of the
Security Council could be appropriately enlarged to enable
the Organization better to respond to the changes in the
world, meet the concerns and wishes of the membership and
enhance its own role in international affairs. Reform of the
Security Council should enable it better to discharge its
mandate in accordance with the purposes and principles of
the Charter. It is the collective will and common aspiration
of the membership that in the new circumstances the United
Nations should be better equipped to address major
international issues vigorously and effectively and in a fair
and balanced manner. Therefore, the reform of the Security
Council and other United Nations organs should take due
account of the principle of equitable geographical
distribution and should accommodate the interests of the
developing countries which make up the overwhelming
majority of the membership. Since any reform would affect
the interests of all Member States and involve a revision of
the Charter, views from all quarters must be heard. The
reform plan should undergo extensive discussions and
consultations by the membership and should be generally
acceptable to all.
The Chinese Government has stated on many occasions
that China stands for the non-proliferation of all weapons of
mass destruction. At the same time we hold that the
ultimate objective of mankind should be the complete
prohibition and thorough destruction of those weapons. Now
that the Conventions banning biological and chemical
weapons have been concluded, we deem it high time that the
complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear
weapons were put on the agenda.
The international community has expressed concern
over the issue of a nuclear-test ban. The Chinese
Government has always stood for a total test ban within the
framework of the complete prohibition and thorough
destruction of nuclear weapons. We support an early start
to negotiations for a comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty
and will work in common with other countries towards a
comprehensive nuclear-test ban at an early date.
China has always exercised great restraint in nuclear
testing. The number of our tests is the smallest among all
nuclear Powers. While a nuclear test ban is necessary, to
undertake not to use nuclear weapons at all is far more
crucial, because this will not only make their testing,
development, production or deployment devoid of any
meaning, but will give great impetus to nuclear disarmament,
which will contribute tremendously to world peace and
security. If, however, complete prohibition and thorough
destruction of nuclear weapons cannot be achieved soon
enough, then let the nuclear Powers reach an agreement not
to be the first to use nuclear weapons and not to use them
against non-nuclear-weapon States or nuclear-free zones.
This is entirely feasible and should be done as soon as
possible. This will put nuclear Powers to the test to see
whether they are genuinely willing to treat non-nuclearweapon States as equals. China long ago unilaterally undertook not to be the first to use nuclear weapons at any time
or under any circumstances, and not to use or threaten to use
them against any nuclear-free zone or non-nuclear-weapon
State. We call upon all the other nuclear Powers to make
the same pledge and conclude an international convention to
this effect as soon as possible.
Now there are international arrangements and
conventions that are designed to control arms transfers and
ban certain types of weapons of mass destruction. Such
conventions are aimed at maintaining international and
regional peace, security and stability. The arrangements
designed to control transfers of missile technology should
also take into account such elements as the arbitrary use of
missiles for attacks on other countries. Otherwise, such an
arrangement will become a means by which certain Powers
Forty-eighth session - 29 September l993 21
can maintain military superiority or play power politics. That
is morally unjustifiable. We oppose the all-too-frequent
arbitrary use of sanctions by one country to bring pressure
to bear on another under the pretext of controlling arms
transfers while engaging in massive arms sales of one’s own
which jeopardize the sovereignty and security of the country
concerned. We also denounce the hegemonic conduct of a
self-styled "world cop" that tramples upon international law
and norms of international relations by endangering another
country’s navigational safety and normal trading under the
pretext of enforcing the ban on chemical weapons and in
disregard of the provisions of the relevant international
conventions.
Thanks to the policy of reform and opening to the
world, China’s economy has expanded considerably over the
past 15 years and is now in high gear. Our gross national
product rose 12.8 per cent last year, and the current year’s
growth rate will again be in double digits. Our foreign trade
and economic cooperation have been expanding rapidly.
Total trade volume in 1992 was a 5.2-fold increase over
1978, the year before the start of the reform and opening-up,
and represents an annual growth rate of 13.9 per cent.
Investments from overseas have flowed in rapidly. Nearly
50,000 overseas-funded projects involving $58 billion were
approved in 1992. The momentum has continued into the
current year. High-speed growth has helped basically solve
the problem of feeding and clothing a population of over 1.1
billion and put China on the road towards prosperity. It has
also boosted economic exchanges and cooperation with other
countries. This is good for both China and the world.
But we have encountered some problems as our
economy has picked up speed. These problems will be
resolved by accelerating and deepening our reform. We
have taken a number of measures to strengthen
macro-control and readjust the economic structure to ensure
healthy, rapid and steady economic growth. We are fully
capable of attaining our objective. We are full of confidence
in the future of our development programme.
It is an objective reality that China has indeed achieved
impressive economic success. But it does not tally with the
facts to exaggerate our economic strength. Given China’s
vast land area, huge population and uneven economic
development in different parts of the country, our per capita
gross national product is still quite low. Ours is still a
developing country. It will require several generations
working very hard for many decades before we can attain
the level of an average developed country.
At this juncture, I would like to draw attention to
assertions recently bruited about on the international scene:
that China’s economic success would entail a military
build-up, or that China would move to "fill up the vacuum",
thus constituting a threat, and so on and so forth. This is
utterly groundless. A China with a burgeoning economy is
an important factor contributing to the economic well-being
of Asia and the world at large. The Chinese people had
long suffered under imperialist aggression, and it regained
independence only after horrible sacrifices in countless grim
struggles spanning more than a century. Nothing can make
us forget the episodes of our history when our country was
subjected to foreign aggression, dismemberment and
enslavement. Our ancient sage Confucius, that great thinker
and statesman, admonished: "Do not do unto others what
you would not like others to do unto you".
Even when China becomes more developed, we will
never engage in aggression or expansionism; nor will we
ever seek hegemony. This is a pledge which has been
enshrined in our Constitution and which has become part of
our consistent and firm basic State policy. It has been borne
out by facts that China is a staunch force for world peace
and stability. Our limited defence capability is solely for
self-defence purposes. Many of our military industrial plants
have been converted to civilian production. Our military
expenditures are the lowest among the major countries. We
have neither troops nor military bases on foreign territory.
We are immersed in economic construction. Therefore, we
need an international environment of enduring peace as well
as long-term amicable relations with our neighbours. We are
ready to cultivate and strengthen similar relationships with
all other countries on the basis of the five principles of
peaceful coexistence.
No matter how the wind may change its direction on
the world scene, China will unswervingly play its part in
preserving world peace and promoting common prosperity
and development.
 Please accept my warm
congratulations, Sir, on your election as President of the
General Assembly at its forty-eighth session. I wish you
luck and success in your high office. At the same time, I
extend a cordial welcome to the new Members of our
Organization.
Addressing the Assembly 20 years ago, Willy Brandt
said that the Federal Republic of Germany’s purpose in
joining the United Nations was to help serve the cause of
world peace. That has always been, and will remain, the
fundamental aim of German foreign policy. At that time, in
a bipolar world, Germany was divided. In that year, 1973,
the October war broke out in the Middle East. In South
Africa the inhuman apartheid regime was dominant. Today
my country is united in peace and harmony with our
neighbours. Today we can congratulate Israel, the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO) and neighbouring Arab
countries on a historic breakthrough. Today the policy of
apartheid has been overcome. Without the resolve to seek
peace, these developments would not have been possible.
World peace, which appears to have come closer as
bipolarity has receded, must not remain an unfulfilled vision.
The international community’s desire for peace led to the
founding of the United Nations after the Second World War.
It remains our moral and political obligation to fulfil that
legacy. There can be no more important task. In the quest
for peace we are faced with a new challenge and a new
danger, but we also have a historic opportunity.
We are faced with the great challenge of overcoming
hunger and poverty around the world, of preserving the
natural sources of life, and of creating the foundations for a
long-term global population policy. When people have to
leave their native lands, when human rights are violated,
there can be no peace. Peace is not merely the silence of
guns. Hence, economic and social challenges must be very
high on the global agenda. The world is deeply unjust. The
distribution of mankind’s opportunities is woefully unequal.
This we should not tolerate.
The danger confronting us is that peace in many parts
of the world is threatened by new conflicts, especially those
of an ethnic nature. The continuing proliferation of modern
weapons and weapon technology increases the destructive
potential of these conflicts.
Our opportunity, after the end of the East-West
confrontation, is to develop the United Nations into what its
founding fathers intended it to be: the principal guardian of
peace. In performing that role the United Nations must have
the support of the numerous other international organizations
that are functioning successfully today.
I truly believe that we can master the economic,
ecological and social challenges and overcome the danger of
a relapse into a confrontation of States, peoples, cultures and
religions only if we resolutely seize the historic opportunity
to strengthen the global multilateral system and the United
Nations.
Today no country alone can cope with global
challenges. Hence we must counteract nationalism with
multilateralism. German foreign policy is aimed at
strengthening the multilateral world order. It is committed
to the goal of European integration. Its purpose is to
harmonize and create a fair balance of interests. German
foreign policy is therefore a policy within, in support of, and
together with the United Nations.
I agree with the Secretary-General: Peace can only be
preserved if we strike at the roots of conflict. His proposed
agenda for development must go hand-in-hand with "An
Agenda for Peace". Misery, starvation and poverty are still
the overriding problem in many countries.
At the eighth session of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development and at the Rio Conference, the
developing and industrial countries agreed on a
comprehensive partnership for promoting development and
protecting the environment. For that partnership to be
successful both sides, North and South, must contribute their
share. By carrying out economic and political reforms,
making more efficient use of their funds and cutting military
expenditure, and ensuring greater democratic control and
respect for the rule of law, many developing countries have
embarked on the right course. The World Summit for Social
Development, scheduled to take place in Copenhagen in
14 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
1995, must be a forum for dialogue on the social issues
re-emerging all over the world.
The industrial countries have undertaken to support the
efforts of the developing countries by improving the general
conditions for world trade in a spirit of solidarity. Such
assistance can never be more than help towards self-help.
What is required is more entrepreneurial cooperation with
developing countries, more direct investment, improved
cooperation in the field of technology, the opening of
markets and the elimination of trade barriers. The Uruguay
Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(GATT) must at long last establish reliable rules for free
trade and be brought to a conclusion by December 15.
Germany, one of the leading trading nations, is committed
to these goals. If new trading blocs were to form, with the
attendant conflicting interests, new political confrontations
would soon follow. Protectionism would be the worst
outcome.
The global economy is in the throes of a fundamental
structural change. International competition is becoming
more intense. Many highly industrialized societies are
confronted with fresh challenges. Unemployment and
sluggish growth are unexpectedly severe burdens on their
productive capacity, both domestically and externally. On
the other hand, the trend towards a single world economy
opens up the first opportunity for billions of people to offer
their products in all markets.
All of us, industrial and developing countries alike,
must make peace with nature. The United Nations is called
upon to protect the natural foundations of life. I propose
that the United Nations develop an early-warning system for
environmental disasters. The momentum of the United
Nations Conference on Environment and Development must
be maintained. My country is ready for comprehensive
cooperation. Germany can make a special contribution,
particularly as regards the transfer of environment-friendly
technologies.
The population explosion is a threat to the planet’s
equilibrium. Whereas in the eighteenth century the world
population increased by a quarter of a billion in 75 years, it
is now increasing by this number every three years. Most
of this increase is taking place in countries whose economic
and ecological resources are already strained to the limit.
Family planning must be enhanced, the poverty gap reduced,
and education and knowledge disseminated among women
and men alike. A successful International Conference on
Population and Development, to be held in Cairo next year,
is therefore mandatory.
Respect for human rights is a universal obligation. It
is a focal point of German foreign policy. Human rights and
the protection of minorities belong together. Racism,
cultural arrogance and the delusion of wanting to create
"ethnically clean" areas constitute a threat to peace.
Yugoslavia is a terrible example of this. Where civic,
economic, cultural and religious rights of minorities are
concerned, the majority may not rule by fiat.
The Declaration and Programme of Action of the
Vienna World Conference on Human Rights represent the
consensus opinion of the community of nations. They
reaffirm the universal validity of the human rights. Now it
is important to seek rapid implementation. I wish to
mention five specific points:
Firstly, my country has long advocated the appointment
of a high commissioner for human rights. He should be
authorized to take steps on his own initiative to protect
human rights and to give active support to those countries
seeking to improve the human rights situation.
Secondly, we need an international criminal court. The
International Law Commission has submitted a full draft
statute for such a court. The pressure on those who trample
human rights under foot must be increased now. Those who
torture on this Earth must live in fear of punishment.
Thirdly, in order to prosecute speedily those who are
responsible for the ghastly violations of human rights in the
former Yugoslavia, the Security Council has set up an ad
hoc Tribunal. The elected judges must now begin their work
right away. A chief prosecutor should be appointed without
delay.
Fourthly, the non-governmental organizations have
become part of the world’s conscience and therefore have an
increasingly important role to play in the defence of human
rights.
Finally, the instruments for ensuring respect for human
rights must be given a higher priority in the United Nations
budget.
The crisis in the former Yugoslavia, and especially the
war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, is one of the most
depressing episodes of our time. A Member of the United
Nations has fallen victim to a war of conquest accompanied
by genocide and mass expulsions. For the first time since
the Second World War, frontiers in Europe are being
redrawn by force of arms. The principles of the United
Nations have been treated with contempt. The credibility of
Forty-eighth session - 29 September l993 15
our institutions - indeed the credibility of the United Nations
itself - is being put to the test.
If the fighting continues, the winter will prove to be an
awful disaster for the suffering people. It must therefore be
stopped as quickly as possible and steps taken to ensure that
humanitarian aid is provided. We therefore support the
Geneva efforts to settle the conflict, in spite of doubts about
the current plan, and we express special thanks to the
Co-Chairmen, Lord Owen and Thorvald Stoltenberg, for the
difficult job they are doing.
A settlement now seems within reach, but it must be
accepted by all parties to the conflict. No party must impose
its will on another. The Bosnian Muslims must be given
viable territory. We need an assurance that the community
of nations will be resolutely and actively involved in the
implementation of a settlement.
We cannot tolerate a situation in which the Muslims,
who have lived in Europe for centuries, would have fewer
rights than their Christian neighbours. Through preventive
measures we must ensure that the tragedy of this war does
not spill over into neighbouring regions. What is now
required is proposals for controlled disarmament in the
region. This is a task for the Conference on Security and
Cooperation in Europe (CSCE).
After decades of war and bitter antagonism, the Middle
East is experiencing a historic breakthrough towards peace.
We all want the peace process to become irreversible.
Germany and its partners in the European Community have
undertaken to provide political, economic and particularly
financial support. They have earmarked about a billion
deutschemarks for this purpose.
I should like to express my respect for both sides for
their political courage and their will for peace. I call upon
those who still hesitate to help sustain the peace process. I
appeal to all to renounce the use of force.
The continuing proliferation of arms in many parts of
the world is still highly disturbing. President Clinton’s
proposals have our support. Encouraging progress has been
achieved in the form of the Convention placing a global ban
on chemical weapons and of the agreement reached on a
mandate for negotiations in the Geneva Conference on
Disarmament with a view to a comprehensive test-ban treaty.
The test moratorium must be extended. There must be no
further testing.
The nuclear and non-nuclear Powers alike are urged to
consolidate the non-proliferation regime. When the matter
comes up for decision in 1995, the Non-Proliferation Treaty
must be extended indefinitely. As the representative of a
country which many years ago unilaterally and bindingly
renounced the possession of nuclear weapons and other
means of mass destruction, I appeal to all Members: accede
to the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
The laying of mines in large regions in many countries
has become a scourge for the population. It prevents the
return of refugees and the resumption of farming.
Thousands have been killed or horribly mutilated. It must
be stopped. The European Community has, with our
support, seized the initiative. We need a fund to finance
mine detection and disposal operations.
My country’s European anchorage is indispensable on
both political and economic grounds. My Belgian colleague,
Willy Claes, has already explained the position of the 12
members of the European Community.
Stability in Europe cannot remain a privilege of the
Western nations. The peoples of the reformist countries
fought for their freedom and we encouraged them to do so.
We shall not abandon them now. We must gradually open
the road to the Euro-Atlantic institutions for the countries of
Central and Eastern Europe. Those institutions include the
European Community and the Council of Europe as well as
the Western European Union and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO). I am expecting a clear message from
the NATO summit - which is to take place at the beginning
of 1994 - like the one that came from the European
Community summit meeting in Copenhagen. In this process,
no new ruptures must emerge. A lasting peaceful order in
Europe is not feasible without including Russia.
Over the last four years Germany has made a greater
financial effort than any other nation to help the reformist
countries on their road to democracy, the rule of law and a
free market economy. This assistance, too, is a major
contribution to conflict-prevention and the safeguarding of
peace. In the present critical phase, Russia’s friends and
partners - who include the Germans in particular - must
continue to provide political and economic support for
President Yeltsin’s reforms.
I am concerned about developments in Georgia. We
must achieve a cease-fire and work out a viable political
solution. This is a task for the United Nations in particular.
16 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
The desire for peace makes it imperative for all
countries to seek closer regional cooperation.We support
intra-Africa efforts to resolve conflicts and welcome the
stronger commitment on the part of the Organization of
African Unity.
We are gratified by the democratic changes to be
observed in Latin America in recent years. Nearly
everywhere democracy and free-market principles have
asserted themselves and sources of conflict have, thank God,
been eliminated.
The Association of South-East Asian Nations has
become an important instrument for cooperation in the
Asia-Pacific region. European-Asian cooperation must be
intensified.
"An Agenda for Peace" has become the lodestone for
the world Organization’s further development. I wish to
take this opportunity, Mr. Secretary-General, to express my
thanks for your commitment. The Security Council and the
General Assembly have constructively taken up the Agenda’s
proposals. However, conflict prevention must begin at an
early stage. Preventing fires is better than having to put
them out. We must focus our energy on the possibilities of
preventive diplomacy, confidence-building measures,
fact-finding and the early detection of conflicts.
The CSCE must back the United Nations within its
sphere of jurisdiction. The relations between the two
organizations have been intensified. The CSCE should be
given wider scope for conflict prevention and crisis
management.
In wars and crises, the Blue Helmets have helped to
protect the civilian population, to prevent the spread of
warfare and to initiate the transition to democracy. Some
80,000 troops from more than 70 countries are engaged in
17 peace-keeping missions around the world. They and the
United Nations Secretariat’s Department of Peace-keeping
Operations deserve our thanks.
One of the most successful operations was the one in
Namibia. In Cambodia the United Nations has sponsored
free elections and restored hopes of lasting peace after
decades of terror and oppression. Of course - and it is
important to stress this - not all the hopes placed in the
United Nations can be fulfilled, and it would be wrong to
deny that difficulties have been encountered. But what
would happen without the United Nations and the Blue
Helmets? To the critics I therefore say that we need not less
but more commitment to the United Nations.
In Somalia starvation has been overcome. The
reconciliation process has been overshadowed by incidents
in which troops and civilians have been killed. These are
tragedies, but without the United Nations Operation in
Somalia, hundreds of thousands would have had to die.
Germany has been providing humanitarian aid within the
scope of this major peace-keeping operation, our largest
commitment of personnel so far within the framework of the
United Nations.
Our involvement in such operations has the backing of
the German people. There is a consensus in our country in
favour of widening our scope for contributing to peace. We
are engaged in a passionate debate over proposed
constitutional amendments which would enable Germany to
participate in all United Nations operations without
restriction.
A policy for peace also means strengthening the rule of
law as opposed to the rule of the strong. If the United
Nations is prevented from carrying out its mandate, it will
have to be in a position to authorize the Security Council to
resort to force, as provided for in Chapter VII of the Charter.
However, the use of military means should be
considered only if we have a clear political blueprint for
resolving the conflict. Force must always be the last resort.
Consequently, our contribution to the United Nations will
continue to be of a mainly political and economic nature.
Greater emphasis will have to be placed on United Nations
peace-keeping measures in view of the growing
responsibilities and demands.
First, the United Nations Secretariat’s Department of
Peace-keeping Operations must be improved logistically and
organizationally and in terms of staff. The German
Government is willing to make further experts available to
the Secretariat.
Secondly, effective crisis management presupposes the
ability to react swiftly. The Secretary-General’s initiative for
the establishment of stand-by forces has my support.
Stand-by forces should not be confined to military units but
should include civilian personnel and experts ranging from
police to election observers. But participation must always
be voluntary and be subject to the fulfilment of national
conditions.
Thirdly, enhancing the efficiency of the United Nations
presupposes a link-up of military forces. The North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) has declared its willingness to
Forty-eighth session - 29 September l993 17
make its capacities available. The same holds true for the
Western European Union (WEU).
Fourthly, in many countries military training is geared
solely to the traditional duties of the army. The specific
tasks of peace-keeping require a completely different kind of
training. The national preparation of "Blue-Helmet" forces
needs to be coordinated to a greater degree by the United
Nations. For this, common training guidelines are needed.
The United Nations should also create its own training
capacity; that is my view. Common training and exercises
are, at the same time, important steps in confidence-building.
Fifthly, peace-keeping operations require sound
financing. The responsibility for peace also includes the
prompt and complete payment of contributions by all
Members.
Humanitarian concerns have been of pivotal importance
for Germany’s involvement in United Nations activities from
the very start. In the Middle East, in Africa, in South-East
Asia, in the Gulf region, in Somalia and in former
Yugoslavia we are providing humanitarian assistance. We
have assumed responsibility for transport, medical care, the
monitoring of disarmament measures and the repatriation of
refugees. Together with our partners in the European
Community we have called for the creation of a post of
coordinator for humanitarian assistance.
Part of our humanitarian commitment is the readiness
to assist refugees from the civil war, whose situation is very
distressing. We have admitted more than 350,000 refugees
from former Yugoslavia. I urge the General Assembly to
use every opportunity to strengthen the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). Mrs.
Ogata deserves high praise for the job she is doing. More
international solidarity and burden-sharing is called for. We
must not abandon those countries which, as neighbouring or
target countries for the refugees, are particularly affected.
The aim must be to offer shelter to refugees from civil wars
or other disasters near their home countries in order to
facilitate their early return to those countries. For this we
need binding rules. I therefore propose the drafting of an
international convention to regulate large-scale refugee
movements.
Another focal point of our involvement in United
Nations activities has been what the Secretary-General refers
to in his "Agenda for Peace" as post-conflict peace-building.
Lasting peace depends on the establishment of democratic
and market-economy structures based on the rule of law.
Investment in the democratization process is an investment
in peace. My country, Germany, sees this as a priority of its
commitment to development. That is why Germany
participates in missions to observe elections, provides
economic experts, and assists in the creation of democratic
administrative, judicial and police institutions.
I should like to stress that a culture of peace is another
prerequisite for lasting peace. Not only governments but
also individual citizens must develop the will for peace if we
want to overcome racial hatred and religious conflict. A
culture of peace encompasses a dialogue between ethnic
groups as well as between religions and cultures. The
Europeans live next door to and in close contact with Islam.
We need bridges of mutual understanding, not new enemy
images. We need to promote education for peace. The
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO), with its mandate to foster relations
between nations, therefore deserves comprehensive support.
Germany advocates the strengthening of all United
Nations bodies. We do not want a never-ending discussion
on reform, but greater efficiency. We welcome the
Secretary-General’s efforts to reorganize the Secretariat.
The efforts to revitalize the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council also meet with our full
support. We would be happy if the United Nations were
better represented in Germany and have therefore made an
offer for the relocation of institutions of technical
cooperation to Bonn.
The most important decisions on security and peace are
today made in the Security Council. This is what the
Charter envisaged right from the start. Anyone who wants
peace must strengthen the Security Council.
In its response to the Secretary-General’s request, the
Federal Government has stated that efficiency and credibility
are of equal importance for the future composition of the
Security Council.
Germany is prepared to assume responsibility as a
permanent member of the Security Council also. I stated
this at the last session of the General Assembly. However,
we will be able to maintain and strengthen the credibility of
the Council only if, in deliberating on reforming it, we also
take into consideration the growing importance of the third
world.
Finally, let me state that Germany wants to be and will
be a driving force in efforts to strengthen the United
Nations. We need to achieve a basic consensus for the
important tasks ahead of us. In my view this consensus lies
18 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
in the rule of law. The law protects the weak and
legitimizes force where it is unavoidable. The law is an
expression of partnership and is opposed to tyranny and
hegemony. It is the acceptance of law that creates justice.
Only where justice reigns can peace flourish.
I
should like first to say, Mr. President, that France is pleased
to see the General Assembly meeting under your guidance
this year. Your election is just testimony to the esteem in
which the international community holds your country. It
also affords us the opportunity to welcome the "silent
revolution" that has been taking place in Latin America over
the past few years, which has put many States back on the
path of national reconciliation, democracy and economic
development.
22 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
The year which is ending will have been as rich in
promise as it has been fraught with danger. Conflicts once
thought to be insoluble suddenly seem to be on track
towards resolution. On behalf of my country, I should like
to pay tribute to the men in the Middle East, in South Africa
and in Cambodia who found the courage to take the path
towards reconciliation and peace: Yitzhak Rabin and Yasser
Arafat, F.W. de Klerk and Nelson Mandela, His Majesty
King Norodom Sihanouk and all those, known and unknown,
who accompanied or even preceded them on this courageous
path.
The agreement between Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO) opens the way to the
settlement of a conflict which some had despaired of seeing
resolved, and makes it possible to conceive of a radically
new future for the entire region. This revolution gives us
new reason to believe in human will and encourages us
never to consider the hope for peace as a chimera. From us,
it calls for collective effort, including financial effort, in
order to translate this hope into reality as soon as possible.
It also invites us to erase the aftermath of conflicts as
reflected in past resolutions of this Assembly.
But the end of what was for years called the balance of
terror has also led to new kinds of uncertainty and disorder.
Russia is going through a political and economic
transition that could lead to serious internal difficulties, as
the events of the past few days have shown. In that context,
I should like to reaffirm France’s support for the process of
democratization and reform courageously undertaken by
President Yeltsin.
In the former Yugoslavia war has been raging for two
years, with its attendant death, suffering and destruction.
Other regions in Africa, Central Asia, the Balkans and the
Caucasus are falling or could fall victim to this new type of
conflict, resulting from the break-up of States and the
resurgence of nationalist, ethnic or religious passions.
Elsewhere, States put under a sanctions regime by our
Organization for failing to comply with the obligations of
international law or with commitments they have made
persist in refusing to take the measures that would permit
them to regain their place in the international community.
Almost everywhere, the proliferation of weapons is a
fearsome factor for instability.
In the face of the promises and dangers I have just
outlined, France bases its foreign policy on a few guiding
principles. Whether they are found reassuring or disturbing,
I should like to recall them to the Assembly.
The first principle is the desire for independence.
France has amply demonstrated that it is ready to act in
concert with others where the ends are genuinely collective.
But, needless to say, it does so in complete sovereignty.
Exercising freedom of judgement and choice, France refuses
to follow the orthodoxy of the moment or to succumb to
pressures resulting from relative material strengths.
The second principle, shared by many in this Hall, is a
commitment to our fundamental interests. Like every other
State in this Organization, France has its own strategic,
commercial and cultural interests which it seeks to preserve.
While we are open to negotiation and to the mutual
concessions it implies, we cannot be made to give up
anything we consider to be an essential element of our
security, our prosperity or our culture.
The third principle is devotion to law and justice.
Beyond its own interests, France aspires to help ensure that
certain fundamental principles first inspired by France,
among others, triumph throughout the world: the right of
peoples to self-determination and security, human rights and
the right to development.
Finally, one last aspect of our diplomacy, in the service
of the others, is France’s perseverance, and at times
stubbornness. May I recall our resolve - despite obstacles -
in opening up the path that would eventually lead to the
restoration of peace in Cambodia, and our determination to
see institutional legality restored in Haiti.
These unchanging principles dictate the two main lines
of the policy which my country hopes to implement on the
international stage.
Our ambition concerns Europe first of all.
Whatever the present difficulties, whatever the
prevailing scepticism, France will not falter in its resolve to
build with its neighbours a strong, prosperous, democratic
and generous Europe, capable of making its voice heard and
of contributing to world peace. This is an irrevocable choice
for us because the peoples of Europe need a plan that brings
them together, and European unity is the only goal that
measures up to the values they share. Moreover, the
building of a united Europe is the only way to avert the
dangers threatening our continent at this time: dangers
arising from the resurgence of the most implacable forms of
nationalism and from the persistence of unacceptable
economic disparities. Europe’s success will serve as an
example for other regions of the world as did in its day the
Forty-eighth session - 29 September l993 23
reconciliation between France and Germany sought by
General de Gaulle and Chancellor Adenauer.
I have already spoken of the conflict raging in the
former Yugoslavia.
France has spared no effort to put an end to it. As you
know, France initiated most of the Security Council
resolutions designed to discourage or punish aggressors.
Together with its partners, France provides an essential part
of the humanitarian aid sent there. Its soldiers represent the
largest of the contingents made available to the United
Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR), and more than a
dozen of them have paid for their generous presence there
with their lives. It has so far been the only country to send
reinforcements in accordance with resolution 836 (1993) in
order to contribute to the security of the protected areas and
the Muslim populations there. France was, as well, the first
nation to deplore the inadequacy of the actions taken by the
international community in regard to the former Yugoslavia.
The efforts it has made entitled it to tell those who have
been free with their advice and lessons that they might be
better heard if they were agreeing, when they are able to do
so, to commit their own troops to the field. Once in contact
with the realities of the situation, they would undoubtedly
better appreciate the fact that between negotiated peace and
chaos there is no middle ground.
Let us learn the lessons of this painful experience. It
is essential for us to acquire the means to avoid the
repetition of such a conflict, and to ensure, without waiting
for future progress in the construction of a united Europe,
that preventive diplomacy, military openness and respect for
the rule of law prevail wherever latent tensions remain. This
is the intent of the proposed pact on European stability
which France has submitted to its European partners and to
which it would like to associate Russia, as well as its allies
across the Atlantic, Canada and the United States.
Europe is, of course, far from being the sole horizon of
France’s action. My country has long-standing, close
relations with many parts of the world. For the long-term
organization of the international scene in the aftermath of the
cold war, France naturally turns to the United Nations.
Because it believes in the mission of the United
Nations, France wants a strong and effective Organization.
This goal involves, first of all, the reforming of the
Security Council. Its enlargement, which has become
necessary today in the light of the world’s evolution, must
be envisioned as the way to increase its effectiveness.
France understands and supports the aspirations of some
of its partners to exercise their international responsibilities
more actively, provided that they are ready to commit
themselves in the field. However, the expansion of the
Council should not be achieved at the expense of one or
another group of States; in particular, it must preserve the
capacity of the developing countries to make their voices
heard. In our view, this is an essential requirement.
In their wisdom, those who drafted the Charter
recognized that only a group of limited size could take
prompt measures to restore peace when confronted with an
urgent crisis. We should therefore take care that the
projected enlargement does not lead to a paralysis of the
Council.
France hopes that at its present session the General
Assembly will decide to open discussions on ways to reform
the Security Council. A solution will have to be found that
reconciles the will to reform with the desire for
effectiveness. This is why enlargement, in our view, will
have to be decided according to a formula combining new
permanent members and additional non-permanent members.
The Secretary-General is a key institution of the United
Nations. France would like him to be given the means to
carry through the innovative action he has undertaken.
Allow me to pay a tribute to the energy, authority and
courage with which our Secretary-General is carrying out his
missions.
France approves not only of his political initiatives but
also of his tireless efforts to rationalize the functioning of
our Organization. We must combat the proliferation of
institutions, which consumes our resources and threatens the
coherence of our efforts. We must improve the coordination
of activities linked to development and restore to the
Economic and Social Council its role as a provider of
stimulus and organization. We must combat administrative
waste wherever it exists, without hesitating to punish any
abuses that may be uncovered. Lastly, we must have more
supervision and greater transparency in peace-keeping
operations.
The Secretary-General still does not have all the means
to exercise his responsibility to the full. France calls on the
Member States to provide him with those means without
delay. Strengthening the Department of Peace-keeping
Operations, establishing a mechanism for a true general
inspection, and setting up a court for budgetary discipline
are, in our eyes, indispensable measures.
24 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
The third requirement for strengthening the
Organization is a clean-up of its finances.
Perhaps I should have begun with this point.
According to an old French saying, money is "the sinew of
war". It is also the sinew of peace. Our projects for this
Organization will be no more than empty words unless we
have the courage to adopt the new measures that its financial
bankruptcy requires.
First, Member States which do not pay their
contributions within 30 days following the
Secretary-General’s call for contributions should be
penalized. France proposes that market-rate interest should
be imposed on all late payments. This firm stance seems
particularly necessary because the payment of accumulated
arrears alone would suffice to resolve the financial crisis. It
is also consistent with considerations of fairness and political
morality. One cannot simultaneously speak of United
Nations reform, justice and international development and
exempt oneself from the primary financial obligation
resulting from adherence to our Charter. It is high time to
measure the generosity of words against the yardstick of
arrears due our Organization.
The establishment of a mechanism for a true general
inspection will, as I have said, make it possible to rationalize
the functioning and costs of the United Nations. France will
support all initiatives to supplement the existing procedures
of internal assessment, which have already shown their
limitations despite the judicious reorganization recently
introduced by the Secretary-General.
Lastly, we must adopt an exemplary budget for the
1994-1995 period. We must not hesitate to reduce
expenditures for obsolete activities. We will also have to
provide sufficient funding for the new mandates entrusted to
the Organization. If, from that, it is necessary to consider a
reasonable increase in the ordinary budget, France, which
has never espoused a dogmatic idea of zero growth, will
readily accept this.
These are concrete measures. They require a collective
effort on the part of Member States. But France is
convinced that we can no longer be satisfied, as in previous
years, with marginal adjustments. The very ability of the
United Nations to carry out its mandate is at stake.
France, as you will have realized, is ambitious for the
United Nations. With the support of renovated institutions
and reorganized financing, the United Nations will be able
to meet the great responsibilities incumbent on it: to preserve
peace and collective security, to promote development and
to address global problems whose international scale
removes them from the individual action of States.
Peace is of course the first of our responsibilities.
The present instability in several parts of the world
compels the United Nations to intervene more and more
frequently in order to check the spread of conflicts and allow
a negotiated solution to be sought. France, for its part, has
wished to participate fully in this effort and is today in the
front rank of States participating in peace-keeping
operations.
This commitment obviously does not confer any
privilege on us. But our experience enables us to cast a lucid
eye over the operations in which we have participated and
encourages us to reaffirm certain principles and to propose
certain common-sense measures that might help increase the
future effectiveness of our action.
First, greater political control is needed over operations
that have become increasingly complex. Purely military
considerations should never thwart - or even obscure -
political ends. Naturally, regional or defence organizations
may make useful contributions in terms of expertise,
personnel or matériel. But the use of force presupposes that
the guardian of the law - that is, the Security Council -
exercises its authority in the name of the international
community. This it cannot relinquish. That is why France
insisted that the Secretary-General’s Special Representative
to the former Yugoslavia should have authority over all
operations under international mandate. It is important, it
seems to me, that we should maintain this requirement at all
times. By the same token, France insists that the political
ends of the operation in Somalia should not be lost sight of.
Next, we should systematically consider the question of
the timetable of operations.
As a matter of principle, time-frames should be
explicitly assigned to each operation in the actual resolution
that institutes it. It is also important to know when to
terminate operations that go on and on, needlessly dipping
into the means of the Organization and its Member States.
France fully supports the Secretary-General’s efforts on this
score.
Lastly, we must expand the capacity of the
Organization to react. The time that elapses between our
decision to create a force and the implementation of that
decision is far too long. How many weeks did we have to
Forty-eighth session - 29 September l993 25
wait before the air power authorized by resolution
836 (1993) on Bosnia was eventually deployed? And how
many weeks for the ground reinforcements that had been
announced to reach Sarajevo?
We cannot but note that the current procedures do not
meet the criteria for rapid reaction and flexible use which
are called for in this area.
France does not, however, believe that the Organization
should have its own force. On the other hand, it has
participated in discussions organized by the
Secretariat-General on the concept of stand-by units. These
discussions have resulted in original proposals for "tailormade" forces for the United Nations. In this way, the
Organization could have at its disposal support, transport and
communications capabilities which it currently lacks for
carrying out military actions speedily.
France, which has already offered, in a statement made
by the President of the French Republic, to make available
to the Secretary-General a 1,000-strong contingent for peacekeeping operations at 48 hours’ notice, will take part in this
effort.
These measures will have another advantage. They will
add an extra degree of effectiveness to preventive diplomacy,
which has to be central to the ambitions we have for the
Organization. This policy requires us to develop and put in
place mechanisms for crisis alert, evaluation and prevention.
Several ideas were put forward in the "Agenda for
Peace" - they included use of fact-finding missions and the
effective deployment of United Nations forces - and have
already been applied to certain difficult situations in Africa,
Central Asia and the Balkans.
In this spirit, the United Kingdom and France are ready
to submit to the Secretary-General proposals for compiling
a list of prominent individuals who could intervene promptly
at his request, in liaison with appropriate regional
organizations, and provide them with equipment -
specifically in the communications field - necessary for
carrying out their mission completely.
It is through concrete initiatives of this sort, which may
seem modest at first, that preventive diplomacy will
gradually assume its rightful place in the maintenance of
peace.
The effort made in relation to disarmament in the past
few years, finally, should continue.
Considerable progress has already been made with the
reduction of stockpiles from the cold-war era. But a new
priority is becoming evident: the struggle against the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. To attain this
goal, we must be extremely vigilant in the threefold domain
of nuclear weapons, chemical weapons and ballistic
technologies.
In this light, France welcomes the signing in Paris by
nearly 150 States of the Convention banning chemical
weapons, the first real multilateral disarmament pact of
general scope, and calls on the States which have not yet
ratified this Convention to do so. It supports the efforts
being made by several groups of countries to institute
systems of control of missile technology, nuclear exports and
the sale of so-called sensitive products.
France asks, finally, that the non-proliferation regimes
be strengthened. It reaffirms in particular its desire to see
the Non-Proliferation Treaty prolonged indefinitely and
unconditionally. It continues to believe that it is only the
Security Council that can decide on sanctions against
irresponsible behaviour. This would be the case if North
Korea were to fail to respect its commitments to the
International Atomic Energy Agency.
What guarantees can be given for collective security
and peace if nothing is done to try to resolve the economic
and social disparities that are so often the source of conflict?
We know that there can be no lasting peace without lasting
economic development. That is why the "Agenda for Peace"
unquestionably requires also an "agenda for development".
France, as is known, has consistently spoken for the
interests of the developing countries, particularly the least
developed, in discussion with its industrialized partners. It
has tirelessly pleaded - sometimes as a voice crying in the
wilderness - for a substantial increase in the level of official
development assistance in order to permit these countries to
enjoy trade advantages without reciprocity, to ease their debt
burden and stabilize raw-material prices. Our resolve in this
matter will not weaken: how can we accept, for example, a
situation in which every year the African countries pay the
World Bank more than they receive from it?
Nor can we accept the persistence, and sometimes the
worsening, of the most glaring situations of distress. France
has not forgotten the depth of the crisis in sub-Saharan
Africa, with which it has so many ties. It believes it is
26 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
essential that the basic achievements of cooperation between
the European Community and the African, Caribbean and
Pacific countries, should be maintained, especially with
regard to trade.
Lastly, our third ambition for the United Nations
concerns the vast issue of societal questions, linked naturally
to the requirements of development but distinct from it.
The protection of human rights, the preservation of the
environment, aid to refugees, the struggle against full-scale
epidemics, organized crime and drug trafficking all have a
worldwide dimension. The Organization must address these
problems with the same energy it expends in the search for
peace and the promotion of development.
Several important dates lie ahead of us. Let us apply
without delay the recommendations unanimously adopted at
the Vienna Conference on Human Rights, particularly the
creation of a post of high commissioner for human rights.
Let us prepare for the conferences in Cairo and Beijing and
the social development summit in Copenhagen with all the
necessary determination, so as to reinforce the cooperation
required in addressing demographic problems, the promotion
of women’s rights and the demands for social development.
Great epidemics have always been a threat to the
world’s nations. But the need for full-scale international
mobilization is becoming particularly acute in the case of
AIDS in view of the havoc of all kinds caused by the spread
of this malady. I earnestly hope that, as we approach the
second decade of this struggle, the coherence of United
Nations action, and that of its specialized agencies and of all
States and interested organizations, will be equal to this new
challenge. In this context, France proposes the convening of
a conference next year to bring together the main contributor
countries in the war against this scourge in order to improve
coordination of their efforts and give them a new impetus.
In most cases, these phenomena are not new. However,
the challenge they pose to our societies, in the North and in
the South, is of unprecedented seriousness. They affect
underdevelopment as much as they do the excesses of the
consumer society, and our traditional responses are proving
to be inadequate or ineffective. We need new ideas in this
area. The Secretary-General should have broad power to
take initiatives and make proposals in this matter. France
therefore suggests the formation of a group of prominent
figures chosen for their intellectual and scientific abilities
and moral influence to assist him in this vital task at the end
of our century.
Forty-eighth session - 29 September l993 27
Setting forth such ambitions for the United Nations
might have made the sceptics smile a few years ago. With
the end of the cold war the international community has a
historic opportunity: no longer to dismiss problems but
perhaps to solve them; no longer to limit conflicts but
perhaps to settle them.
Let us remain clear-sighted. This period could be
merely a brief interlude. If we were to hesitate, would it be
long before peoples succumbed to their basest inclinations,
cast off the rules of international law or put themselves - in
the best of cases - under the sole protection of regional,
competing and potentially hostile solidarities?
We do not have unlimited time. It is therefore our duty
to undertake without delay the reforms required to strengthen
our Organization and to realize its new objectives.
I should like to assure the Assembly that in the pursuit
of these twin goals, the United Nations can count on
France’s firm resolve.
Mr. President, may I
first of all congratulate you on your election, and on the
dignified and effective way in which you are already
presiding over this Assembly. You have a burdensome job
and we wish you all good fortune as you discharge it.
I have sometimes heard speakers from this rostrum
patrol the world in their speeches in the general debate,
dealing at length with one continent after another. Indeed,
I have done so myself in past years. There is much to
describe: events in the Middle East and South Africa are
particularly encouraging, and developments in Russia, as we
have just heard from Mr. Kozirev, are particularly important.
But today it seems to me that in the time available, the focus
of interest should not only be on distant events or distant
tragedies, but here, in this building, on this institution.
Never has there been a time when the United Nations has
been so discussed, so misunderstood, so needed.
The international task of this decade is managing
disorder. I believe it is possible. But it demands cool
heads, low voices, and an understanding of what we can and
cannot do. It demands concertation between all countries
that take on part of the responsibility for steering the world
through channels which are certainly strewn with rocks.
This concertation takes place in many forums, but nowhere
with greater legal and political authority than here at the
United Nations.
We can now see the events of 1989 in their true
perspective. They did not usher in a new world order. I
think we have to be sober about this. What happened in
1989 was not the birth of a new world order, it was the
collapse of one super-Power and the end of communism as
a threat to world peace.
The tragedies of the world have continued. Indeed,
they have probably increased since 1989. "Tragedy" is a
better description than the usual, and overworked, term
"crisis", because "crisis" implies a threat to world peace.
Now that the cold war is over and super-Powers no longer
exert themselves on behalf of clients, it is no longer a crisis
in that sense - a threat to world peace - if Sudan, Bosnia,
Angola, Liberia, Georgia, Afghanistan, Rwanda, Somalia,
Tajikistan, Azerbaijan and others are racked by civil war.
But these are appalling tragedies for those who are killed or
driven from their homes, and indeed for all of us, because
we are all diminished when the bell tolls.
18 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
Some of these tragedies are illuminated by the
haphazard light of television. In those cases, millions of our
citizens, in all our countries, share feelings of sympathy,
indignation and horror. But other tragedies equally foul are
played in a darkened theatre: no television, no audience,
little pressure. But all these tragedies are a reproach to those
of us who are convinced that it is possible slowly and
painstakingly to construct a more decent world.
How do we do that? Not, it is clear, by the remaining
super-Power using its superiority to impose its own solutions
by force. In the 10 tragedies that I listed, the United States
has intervened with troops only in one, Somalia - and that
now on a reduced scale and under the United Nations -
because the United States, quite rightly in my view, is not
prepared to send its troops all over the world, as Rome once
sent its legions all over Europe, to fight, to pacify and to
rule. There are British, French, Spanish and other European
troops in Bosnia today under the command of the United
Nations. But their role is to save Bosnian lives - they do
that daily - implementing United Nations decisions.
Likewise, they are not imposing a European imperium on
that country.
If America and its allies are not to exert themselves as
a joint imperial Power, imposing on other countries and
sustaining laws and rulers of their choice, then the answer
can only lie in reforming and making much better use of the
international institutions to which we belong. They were
mostly built after the Second World War for one purpose
and are now, after the end of the cold war, being hurriedly
adapted for another. The British architect Norman Foster
has just been given the responsibility of designing in Berlin
the new parliament house for a united Germany. If his plans
are accepted, he intends to include the old Reichstag
building alongside the line of the Berlin Wall in a splendid
new structure reaching across the old Wall into East Berlin.
There is a parable here for us as well as for Germany.
Inevitably, we have to cope as best we can with what
we have. A man, after all, may take some shelter in an
unfinished building. I do not believe that an international
organization like ours, which is not a colonizing Power, will
ever be able to guarantee solutions to civil wars or even to
that pernicious variant of a civil war which we see today in
Bosnia. But if there are no guarantees of success, the
United Nations can be helped greatly to improve on its
record. With greater experience, greater resources for
preventive action and effectively coordinated humanitarian
efforts, it can act before the situation gets out of control and
the demand grows for the implementation of sanctions and
for peace enforcement.
I hope that within the next few weeks the European
Community will move into a new phase of working together
on a common foreign and security policy once the Treaty of
Maastricht is ratified by all 12 member States. Our
President, Willy Claes, the Foreign Minister and Deputy
Prime Minister of Belgium, has just illustrated that point.
But one of our main aims as European partners must be to
support and strengthen the role and the work of the United
Nations, for the United Nations is not "them"; it is us, all of
us. We have to take responsibility for it and its failures.
If we want the United Nations to work better, it is up
to us to give the Secretary-General the support he needs in
thoughts, words, deeds and money. I suppose there are few
more lonely or more demanding jobs than that of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, and the present
Secretary-General certainly has the misfortune to hold his
office in interesting times. He has already given and
continues to give a firm and effective lead. He needs and
deserves our support.
The United Nations is unique. It alone conveys the
word of the international community. Only the United
Nations has the legal powers to translate those words into
action for the maintenance of world peace. We need, as
President Clinton said yesterday, to look at tasks closely, to
ensure that they are properly defined and that the resources
are there to meet them. We may on occasion have to accept
that a mandate should not be given because in reality it
cannot be fulfilled.
Let me follow that by looking briefly at the way we
carry out peace-keeping operations, the way we deploy
preventive diplomacy and the way we run our finances.
Peace-keeping: United Nations blue-helmets are
deployed on nearly every continent. We can reel off the
statistics, but actually we hear too little of individual soldiers
and small detachments. Who knows, for example, of the
single military observer in a remote part of Cambodia who
found himself not only acting as the local arbiter of family
disputes but also providing a local, much appreciated,
medical service using a handbook called When There is No
Doctor, who kept on securing supplies from his wife in
Germany and the field hospital in Phnomh Penh for his
Khmer community? Or the United Nations military observer
who spent his leave in Bangkok fund-raising for a water
filter for a remote Cambodian village? Now, they happen to
be British, but such servants of the world come from many
countries.
Forty-eighth session - 28 September l993 19
We in Britain are committed to our peace-keeping
contribution. We now have over 3,300 men and women in
blue berets around the world.
In June the Secretary-General asked Member States to
identify for him those areas of United Nations peace-keeping
operations which needed strengthening and for our ideas on
positive steps we could take. I look forward to his report
drawing all those responses together.
Useful steps have certainly been taken. There is now
a 24-hour operations room, improving the ability of those
here in New York to oversee operations around the world.
The standby force planning project has been started. A new
Department of Peace-keeping Operations is responsible for
all United Nations field missions. We can build on these
improvements.
Good organization involves clarity and sobriety in
setting out our objectives. That means that any operation
must have clear and achievable objectives linked to a
political process which offers reasonable hope of a solution,
and to which all parties should be committed. The mandate
should be precise and finite. That means adequate support
at Headquarters for planning and reconnaissance missions.
It means that the Security Council must resist the temptation
to become involved in the detailed conduct of operations. It
means the mandate must not create impossible obligations
for a force commander on the ground. Once an operation is
agreed, command and control relationships could be more
clearly defined.
Unity of command at the highest level is essential.
Where the United Nations is charged with executing as well
as authorizing a peace-keeping operation, all aspects of it
should be handled by a single department in New York.
That is why we have suggested the creation of an expanded
planning and operations staff. This in effect is a general
staff for peace-keeping. These men and women, civilian and
military, would be able together to provide the necessary
core of the United Nations strategic-planning chain. They
would operate mainly here in New York, but also in the
field. They would provide the United Nations with the
nervous system for which its present staff is neither
structured nor resourced.
We are not proposing here some new and heavy
bureaucracy. On the contrary, we are talking about core
staff: trained staff officers, United Nations civil affairs and,
increasingly, humanitarian advisers, and chief administrative
officers. The example of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), of a special
envoy for all humanitarian and refugee aspects of an
operation, is good.
Then, there must be flexibility in running peace-keeping
operations. The more comprehensive a bureaucracy
becomes, the harder it is for it to stay nimble on its feet.
Doctrinal and administrative difficulties in working with
other international organizations can be overcome. For
example, the United Nations is already building valuable
links with the Conference on Security and Cooperation in
Europe (CSCE) and with the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO). Many peace-keeping and
peacemaking operations can be run more effectively by
regional organizations or single countries on behalf of the
United Nations. That depends on the nature of the problem
and on the proposed action agreed by the United Nations.
I am thinking, for example, of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) in Liberia, the Organization
of African Unity (OAU) in Rwanda, and the European
Community and NATO in the former Yugoslavia.
Regional organizations can also be asked to help with
training. We might look at getting certain nations with well-
trained, equipped and available forces to provide the first
wave of a peace-keeping force, allowing other nations the
time to train and equip their forces to the required standard.
A commitment to deploy early would of course need to be
matched by a United Nations commitment to agree a firm
end-date for the deployment, because exits can be as
important as entrances.
What we cannot do, we should not pretend to do. If
we play a game of bluff, we can deceive and disappoint
others, and sometimes we deceive and disappoint ourselves.
Rarely can we attain our ends that way. It is empty to
pretend that we can impose peace with justice on every
disorder, every dispute, outside our national borders.
But what the United Nations can do, it should do well.
Cambodia, for example, is a success story. So was Namibia.
Our peace-keepers have been able to limit, though not stop,
conflict and to assuage, though not bring to and end,
suffering in Bosnia and Somalia. But the authority of the
United Nations will suffer if it fails to approach new
challenges realistically and flexibly.
However important peace-keeping may be, successful
preventive diplomacy would be better. I have just been
reading the book published this week by our Australian
colleague, the Australian Foreign Minister, Senator Gareth
Evans. His new book, Cooperating for Peace, brings this
point out well and is full of fruitful ideas. Defusing trouble
20 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
costs a great deal less than a military operation. You can
field plenty of emissaries for the price of a battalion. But to
be useful, of course, an emissary has to set about his work
before the excitement of violence has taken hold.
The Secretary-General has been energetic here. He has
sent missions to several areas of tension - to Tajikistan and
other regions of the former Soviet Union, to Macedonia, to
South Africa and elsewhere.
But in this as in other parts of the United Nations
system money is tight. Many missions create an acute need
for additional international staff with the necessary skills. I
am thinking not just of eminent people, of retired ministers
or distinguished ambassadors who can head such missions.
The Secretary-General will find them when he needs them.
What he needs from Member States is personnel at a more
junior level with local experience and negotiating skills.
Now, we have discussed this problem in particular with
the French Government, and as an Anglo-French initiative
we stand ready to provide the Secretariat with a list of such
people, people who have experience in Government service -
sometimes outside Government service - and whom we
would be prepared to make available for particular missions.
We would also be prepared to provide a certain amount of
equipment where personnel provided by the United Kingdom
were involved. We are ready to respond to the invitation of
the Secretary-General in "Agenda for Peace" to provide
information crucial to the task of preventive diplomacy. The
British and French Governments are both committed to
support him in this way, and we hope that others may join
in a similar enterprise.
All this work means a financial burden. Of course we
should all pay our assessed contribution in full and promptly.
We do so. So do most of our European partners, the Nordic
countries and those with a long tradition of peace-keeping
like Australia and Canada. But others, not entirely or
always through their own fault, others who share the heavy
burden of international responsibility, do not.
The fact is, the United Nations will always be short
of money. Even if everybody pays up in full and on time,
the United Nations will still have to choose priorities within
the resources available to it. That means - and will always
mean - turning down some good causes, and reappraising
and sometimes bringing to an end existing commitments.
The United Nations needs to conduct a rigorous
scrutiny of what it needs and what it spends. Obviously, it
would be able to afford more operations if it ran the existing
ones more economically. Without thrift, without financial
probity, the authority of the United Nations will weaken and
vanish. So we welcome the Secretary-General’s recent
additional senior appointments at the level of Assistant
Secretary-General, covering administrative and financial
affairs. We support proposals for a system of inspection
with teeth, which can match more delegated financial
authority to the field.
I mention these three areas - peace-keeping, preventive
diplomacy and finance. If we can tackle these three areas
constructively and vigorously, there is no reason why even
under present strains the authority of the United Nations
should not grow as strikingly as the burden of expectations
now placed upon it. People will always continue to turn to
the United Nations, even if they will always expect more of
us than is conceivable.
We are discussing, in that context, reform, and we in
Britain welcome the debate on Security Council reform. We
are discussing positively the enlargement of the Council.
This will be complex, as our debate already makes clear,
because there are many currents and cross-currents of view.
I do not doubt that if there were to be consensus on
enlarging the Security Council there are some countries
which, because of their global interests, their contribution to
international security, their contribution to United Nations
peace-keeping, could undertake the full range of
responsibilities of a permanent member and can certainly be
expected to do so.
I have concentrated simply on this Organization for the
reason which I gave. Few tasks are more important than
improving the way the United Nations works if we are to
secure a more stable world. We have lived through the
events of these last few years. They have been dramatic and
exhilarating, they have changed the political and strategic
landscape, but they have not removed from us our
responsibility to work constructively for a better United
Nations. This better world order will not happen because we
make a few speeches or pass a few resolutions. It will be
constructed steadily, brick by brick, learning always the right
lessons from the past, developing steadily our international
institutions and our international relations.
It is fair to say that in the last four years, with its ups
and downs, we have come a long way, and I believe that,
together, we have the will and the wisdom to continue along
that road.
Mr. President, your
unanimous election as President augurs well for the forty-
eighth session of the General Assembly. I extend my
heartiest congratulations to you and best wishes for success.
Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, the Secretary-General, has
given a new vision and a new impetus to the United Nations
at a crucial time in its history. We wish him well in his
efforts.
My Government is deeply touched by the sympathy and
compassion expressed by the leaders of several delegations
on the devastating earthquake in India on
30 September 1993, and, with your permission,
Mr. President, I shall have to go back to India immediately.
The United Nations will soon be 50 years old. It has
had many achievements to its credit: decolonization; efforts
to alleviate poverty; peace-keeping; disarmament; devising
an accepted code of international law; respect for human
rights and concern for the environment. I would like to
reiterate India’s faith in and consistent support for the United
Nations and its efforts to establish peace and the well-being
of peoples. We take note that the United Nations is trying
to evolve so as to better serve the principles and purposes of
the Charter. We support the Secretary-General’s efforts to
make what he has called a transition from the old to the new
United Nations, which would be particularly useful and
fruitful for the less developed and less fortunate States.
The euphoria generated by the end of the cold war has
in the past two years given way to concerns about the
difficulties of achieving a new global equilibrium and
stability. Essentially, we can see these difficulties arising
from the contradictory pulls and pressures exerted by the
forces of positive integration and harmony on the one hand
and fragmentation and discord on the other.
The end of the divisions of the cold war and the efforts
to halt and reverse the arms race have generated some of the
integrative forces. Some forces of integration have also been
at work in the global economy, which has been characterized
by the globalization and interdependence of countries’
factors of production and of issues of trade, money, finance,
technology, environment, population and development. The
desire of the developing countries to participate more
actively in the growth of the world economy and the
building-up of free-market, liberalized economies for
themselves adds another positive dimension. Issues of
common concern and global survival - economic
development and regeneration, environmental sustainability,
demographic management, technological dynamism and
health for all - have provided a sense of common destiny.
The communications revolution has resulted in greater
cultural intermingling and openness around the world.
These forces of integration are, unfortunately, opposed
by those of fragmentation. Represented by sectarian and
subnational aggression, racism, religious fundamentalism,
bigotry, terrorism, drug trafficking and arms smuggling, they
pose a threat to peace, global security, democracy, human
rights and economic and social development. We are also
witnessing strife, conflicts and cruel, unceasing and irrational
civil wars in many parts of the world. Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Somalia and Afghanistan cause us anxiety and
concern. The proliferation of such local conflicts and the
ever-increasing flow of refugees across national frontiers re-
affirm the truism that peace, like freedom, is indivisible and
that the disruption of peace anywhere is a danger to peace
everywhere.
These divisive forces have caused not only political
instability but also economic collapse in several instances.
Conversely, economic sluggishness and lack of development
in several cases have led to political upheavals. Inward-
looking, exclusivist and narrowly self-centred global
economic policy-making has been in evidence at a time
when the global economy is overshadowed by recession and
lack of dynamism. Macroeconomic coordination is at its
weakest. Protectionist tendencies are strong. The potential
of developing countries to act as vigorous engines of growth
for revitalizing the world economy stands largely ignored.
In developing countries, absolute and deepening poverty,
hunger and malnutrition, disease, illiteracy and the lack of
shelter and sanitation for a large portion of the population
have caused political and social tensions. The structural
imbalances and flaws of the post-Second-World-War
international economic order persist and prevent the
maximization of the benefits of interdependence and
globalization.
Against this backdrop, the task of the United Nations
should be to construct a new global equilibrium by fostering
positive integrative forces and discouraging, if not
counteracting, the forces of fragmentation and discord. For
this, the new United Nations will have to reiterate the
fundamental and immutable principles on which it was built:
respect for the national sovereignty, territorial integrity and
sovereign equality of nation States. I am glad that the
12 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
Secretary-General stated in his report to the forty-eighth
session:
"National sovereignty is the art of rendering
unequal power equal. Without State sovereignty, the
very instrument of international cooperation might be
destroyed and international organization might itself
become impossible." (A/48/1, para. 16)
The United Nations will have to set an example for the
conduct of relations amongst nation States on the basis of
respect for the rule of law, democracy and pluralism. Any
international framework, whether it be associated with peace
or development, must be transparent and must deal with
issues of global concerns on a non-selective and non--
discriminatory basis.
In the final analysis, the institutions, concepts and
agencies that represent the new world order will be judged
by their ability to harness and channel the beneficial and
creative forces of integration for the benefit of peace and
development for all and by the ability of the United Nations
to ensure that the interests of its weaker Member States are
fully reflected therein. In these still perilous times, they
would have to promote development cooperation and
effectively arrest the plunge into insecurity, strife and chaos,
particularly when these threaten the very foundation of
Member States, where ultimately the United Nations is
rooted.
There have been references in this Assembly to all
these conflicts, big or small, local or with international
dimensions, describing them in the generic terms of ethnic,
religious and civil wars. The plurality and complexity of our
post-cold-war world do not permit such generic labelling.
Nor are these conflicts amenable to generic and instant
remedies. A number of instances of strife or aberrations are
part of the historical legacies inherited by Member States.
Each is posited in a different socio-economic and cultural
matrix of causation; each is caught up in a different cycle of
circumstance and violence. The imposition of peace through
unilateral external intervention will only perpetuate situations
embodying the Orwellian logic of "peace is war" that we see
in many parts of the world today.
Wisdom lies in overcoming conflict situations with a
positive vision animated by peace and amity and in creating
the necessary confidence and will for peace among countries
and peoples. It is in this spirit that India is ready to initiate
a dialogue with Pakistan to build mutual confidence and to
promote a climate of stability in our region. I can only hope
that Pakistan will respond to this, and have a dialogue with
us, instead of trying to go around the world accentuating
differences that will be difficult to resolve later.
We welcome the recently concluded peace accord
between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO), and earnestly hope that this will be a true harbinger
of further positive developments aimed at establishing lasting
peace and prosperity in West Asia. We also welcome the
announcement by Mr. Nelson Mandela that irreversible
progress towards a non-racial, democratic South Africa has
been made. In response to his suggestion, India, which had
imposed trade sanctions against South Africa as early as
1946, has initiated action to lift those sanctions and to
normalize relations with South Africa.
We trust that the recognition by the Security Council of
the international boundary between Iraq and Kuwait will
contribute to the stabilization of the situation in the Gulf
region. We hope that the faithful implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions will lead to the
alleviation of the present difficulties of the peoples of the
region.
In Somalia, a whole population has gone through a
protracted civil war and famine with hardly any
governmental machinery to tackle the situation. This made
it imperative for the United Nations to act. As an
unprecedented humanitarian mission, the multilateral action
in Somalia enjoyed the support of the entire world, including
the factional Somali leaders themselves. India, for its part,
has contributed one of the largest contingents to this mission.
Now that the situation has improved and starvation has been
averted, the United Nations operation faces new problems.
It is necessary for the United Nations to reassure all sectors
of the people of Somalia about its role in the country,
intensify the process of political reconciliation and adhere
strictly to the original objectives of the mission.
The phenomenal increase in peace-keeping operations
in the post-cold-war period and their inclusion as an element
of the new agenda for peace is at once a matter of comfort
and concern. It is a matter of comfort because the United
Nations at long last has started playing its Charter role in the
area of peace and security. In the altered international
political environment, we would like the United Nations to
realize its full potential. At the same time, the involvement
of the United Nations on an unprecedented scale with peace-
keeping operations causes us concern because operationally
the United Nations is not fully prepared and equipped to
discharge this role effectively. And, legally and
conceptually, the limits, procedures and rules of the
involvement of the United Nations are not clearly defined.
Forty-eighth session - 1 October l993 13
For peace-keeping operations to be successful, it is
necessary to follow certain guidelines and criteria. All
avenues of pacific settlement of disputes, as laid down in
Chapter VI of the Charter, should be fully explored and
exhausted before resorting to peace-keeping operations under
Chapter VII. Decisions on such operations should be taken
in a democratic and broad-based manner, and after thorough
consideration of all aspects. To command universal
endorsement and maintain their non-partisan character,
United Nations peace-keeping operations must be based on
the consent of all the States parties to a dispute. They
should be undertaken with a specific mandate and a clear
time-frame. Greater efficiency should be achieved in both
planning and execution of peace-keeping operations. The
Foreign Minister of the Russian Federation, in his address to
the General Assembly a few days ago, put forward a few
proposals in this respect which merit consideration by the
General Assembly. The concept of invoking humanitarian
relief as a basis for peace-keeping operations may have to be
approached with a great deal of caution and circumspection.
Any new United Nations operation for providing
humanitarian relief must be completely non-partisan - in fact
and in the perception of the parties involved.
That consideration must also guide any discussion or
decision on preventive deployment. The United Nations
must not allow itself to be burdened indefinitely with
obsolete and ineffective peace-keeping operations. Every
possible measure should be taken to ensure the safety of
peace-keeping personnel.
Another aspect of the agenda for peace which we
would like to underline is the particular importance we
attach to Article 50, which enjoins the Security Council to
find solutions to the special economic problems faced by
third States on account of the implementation of sanctions
imposed by the Security Council. We call for an automatic
mechanism that would put remedial action in place
simultaneously with the imposition of sanctions.
An integral element of any agenda for peace in our
time is the achievement of disarmament, particularly nuclear
disarmament. Having endorsed the Chemical Weapons
Convention, the United Nations should move on to consider
similar steps in other areas of disarmament.
We welcome the unilateral decision of the United States
to extend its moratorium on nuclear testing until the end
of 1994. The focus of the nuclear-weapon Powers should
now be on the early conclusion of a universal, verifiable and
comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty leading to the
elimination of all nuclear weapons.
India’s commitment to non-proliferation is complete
and unequivocal. India has an unblemished track record.
India’s proposal made in 1988 for an action plan for nuclear
disarmament within a specific time-frame is of continuing
relevance in our bid to rid the world of the global scourge
of nuclear weapons. We believe that a new, just and
uniformly applicable regime for non-proliferation which does
not discriminate between the nuclear-weapon and the
non-nuclear-weapon States should be considered at an early
date. Such a treaty should place equal obligations on all
States. For a non-proliferation regime to be truly
meaningful, it must also address the questions of a
convention on the non-use of nuclear weapons, a verifiable
freeze on the production of fissionable material, a total ban
on nuclear-weapon tests and negotiations on general and
complete disarmament. The global spread and reach of
nuclear weapons reduce to a travesty the objective of
achieving genuine peace and security within a narrow
regional framework. It is our hope that the United Nations
will take firm action in this direction to achieve this in the
sense I have mentioned.
One area of concern for developing countries is the
question of ad hoc and unilateral export controls and other
restrictions being placed on the transfer of dual-use and high
technology with the ostensible purpose of curbing
proliferation. Non-proliferation concerns must not be made
a pretext for denying developing countries access to
technologies critical for their development. There is,
therefore, need to evolve multilateral, non-discriminatory and
transparent arrangements to regulate the transfer of such
technologies so that peaceful uses and dissemination of some
key technologies are not denied to the developing world.
There is perhaps merit in convening a special session
on disarmament to examine the whole gamut of
disarmament-related issues that arise in the new context of
today. The question of a peace dividend arising from
disarmament in the form of financial and technical resources
for the enhancement of international development
cooperation in the context of the United Nations could be
one of the issues that special session could address.
It is obvious that there can be no global security unless
development is ensured, and we therefore attach as much
importance to an agenda for development as to the "Agenda
for Peace". Agenda 21 of the Rio Declaration, outlining the
plan and programme for global cooperation in ensuring
sustainable development; the outcome of the Final Act of the
eighth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development (UNCTAD VIII), on the partnership for
development between the North and the South; and the
14 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
forthcoming Conference on Population and Development, as
well as the World Summit on Social Development, provide
the international community enough opportunity to promote
economic and social development and environmental
sustainability, particularly in developing countries. The work
on an agenda for development should build on all these
development-related action programmes and provide a new
impetus to development cooperation, both under United
Nations auspices and in bilateral and other multilateral
contexts. Enhancement of the role, resources and
capabilities of the organs and agencies dealing with
development in the United Nations system should be
stressed. The United Nations should also be enabled to have
a more interactive relationship with the Bretton Woods
institutions in a spirit of finding considered and innovative
solutions to global economic problems and pooling all
available resources for that purpose.
Comprehensive and constructive dialogue between the
North and the South and the strengthening of a global
partnership for development are the needs of our times if we
are to avoid the replacement of the East-West divide by a
North-South one. India has always participated in the
ongoing North-South dialogue through the Group of 77 and
the Non-Aligned Movement and in keeping with the
requirements of a more focused dialogue. India has become
part of the new group of 15 developing countries for
South-South consultation and cooperation, the G-15. We are
acting as host to the fourth summit meeting of that group at
New Delhi in December. Representing the developing
countries, we have had a promising start through an informal
dialogue with the G-7 and we hope to build on those
beginnings in a spirit of "global partnership for global
benefit", as was stated by my Prime Minister,
Mr. P. V. Narasimha Rao in his message to the
G-7 Chairman.
Some key issues where there is an ongoing dialogue but
which none the less need further consideration and
implementation include: participation of developing
countries in global macroeconomic coordination and
decision-making; reciprocation by the North of the efforts of
the South at restructuring and economic liberalization
through the pursuit of expansionist policies conducive to
long-term growth and opening them up to global competition
in goods, services and manpower through reduction and
elimination of protectionist barriers; increased capital flows,
both official and private, bilateral and multilateral, to
developing countries to offset the crippling effects of the
debt burden and to accelerate growth and development; and
a balanced, successful conclusion of the Uruguay Round,
which should ensure substantial enhancement of market
access for developing-country exports and of their access to
the tool of competitiveness.
The profoundly humanistic traditions of the Indian
civilization, with its emphasis on tolerance, harmony,
non-violence and the inviolability of the individual, have
found their modern expression in the setting up of a
democratic, secular and egalitarian polity and society in free
India.
Being the largest practising democracy and effecting a
synthesis between a multiplicity of ethnic, religious and
linguistic groups and peoples has been no easy task, as some
in the West are themselves realizing even in the context of
their relatively lesser diversities. The Constitution of free
India consolidated this humanistic tradition and is indeed a
veritable bill of human rights. A strong and independent
judiciary and a totally free press have also been watchdogs
of democracy and human rights in India.
India’s commitment to the effective protection of
human rights has now received another institutional impetus
with the establishment of a National Human Rights
Commission comprised of a retired Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court of India, a retired judge of the Supreme
Court of India, a former Chief Justice of the State High
Court and other eminent persons as well as the chairmen of
the three separate national commissions which already exist
to protect the interests of scheduled castes and scheduled
tribes, women and minorities. The Commission has been
mandated to inquire into allegations of violations of human
rights and has been invested with wide-ranging powers,
including the power to establish special investigation teams
to carry out effective investigations. The findings of the
Commission are to be published from time to time besides
being reflected in its annual report, which will also be laid
before Parliament. The law also provides for the
establishment of human rights commissions by the State
Governments, on the pattern of the national Commission, as
also special courts for the speedy trial of cases involving
human rights violations.
I am confident that members of the Assembly will
accept that India has established the most appropriate human
rights commission to ensure that there will be full human
rights protection in the country.
Our commitment to universally acceptable
non-discriminatory norms of human rights and their
protection and promotion cannot be questioned. It was in
that spirit that we participated actively in the World
Conference on Human Rights, which recognized the
Forty-eighth session - 1 October l993 15
importance of this issue. We are however pained that not
enough emphasis is put on a major threat and impediment to
the realization of human rights, namely, terrorism, especially
the kind that is aided and abetted by one State against
another. Why is it that a few so-called human rights
advocates and Member States of the United Nations choose
to focus on the human rights of terrorists - those who
indulge in senseless murder, destruction, pillage, the
disruption of civilized existence and the undermining of
democratic institutions? Why do they virtually turn a blind
eye to the violation of the human rights of the victims of
such terrorism - innocent civilians or those upholding law
and order and the territorial integrity of States? Can they in
true conscience allow terrorists and their supporters to usurp
the moral high ground on human rights?
The United Nations will have to take strong action
against terrorists because terrorists engage in all kinds of
violence. They try to upset democratically taken decisions
in a country by using force and killing people. This must be
totally condemned by the United Nations and stopped
completely so that people can live in peace and in
democracy and express their views in accordance with the
constitution of their country.
In sum, we believe that international cooperation in the
protection of human rights can succeed only if it is within
the framework of respect for the sovereignty and integrity of
States and of a vigorous global programme for anti-terrorist
action. We would, however, like to point out that any
unilateral use of human rights as an instrument of political
pressure or intervention, or as an obstacle to trade or a
condition for development cooperation and aid, in fact serves
the opposite purpose and impedes the full realization of the
human rights of people of affected countries.
The enhanced role of the United Nations in
international affairs calls for the restructuring and redefining
of the functions of its principal organs.
The responsibilities of the Security Council have grown
dramatically in the past few years, requiring a greater degree
of participation by the overall membership of the United
Nations in the Council’s decision-making process. We must
recognize that the membership of the United Nations has
grown enormously over the years. A more balanced and
expanded representation for Member States in the Council is
therefore inevitable. Unity of purpose among its members
rather than size determines the efficiency of any
organization. The expansion should not be done selectively
or in a piecemeal manner. The principles or criteria of
expansion of the permanent and non-permanent membership
should be agreed upon by consensus. For the selection of
additional States in an expanded Council, the population -
which represents the principle of democracy and an element
of power - the size of the economy and the future potential
of the countries concerned should be taken into account,
along with equitable geographical distribution and the
contribution to the maintenance of international peace and
security. There is virtual unanimity among those who have
responded to the Secretary-General that an expansion of the
Council is imperative. Interesting suggestions have been put
forward by several countries. The logical next step would
be to start a process of consultations to arrive at a suitable
and fair formula that commands universal support.
The permanent members should be responsive to the
aspirations of developing countries represented in the
General Assembly on the basis of equality. It is therefore
essential also to revive the role of the General Assembly, as
was originally envisaged in the Charter.
We stand on a decisive threshold incomparable to any
in history, a moment in time when we must bring to bear a
larger vision and foster the forces of positive integration,
democracy and cooperation at national and international
levels.
My Prime Minister has, in characterizing the 1990s as
watershed years in global affairs in the realm of political,
economic and environmental challenges and changes,
conveyed an unequivocal message:
"We cannot go wrong if we make coexistence
and peace our watchword, and common universal
good our objective".
It is my Government’s belief that this quest for the common
good, jointly undertaken, will be central to the success of
our endeavour and for the achievement of the Charter’s
objective of harmonizing the actions of nations in the
attainment of these common ends.
I should like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your unanimous election to preside over
the forty-eighth session of the United Nations General
Assembly.
We feel strongly that the time has come for all of us -
communities, nations, peoples, families - finally to lay the
last collective wreath on the tombs of the fallen combatants
and on the monuments of our beloved. It is the right way to
honour their memories and to answer the needs of the newly
born. We have to lay the foundations for a new Middle
East.
The peace agreement between us and the Palestinians
is not just an accord signed by political leaders. It is an
ongoing, profound commitment to the next generation of
Arabs and Israelis, Christians, Muslims, Jews and people of
all other faiths.
We know it is not enough to declare an end to war.
We have to try to eradicate the roots of all hostilities. If we
only bring violence down but ignore misery, we may
discover that we have traded one menace for another peril.
Territorial disputes may have been the reason for wars
between nations, and poverty may again become the seed of
violence between peoples. While signing the documents on
the lawn of the White House, I could almost sense the
breeze of a fresh spring, and my imagination began to
wander to the skies of our land, which may have become
brighter to the eyes of all people, both those who agree and
those who oppose. On the lawn one could almost hear the
heavy tread of boots leaving the stage after a hundred years
of hostility. One could have heard the gentle tiptoeing of
new steps making a debut in a world awaiting peace.
Yet we could not depart from reality. I know that the
solution to the Palestinian issue may be the key to a new
beginning, but it is in no way the answer to the many needs
awaiting us upon our return home.
The last decade saw great changes, including the end of
East-West confrontation and the opening of the way for the
gradual disappearance of North-South polarization. The
great continent of Asia and the picturesque continent of
South America introduced the dynamics of an economic
development of their own. The dramatic event in South
Africa is a declaration to the same effect. So, contrary to all
assumptions, it has been demonstrated that neither geography
nor race is a hindrance or an advantage to economic
promise.
We witnessed the end of some wars only to discover
that the warriors did not reach their own promised land.
Some colonized people gained their independence, but they
hardly enjoyed its fruits. The dangers may have been over,
but their hopes evaporated. We have learned that the end of
a war should be the beginning of a new genesis, which will
be the end of belligerency and will put an end to
psychological prejudices.
No nation, rich or poor, is able nowadays to attain
security unless the region in which it exists is secure. The
scope of regional security must exceed the range of ballistic
missiles, which may hit each and all of us.
As we strive to achieve a comprehensive peace, no
wound must remain unhealed.
Geographically speaking, we live side by side with the
Jordanian Kingdom, and what is so obvious geographically
must become clear politically. We have already agreed with
the Hashemite Kingdom on many complicated issues, and
there is no doubt that we can complete the story fully, that
we can offer the people on both sides of the river full peace,
that the Dead Sea can become a spring of new life and that
the old waters of the River Jordan can be a source of
prosperity flowing from each side to the other.
We hope - as a matter of fact, we are determined - to
make peace with Syria, yet we ask the Syrian leadership, if
it has chosen peace, why it refuses to meet openly. If Syria
is aiming for the Egyptian fruits of peace, it must follow the
process that led to them. Both of us have to look ahead and
realize that the threats of war are no more than an illusion
that one can return to an unbearable past.
We shall not give up our negotiations with our
Lebanese neighbours. We do not have any territorial claims
or any political pretensions concerning Lebanon. We pray,
together with many Lebanese, that their country will no
longer be a back yard for troublemakers. It is for Lebanon
to make a choice between Hizbollah, on the one hand, which
operates from its territory and then takes orders from another
Government, and, on the other, insisting on having one
army, one policy, and offering real tranquillity to its people
and security to its neighbours. Lebanon does not need a
license to regain its independence, and Lebanon should not
postpone its return to its balanced, traditional policy.
I am not sure whether there is a new order in the
world, but all of us feel there is a new world awaiting an
order. We are encouraged by the new attempt of the United
Nations and its Secretary-General to answer the social and
22 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
economic call of the present era. The United Nations was
created as a political answer; today it must face social and
economic questions.
The Middle East, which has been an important agenda
item in United Nations history, must become prosperous, not
only peaceful. To construct a modern Middle East we need
wisdom no less than financial support.
We have to rid ourselves of the costly follies of the
past and adopt the principles of modern economy. Who
will, and who should, pay the cost of oversized armies?
Who will, and who should, bear the price of an arms race
whose cost has reached $50 billion annually? Who will, and
who should, pay for the inefficiencies of old systems? Who
will, and who should, compensate for outmoded censorship
of mail and control of trade and travel? And who will
comply with the State where suspicion intercepts the
enterprising spirit of the people?
We can, and we should, turn to the promises of
scientific development, the market economy and
comprehensive education. We must base our industry,
agriculture and services on the highest of today’s
technologies. We have to invest in our schools. Israel, a
country of immigration, is blessed with many scientists and
engineers. We shall gladly make this human wealth
available as a contribution.
I know that there is suspicion; that, when referring to
a common market in the Middle East or announcing an
Israeli contribution, it may be perceived as an attempt to win
preference or to establish domination. May I say sincerely
and loudly that we did not give up territorial control to
engage ourselves in economic superiority. The age of
domination, political or economic, is dead. The time of
cooperation has begun.
As a Jew, may I say that the virtue and the essence of
our history since the times of Abraham and the
commandments of Moses have been an uncompromising
opposition to any form of occupation, domination and
discrimination. For us, Israel is not just a territorial
homeland, but a permanent moral commitment as well.
There are other questions, concerning the building of a
common market in the Middle East, as to how to attain this
when governments are so varied and economies are so
different. The differences in governments and economies
should not prevent us from doing together what can be done
together: combating the desert and offering fertility to an
arid land.
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations declared that the Middle East must double its
agricultural production in the 25 years to come. The
population of the region in the same period will double itself
anyway. The land is cut by many and large deserts and its
water resources are stingy and scarce. Yet we know that in
a similar period of time - the 25 years between 1950 and 1975 -
Israel was able to increase its agricultural output twelvefold -
an increase unprecedented in history.
During the past decade, 95 per cent of the growth of
our agriculture resulted from research, planning, training and
organizing. High technology permits nations to attain real
independence and to experience genuine freedom, political
as well as economic. There is nothing new about the
scarcity of water in our midst. Jacob and Esau drank from
the same wells even when their paths were separated. But
then, unlike today, they could not desalinate the sea water;
they could not computerize irrigation; nor could they enjoy
the potential of biotechnology.
We are meeting again with an entirely different
opportunity. Greening the land can be accompanied by the
creation of many new jobs for all people in the area. The
most promising opportunity may be the development of
tourism. No other branch of modern industry assures an
immediate growth of the Middle East like this one. Our area
is blessed by nature and by history, a history which is still
very much alive: the eternity of Jerusalem, the magnificence
of the pyramids, the symbols of Luxor, the Hanging Gardens
of Babylon, the Pillars of Wisdom in Baalbek, the red
palaces of Petra, the inimitable charm of Marakesh, the old
winds which still blow in Carthage, not forgetting the
beaches of Gaza or the scent of Jericho’s perfumed fruits.
We have to open roads to those wonders and keep them safe
and hospitable. Tourism depends on tranquility; tourism
enhances tranquillity. It makes friendship a vested interest.
Thirdly, we have to build an infrastructure with modern
means so as to avoid the pitfalls of the past. Modern
transportation and revolutionary communications crossing the
air, covering the ground and connecting the seas will turn
geographical proximities into an economic advantage. We
should not ask taxpayers of other countries to finance follies
of our own. We have to correct them ourselves. We do not
have the moral right to ask for the financing of unnecessary
wars or wasteful systems.
If the thumping of hammers replaces the thunder of
guns, many nations will be more than willing to extend a
helping hand. They will invest in a better future. They will
support the replacement of unwarranted confrontation with
Forty-eighth session - 28 September l993 23
much-needed economic competition. Markets can serve the
needs of the people no less than flags can signify their
destinies. The time has come to build a Middle East for the
people and not just for the rulers.
It was not simple to open the locked doors to peace. In
the name of God, let them not be closed again. Let peace
be comprehensive, embracing all issues, all countries, all
generations. We suggest that we all negotiate together as
equals. We offer a common ground of mutual respect and
mutual compromise. Thirteen years have passed since we
made peace with Egypt. We are grateful to Egypt and its
President for expanding understanding, overt and hidden. In
a world in which so many insoluble problems reside, the
Palestinians and we have finally shown that in fact there are
no insoluble problems, only people who tend to believe that
many problems are insoluble.
We have negotiated one of the most complicated issues
of the last 100 years. We are grateful to the United States
for its support and leadership. We are grateful to both
President Clinton and Secretary Christopher for their crucial
role. We appreciate the Egyptian role and the Norwegian
encouragement; the European involvement and serious
contribution; the Asian support and blessing. Maybe we
now have the right to say to other people in conflict: "Do
not give up. Do not surrender to old obsessions and do not
take fresh disappointments at face value." What we did,
others can do as well.
We are determined to make the agreement with the
Palestinians into a permanent success. Israel would consider
the economic success of the Palestinians as though it were
its own, and I believe that a newly achieved security will
serve the aspirations of the Israelis and the necessities of the
Palestinians.
Gaza, after 7,000 years of suffering, can emancipate
itself from want. Jericho, without its fallen walls, can see its
gardens blossom again.
As the twentieth century comes to a close, we have
learned from the United States and Russia that there are no
military answers to the new military dangers, only political
solutions. Successful economies are no longer a monopoly
of the rich and the mighty. They represent an open
invitation to every nation ready to adopt the combination of
science and open-mindedness. We see at the end of this
century that politics can achieve more by good will than by
power, and that the young generation watching their
televisions compare their lot with the fortunes or misfortunes
of others. They see freedom, they watch peace, they view
prosperity, all in real time. They know that they can attain
more if they work harder.
If we want to represent their hopes, we have to
combine wise policies and regional security with market
economies. Historically we were born equal, and equally we
can give birth to a new age.
"Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that the
plowman shall overtake the reaper, and the treader of
24 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
grapes him that soweth seed; and the mountains shall
drop sweet wine, and all the hills shall melt." (The
Holy Bible, Amos 9:13)
So said the Prophet.
The United Nations
is our Organization; we are its custodians, and we have to
adjust to change. We have a huge responsibility to pass it
on in better shape than we found it. Historians in future
years will acknowledge this period of radical change.
But what are the objectives of this Organization of ours
in 1993? Well, they are not very difficult to enumerate,
because they are set out for us and by us in the Preamble to
the Charter, and they remain as valid today as they were
when they were agreed in 1945.
The first, of course, is peace, because without peace
and security no human society can flourish; then human
dignity, because if we do not treat each other with respect as
individuals, we will not do so as nations; justice, because
unless relations between nations are grounded in law, the
powerful will always be able to triumph over the weak;
social and economic progress, because without the sustained
and sustainable development of our economies, all our other
achievements will be as nothing.
I believe that to this list we must now add the
maintenance of a clean and attractive environment. We are
learning, painfully, that our planet also has rights. We
ignore them only at our peril.
These are the foundations for the vision of what the
world should be. In New Zealand, we would say that they
give opportunities to all. When the United Nations came
into existence almost 50 years ago, the vision was sharper
than the reality, but the founders of the United Nations were
certainly not deterred. They were at the watershed in the
affairs of the world. They had just experienced the awful
reality of a global conflict in which millions had died, and
they were determined to do everything in their power to
make sure that such a conflict could never occur again.
They did build well. They embodied their vision not only
in this Organization but also in a whole series of economic,
financial, social and humanitarian institutions, and they gave
it the only strength that counted: their sheer determination,
as men and women from very different countries, to make
it happen.
Only the utmost patience and perseverance has kept that
dream and that determination alive through most of the
50 years since 1945. Progress has been slow and it has been
halting. Some great things were done, but too often the
Members of the United Nations could agree only at the
lowest common denominator, a reflection of the political
gaps and strains within the United Nations membership.
There are, however, four reasons why I believe that that
long, grey era has closed.
The first is that the cold war, that shadow and threat of
a global conflict, is now over. Freed of that constraint, the
United Nations can operate, as it was intended that it should,
as the ultimate guardian of the security of all its Members,
the ultimate arbiter of world peace.
Secondly, democracy, one of the most effective
guarantors of peace between nations, is spreading. We
welcome the establishment of democratic institutions and
processes in countries that have for too long been without
them.
The third point is that in the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade Uruguay Round of multilateral trade
negotiations, the world has a major opportunity to turn its
back on protectionism and lock in the prospects for
economic growth through trade and other forms of economic
integration. Freedom and free trade go hand in hand.
Fourthly, and last, the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro
and Agenda 21 contain a global consensus, a universal
determination to act to preserve our environment.
This combination of developments marks a new
watershed; if we are to keep faith with the founders of this
Organization, we must do what they did in 1945 at their
watershed, and build well, not just for ourselves, but of
course for those who follow.
On the issue of security and peacemaking, the first
point that I raised was that the elimination of confrontation
between the super-Powers has opened up new possibilities
for the practice of collective security and peacemaking. The
unfortunate consequence of 50 years of super-Power
confrontation is, paradoxically, that we are not yet very good
at working together: like a novice sports team, we are really
rather uncoordinated, sadly lacking in strategy, sadly lacking
in team skills or knowledge of the new rules, and sadly
lacking in collective determination. We cannot correct these
deficiencies overnight, but we must keep on trying to
improve.
Forty-eighth session - 29 September l993 39
The other paradox is that peace has not broken out
simply because the former Soviet Union and the United
States have stopped squaring off against each other. There
have been unexpected consequences: some would liken the
result to taking the lid off a pressure-cooker. Conflicts,
internal and between neighbours, seem to have burst out
everywhere. These consequences, in human terms, are
horrific.
So here we are, in the United Nations, underresourced,
undertrained and facing an enormous peacemaking, peace-
building and peace-keeping challenge. We really have no
alternative to learning as we go, and I believe that we are
doing so.
During the past year, I have spoken to soldiers and
relief workers in the field in United Nations missions as
widely spread as Somalia and Croatia, and I pay my highest
tribute to their dedication under some of the most adverse
circumstances. United Nations people are trying there, as
elsewhere, to create conditions where their work will
ultimately no longer be required. They are actually trying to
do themselves out of a job.
The Secretary-General’s document "An Agenda for
Peace" is now in a consolidation phase. The problems are
clear: rising expectations; machinery due for reform; lack of
funds; and the lack of ready, well-trained and well-equipped
forces. Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali has already made some
thoughtful proposals, including sending teams to Member
States to help identify in advance resources available for the
United Nations operations. New Zealand is willing to
respond positively to this approach.

The Secretary-General has also made organizational
changes in the Headquarters departments that support peace-
keeping. The revamping of the Department of Peace-
Keeping Operations is a very good start, providing we
recognize that we need more than just a shifting of the
resources. The new philosophy of peace-building and
peacemaking must work in tandem with the well-tried and
successful peace-keeping philosophy of the past.
On the issue of safety and security of United Nations
personnel, recent peace-keeping operations have highlighted
the risks to United Nations personnel working in dangerous
and unstable situations. That does not help the recruitment
of peace-keepers, and it does not help the recruitment of
contributing countries. The United Nations must have the
means to hold personally responsible and accountable those
who attack or commit other acts of violence against the
United Nations and associated personnel.
Earlier this year the New Zealand Government took the
initial step of calling for all possible measures to ensure the
safety of United Nations personnel. We asked the Secretary-
General to report on the adequacy of existing arrangements.
His report makes a number of positive recommendations.
He has highlighted the need for the General Assembly to
elaborate a new multilateral instrument on the role the
Security Council might play in setting the appropriate
conditions designed to improve the safety of personnel.
I was very pleased just this afternoon to participate in
a Security Council meeting that adopted a resolution
welcoming the Secretary-General’s report and spelling out
the conditions the Council will impose in the future for the
protection of United Nations personnel. I was also delighted
that the General Assembly last week agreed to New
Zealand’s proposal to include a new item on the safety of
personnel in this year’s agenda. I hope that the Sixth
Committee will establish a working group to consider the
issue and make urgent progress. I hope the subject will also
be very fully discussed in all other relevant United Nations
bodies.
Of course, any mechanisms for protecting peace-keepers
must also require that parties to any conflict respect the
integrity of those personnel that have been deployed on their
behalf. Such an undertaking should, in principle, form part
of the mandate for any peace-keeping operation. The recent
practice of the Security Council of establishing clear
mandates for peace-keeping operations at the outset of
deployment is especially welcome, but there remains an onus
on a host State both to explain carefully to its people the
reason for the United Nations presence and also to take
active steps to ensure the safety of United Nations personnel.
But the purpose of peace-keeping or peacemaking and
peace-building is not solely to deal with conflicts that have
already arisen, urgent though that task is. We must improve
our capacity to prevent conflicts before they break out, and
I should like to acknowledge here the importance and
timeliness of recent improvements in conflict-resolution
mechanisms and the ongoing work on preventive diplomacy.
I welcome very warmly the contribution made by my
Australian colleague, Senator Gareth Evans, to the debate on
this subject. He has given us much food for thought and
some helpful suggestions for concrete steps we can take to
improve our performance in this area.
40 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
Disarmament measures remain a key element in conflict
prevention. This year, as the international community
moves towards the extension - I hope for an indefinite
period - of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, the Assembly will have non-proliferation as one
of its major themes. In this regard, North Korea’s continued
evasion of its responsibilities under that Treaty demands a
firm international response.
We welcome very strongly the restraint being shown by
the nuclear-weapon States on testing and their positive
attitude towards the launching of negotiations for a
comprehensive test-ban treaty. It is not before time. New
Zealand has sponsored a draft resolution on comprehensive
test-bans for many years. Its purpose now is on the brink of
fulfillment. The subject needs to be taken up in the
Conference on Disarmament. Given the importance of the
tasks now on the agenda of the Conference on Disarmament,
membership of the Conference must be open to all who have
the will to participate constructively.
In respect of conventional weaponry, we applaud the
enhancement of controls through the commencement of the
Register of conventional-arms transfers. We now have a
chemical weapons Convention in place alongside the
biological weapons Convention.
It is timely to consider what similar work can be done
in respect of conventional weapons. As disarmament moves
from the realms of Utopia into the achievable, we must lend
every effort, here in the United Nations and outside it, to
ensure disarmament’s more rapid progress. No sensible
proposal should be discarded simply for outdated ideological
reasons.
The spread of democratic institutions to every corner of
the globe is, I believe, one of the most encouraging
phenomena of recent years, and the pace is astonishing. In
the space of just 24 hours last week, the Parliament of Israel
approved a Declaration of Principles on Palestinian self-
government; the Parliament of South Africa enacted
legislation establishing the Transitional Executive Council to
take charge of that country until a democratically elected
Government is in office; and a constitutional Government
took office in Cambodia.
We welcome these historic events and the promise they
hold for a more just and prosperous existence for the peoples
of those nations. As delegations will remember, the Middle
East and South Africa dominated the political agenda of the
Assembly for many years. These positive developments in
both regions will give a new cast to the Assembly’s
deliberations.
We can also take heart from progress on another front
of long-standing concern to the Assembly. The United
Nations is now three years into the International Decade for
the Eradication of Colonialism. The good news is that we
are already seeing evidence that the goals and objectives of
the United Nations in this area are almost completely
realized. The number of Self-Governing Territories on the
United Nations list is now very small, and many of these are
exploring innovative ways to complete the decolonization
process. The recent United Nations Seminar on Colonialism,
held in Papua-New Guinea in June, confirmed this trend. It
also revealed that in some cases some very small Non-Self-
Governing Territories do not want fundamental constitutional
change thrust upon them.
New Zealand has always been a strong advocate of the
principle that in all cases decisions on self-determination are,
of course, for the local people to make. We are comfortable
with the notion that certain Territories, such as the Tokelaus,
may finally choose to develop concepts of self-government
and free association that further develop models that have
already been successfully employed for other very small
former Territories.
In that connection, and consistent with New Zealand’s
principled approach to all matters of decolonization, I am
pleased to confirm that the New Zealand Government and
the people of the Tokelaus have extended an invitation to the
United Nations to send a further visiting mission to the
Tokelaus early in 1994 to meet local leaders and, of course,
discuss recent developments.
Democracy is a sure foundation for peace between
nations. It is the political expression of that universal
respect for human rights to which we are all committed.
The Vienna Declaration and Plan of Action arising out of
this year’s World Conference on Human Rights gives some
direction to steps the Organization can take to strengthen the
observance of human rights.
I believe we should move quickly to approve a high
commissioner for human rights. The United Nations needs
an officer with a mandate to play a constructive role in
preventing, monitoring and alleviating human rights abuses
throughout the world. The Centre for Human Rights should
be given the resources to match the immense task it will
have before it. There is a clear need for an enhanced
programme of advisory services and technical assistance to
Forty-eighth session - 29 September l993 41
help countries build up their national human rights
infrastructure.
Human rights is also about recognizing the rights of
peoples to self-identity. In this, the International Year for
the World’s Indigenous People, I would like to support a
proposal that the United Nations declare a decade for
indigenous peoples. We need to build on what has been
achieved, first at Rio de Janeiro and subsequently during the
International Year world wide. This is a long-term task. It
will require a sustained and very coordinated effort.
Unhappily, our task is not just to enhance the
observance of human rights. In this last decade of the
twentieth century, we seem at times to be actually moving
backwards, witnessing the abuse and deprivation of human
rights on a scale that we really believed we had put a long
way behind us. The suffering of millions of refugees
displaced by conflict is beyond our comprehension but
cannot and should not be beyond our compassion. This
dimension is starkly evident in nearly every issue now
before the Security Council. Last June, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees put the
figure at 19 million people - 19 million displaced people
around the world - and it continues to rise.
It is appropriate to pay a special tribute to Mrs. Ogata
and her staff for the way in which they are meeting, often in
dangerous and trying circumstances, the challenges which
this problem brings. New Zealand has responded to these
increased demands by making a special provision for
refugees from Bosnia, Somalia and Cambodia by
establishing special programmes for particularly vulnerable
groups, such as women at risk, and by providing aid. We
now have one of the highest per capita resettlement ratios in
the world. But this is, of course, addressing the symptoms,
not the cause. The ultimate objective must be to create or
recreate conditions that allow refugees to return in safety and
dignity to their own homes and homelands.
Nor can we neglect the need to bring to justice those
who have brought about such suffering. The establishment
of a war crimes Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia is
certainly a central pillar in the international response to this
particular conflict. The full achievement of the Tribunal’s
mandate is of the highest priority. At the same time, and in
a broader context, New Zealand also welcomes the
consideration being given to the creation of an international
criminal court. We would like to see further progress on
this issue made during this session of the Assembly.
Sustainable economic growth for all countries is
essential for stability and peace in the world. A principal
determinant for that is an open, healthy and international
trading system, a system that encourages closer economic
relations and strengthened North-South exchanges. There is
no greater assistance developed countries can give to the
developing countries than to open their markets. A
satisfactory conclusion to the Uruguay Round of multilateral
trade negotiations would be of immense benefit to us all and
has been mentioned, I believe, by just about every speaker
on this rostrum during this debate.
Progress to that end in the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade, of course, has been slow, as we know.
Many deadlines have come and many deadlines have gone
without resolution. We should not be under any illusion.
Come this December, after seven years of negotiations on
the Uruguay Round, either we will have the liberalization of
multilateral trade with a benefit to all or the prospects of
avoiding global economic warfare will have suffered the
most serious setback. The New Zealand Government sees
the purpose of these negotiations being to lock in place
today the politically attainable, and to build on what might
be possible tomorrow. In preparing for that, we also have
to focus our attention on what is needed to ensure that all
countries are placed where they can reap the benefits of the
future.
We still have much to follow up from the Rio
Conference on Environment and Development. But time is
not on our side. Environmental degradation continues to
pose a serious threat to the planet and its resources, and no
country - no country - is immune from its impact. The
levels of responsibility for environmental damage may differ
from country to country, but we must face up to their
consequences together. We must meet the objectives of
Agenda 21 and the Rio Declaration. All countries should
move to ratify the climate and biodiversity Conventions, a
step that New Zealand took just recently. New Zealand will
contribute to the global environmental facility that is to fund
both of those Conventions. We have begun work to reduce
carbon dioxide emissions and are developing a
comprehensive strategy for reducing net greenhouse gas
emissions. We are also making excellent progress on
phasing out consumption of ozone-depleting chemicals.
New Zealand is ready to share its expertise on biological
diversity with other countries to assist them in meeting
obligations under the Conventions.
I suppose that one of the most useful exercises that we
can conclude here is to draw some lessons from the
experiences and views that I have set out. The most obvious
42 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
one to me is that, however important it is to deal with the
particularities of human aspirations for peace, respect for the
individual, economic well-being and a good, clean
environment, one should never lose sight of the connections
between them all. The Secretary-General has pointed out
how peace, development and democracy form a mutually
reinforcing circle, and we agree. Getting the linkages right
can be as important for success as the elements of each.
Peace and security are not likely to be soundly based if
people are hungry. Economic growth cannot last if the
natural resources used to create it are not conserved. People
are not likely to make the effort required by economic
restructuring if the important choices are made for them.
Economic growth cannot be sustained if countries keep
coming up with new pretexts, such as environmental
protection, to justify excluding outside competition from
their own markets.
Human aspirations and human security must be seen in
the round. That is one of the major challenges facing the
membership of this Organization. The work done by the
United Nations in post-peace-keeping situations, I believe,
deserves renewed attention. For those countries where there
is still a need to foster economic, political and social
development, we should look at establishing a partnership
arrangement between the United Nations and the sovereign
Government. A coordinating body comprising the
Governments and a group of friends of the Secretariat could
help to ensure that the gains of peace-keeping are taken
through to reconstruction. I believe that we need a new
institutional framework to graduate problems out of the
security area and into a forum more able to cope with the
needs of redevelopment and reconstruction.
The second lesson is that we need to keep looking at
how well the United Nations is fitted to meet the challenges
it is facing and be prepared to change it where necessary.
Membership of the United Nations has continued to grow
and I warmly welcome the newest Member States.
Many speakers have referred to Security Council
reform. The Security Council is in need of early reform.
We support a modest increase in membership and a fresh
look at the institution as a whole. The possibility of some
members representing regional groupings for, say, a 10-year
period is worth considering. New Zealand will continue to
oppose any extension of veto rights.
Another imperative is for the Council’s work methods
to be improved. Wider consultation with the broader
membership of the United Nations is essential. United
Nations agencies are also ripe for restructuring. The General
Assembly has made a good start on itself. We have
streamlined the Committees, but we also must streamline the
overall workload. It is unmanageable at present.
For several years now, we have been looking hard at
ways to fund new demands on the Organization by making
compensating savings elsewhere. We still need to ask hard
questions about whether all that has been done traditionally
still needs to be done. I welcome the fact that the Secretary-
General’s budget proposals already envisage some major
steps in this area. He has also identified better contracting
as a source of further savings.
At the end of the day, however, all that can be done to
increase efficiency and cut costs will come to naught if the
financial commitment by Member States is lacking. New
Zealand pays its dues on time; most others do not. I urge
them to do so. Let us certainly go on talking about financial
reform, but let us also secure the financial basis of the
Organization while we are doing so.
But what is the real dream that all of us have? I would
urge all members to keep making, from year to year, real
progress towards satisfying those basic human aspirations I
mentioned at the outset and to do so with a strong, well-
equipped and well-focused United Nations. Specifically, I
want to see a reshaped Security Council, a more tightly
focused General Assembly, better peace-keeping practice, a
Secretariat equipped to handle peace-building and partnership
arrangements, and financial arrangements built on efficiency
and punctuality. Would that not give a point to the fiftieth
anniversary celebrations that lie ahead in 1995, and would it
not make the United Nations of the next 50 years a more
effective, more dynamic and exciting place to do the world’s
business in than the conditions of the last 50 years have
allowed? The deprived of this world expect no less. The
well-off know the world is too small for the huge gap that
now exists amongst all people to remain.
First of all, I should like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your election to your important post. I see
it as a manifestation of respect for the peace-loving policy
of Guyana, and as a tribute to the growing role of Latin
American and Caribbean countries in international affairs.
Last year demonstrated the great potential for drama
inherent in the post-confrontational and post-communist
world. We have seen that the very highest levels of
cooperation are achievable. We see truly exciting prospects
in yesterday’s address by President Bill Clinton of the
United States and in other statements already delivered from
this rostrum.
At the same time, developments in the former
Yugoslavia, Abkhazia and Karabakh have also revealed the
true depths of barbarism and the significant new threat of
aggressive nationalism.
Outbursts of violence caused by xenophobia, even in
traditionally prosperous countries, have shown that no one is
safe from this danger. It is no less serious a threat to peace
today than nuclear war was yesterday. The world
community mustered the strength to stave off the nuclear
danger. An important guarantee against this was the
Russian-American START II Treaty. Nowadays we all
confront the equally formidable challenge of a new
generation of conflicts and wars triggered by nationalist,
political and religious intolerance. That is why democracy
and peacemaking must be the key terms defining the strategy
of the world community as it moves into the twenty-first
century.
The United Nations is now turning to face this new
challenge. The successful United Nations operation in
Cambodia was one of the largest in the history of the
Organization. Life is returning to normal in a country so
long torn by civil war. We stand ready, together with other
members of the international community, to help the people
of Cambodia to rebuild their country.
Forty-eighth session - 28 September l993 15
We have seen a political and psychological
breakthrough in the solution of the key problem of the
Middle East settlement, which is the problem of Palestine.
We pay tribute to the courageous leaders of Israel and the
PLO who have taken the first and most difficult step towards
mutual recognition and reconciliation. We are ready to
participate in an international conference on the economic
development of self-governing Palestinian territories.
Russia, as a co-sponsor of the Conference on the Middle
East, will spare no effort to advance the peace process in all
other areas.
However, the key to the settlement of many conflicts
has not yet been found. Russia will continue to encourage
the parties to the Bosnian conflict not to lose the chance of
a peaceful settlement and will contribute to the operation for
its implementation under United Nations command.
Twice during wartime I have had occasion to visit
Sarajevo. I propose that the United Nations should place the
city under its moral and political protection and that it
should be declared a centre of coexistence and a meeting
point for Islam, the Orthodox Church, Catholicism and other
religions. The city should become a symbol for the whole
world, a reminder that political violence and intolerance
under the banner of religion are the worst possible crimes
against religion itself and the human spirit. In any case, it
is surely time to think of establishing closer contacts
between the United Nations and the world’s leading
religions.
The international community seems to have turned a
blind eye to Afghanistan and Angola as soon as they ceased
to be pawns in the cold war. The United Nations has no
right to leave millions of people who live there in the grip
of an epidemic of ethnic, clan and religious extremism and
to forget their economic and humanitarian problems,
including that of the liberation of former Soviet prisoners of
war.
We must learn the lessons of the United Nations
operation in Somalia and considerably improve its
effectiveness. Conscious of its special responsibility for
maintaining peace, Russia has made peacemaking and the
protection of human rights, particularly those of national
minorities, the priority of its foreign policy, first and
foremost in the territory of the former USSR.
We will spare no effort to strengthen the
Commonwealth of Independent States and make it a positive
factor, not only regionally, but globally. I call upon
Members of the United Nations to support proposals
submitted jointly by the members of the Commonwealth of
Independent States to the present session, relating in
particular to the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, the struggle against international terrorism and
the protection of the environment.
Our peacemaking efforts are already yielding their first
results. For more than a year now there have been no
hostilities in the Transdniester region and South Ossetia.
With our participation, the process of normalization of the
situation and national dialogue has started in Tajikistan.
Russia is making active efforts to put an end to the
Abkhazian and Karabakh conflicts and to render
humanitarian assistance to their victims.
All these problems are too serious and too tragic for
speculation about neo-imperial plans of Russia, diplomatic
rivalry, or the search for new spheres of influence by
neighbouring and distant Powers. The United Nations, the
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE),
and all States truly interested in peace, along with Russia,
will have enough work to do together. We want to see
much more active assistance for our peacemaking efforts,
not in words, but in deeds.
In most cases this means that the United Nations should
give a mandate for operations conducted at the request of
conflicting parties on the basis of appropriate agreements.
For this, close interaction with the United Nations and the
CSCE missions is essential. Also, our minds should be open
to non-traditional methods, such as the participation of
contingents of the conflicting parties themselves and those
of a neighbouring mediating State. The pragmatic nature of
such a model was shown in particular in the Transdniester
region and in South Ossetia. This model should be used,
and not disregarded, in other regions, in the interests of the
United Nations, which is facing an overload of peace-
keeping operations. The collective peacemaking forces of
the Commonwealth of Independent States could also interact
with the United Nations itself. It is in any case time to
establish closer relations between the two organizations.
In material and financial terms the burden of
peacemaking borne by Russia alone today in the territory of
the former USSR must be lightened. This could mean
establishing a voluntary fund for this purpose. Of course,
Russia realizes that no international organization or group of
States can replace our peacemaking efforts in this specific
post-Soviet area.
16 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
By and large, taking into consideration the wide
experience gained throughout the world, it is time to think
of a modern overall strategy of peacemaking which would
be integrated with "An Agenda for Peace" proposed by the
Secretary-General.
The Russian Federation, as an initiator of the statement
of the President of the Security Council on peacemaking and
peace-keeping issues, made on 28 May 1993, makes the
following proposals.
The first is to define a clear-cut concept of political
leadership by the Security Council, create an effective
military command under the supervision of the Secretary-
General and establish a procedure for involving, on that
basis, regional organizations.
The second is to establish under Article 29 of the
United Nations Charter a special Security Council committee
on improving peace-keeping operation practices. This could
include those States which have already gained considerable
experience in this area of United Nations activity.
Our third proposal is to set up United Nations stand-by
forces which would be at the disposal of Member States and
used in peacemaking operations with the consent of their
Governments on a case-by-case basis at the request of the
Secretary-General.
All these questions directly relate to the process of
renewal of the United Nations. The reform of United
Nations bodies, including the Security Council, will make
sense and be effective if it allows for a more adequate
response to new challenges in the field of peacemaking.
The settlement of conflicts should go hand in hand with
the international protection of their victims. As a follow-up
to the Geneva International Conference on the Protection of
Victims of War, we propose that international legal
restrictions be imposed on the use in internal conflicts of the
most destructive and indiscriminate types of weapons,
primarily military aircraft and artillery-rocket systems. We
should also eliminate or call a halt to the use of mercenaries
and volunteers both in domestic and international conflicts.
We propose the establishment of a permanent
international tribunal to deal with crimes against humanity.
The inevitability of punishment will help to prevent the
recurrence of such atrocities.
It has become crucially important to address
comprehensively the problem of refugees and to specify the
relevant principles of international law at a special
conference.
Peacemaking cannot be separated from the protection
of human rights. The international community is duty-bound
to condemn strongly "double" or lower standards of human
rights protection, the theory and practice of the superiority
of rights of an "indigenous" nation and the creation of mono-
ethnic States. The time has come to establish a United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. Following
the example of the Conference on Security and Cooperation
in Europe, it is time for the United Nations also to have a
Special Rapporteur on National Minorities. We support the
proposals of the Secretary-General in the field of human
rights protection.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction would
directly contradict the peacemaking efforts of the United
Nations. This poses an ever growing threat not only in the
future but even at the present. We are ready to cooperate
with the United States and other countries in solving the
problems connected with cutting off fissionable material
production and banning the construction of facilities for such
production, particularly in conflict areas.
We are in favour of transforming the Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Treaty into a universal agreement of
unlimited duration. The United Nations should also work to
ensure the universality of and strict compliance with the
Convention on the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
Russia reiterates, from this rostrum of the General
Assembly, its intention to adhere to the international regime
of non-proliferation of missile technology. In the very near
future, we intend to take concrete steps to strengthen our
relevant domestic legislation, going so far as to envisage
criminal prosecution for violations of the rules governing the
export of missile equipment and technology. We call on all
States that possess such technology to join the Missile
Technology Control Regime (MTCR). It is also necessary
to provide for equality of rights and obligations of the
participants, so as to enable them freely to export peaceful
space technology.
Successful economic reform is one of the guarantees of
peace. This is of particular relevance to the many developing
countries and to the post-communist States. Easier access to
world markets for countries with transitional economies,
including Russia, and the lifting of all discriminatory
restrictions is becoming an issue of the highest priority. We
Forty-eighth session - 28 September l993 17
believe that the General Assembly should express its support
for efforts in this direction. We also propose the
establishment of a mechanism to coordinate programmes
carried out by the institutions of the United Nations system
in support of economic reforms in countries in transition.
The strengthening of democracy is the principal
guarantee of security and socio-economic development in the
world today. This has been true in Europe, Asia, Africa and
Latin America, although the process is not proceeding easily
and automatically everywhere. Peoples who have risen up
against totalitarianism are threatened by the risk of political
violence and ultra-nationalism.
We categorically reject such an alternative. Russia is
peacefully transforming itself in accordance with the
fundamental principle of democracy: free elections. In 1991,
the people of Russia elected their country’s first democratic
President, and they confirmed their confidence in his policies
at the April referendum this year. On the basis of this
twofold mandate, the President has taken decisive measures
to ensure democratic elections to the Parliament in
December of this year. Thus, the old totalitarian system of
power will be definitively dismantled and replaced by a new
system of power elected by the people and responsible only
to the people. We invite international observers to monitor
the elections to the Parliament.
In building a new democratic Russia, we of course must
first of all rely on our own potential. Yet we very much
appreciate the solidarity the democratic community has
shown us. Such solidarity is neither an act of interference
in our domestic affairs nor the whimsical gesture of
romanticists in international politics. It is simply an
expression of the human duty to protect the rights of
individuals in other countries.
Next month will mark the fiftieth anniversary of the
Moscow Conference when, in the turbulent year of 1943, the
foundation was laid for the establishment of the United
Nations, which was conceived as an organization of
democratic countries having triumphed over Nazi
totalitarianism. Half a century later, the success of
democracy in Russia and many other countries has made it
possible for the first time to realize fully the lofty destiny of
the United Nations and to help it become a truly efficient
peacemaking Organization.
We should not allow political short-sightedness, current
economic difficulties, egoism and conceit to make us lose
the chance to transform the still fragile post-communist
world into a democratic one. I hope that this session will
move us closer to an understanding of this goal and of the
ways of reaching it in the interests of all States and nations.
Let me first congratulate you,
Sir, on your election as President of the General Assembly
for this session.
Mr. Secretary-General, distinguished representatives and
guests, it is a great honour for me to address you and to
stand in this great Hall, which symbolizes so much of the
twentieth century - its darkest crises and its brightest
aspirations.
I come before you as the first American President born
after the founding of the United Nations. Like most of the
people in the world today, I was not even alive during the
convulsive world war that convinced humankind of the need
for this Organization, nor during the San Francisco
Conference that led to its birth. Yet I have followed the
work of the United Nations throughout my life, with
admiration for its accomplishments, sadness for its failures
and the conviction that, through common effort, our
generation can take the bold steps needed to redeem the
mission entrusted to the United Nations 48 years ago. I
pledge to you that my nation remains committed to helping
make the United Nations vision a reality.
The start of this session of the General Assembly offers
us an opportunity to take stock of where we are as common
shareholders in the progress of humankind and the
preservation of our planet. It is clear that we live at a
turning point in human history.
Immense and promising changes seem to wash over us
every day. The cold war is over. The world is no longer
divided into two armed and angry camps. Dozens of new
democracies have been born.
It is a moment of miracles. We see Nelson Mandela
stand side by side with President de Klerk proclaiming a
date for South Africa’s first non-racial elections.
We see Russia’s first popularly elected President,
Boris Yeltsin, leading his nation on its bold democratic
journey.
We have seen decades of deadlock shattered in the
Middle East as the Prime Minister of Israel and the
Chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization reached
past enmity and suspicion to shake each other’s hand and
exhilarate the entire world with the hope of peace.
We have begun to see the doomsday weapons of
nuclear annihilation dismantled and destroyed. Thirty-two
years ago President Kennedy warned this Assembly that
humanity lived under a nuclear sword of Damocles that hung
by the slenderest of threads. Now the United States is
working with Russia, Ukraine, Belarus and others to take
that sword down, to lock it away in a secure vault, where we
hope and pray it will remain for ever.
It is a new era in this Hall as well. The super-Power
standoff that for so long stymied the work of the United
Nations, almost from its first day, has now yielded to a new
promise of practical cooperation.
Yet today we must all admit that there are two
powerful tendencies working from opposite directions to
challenge the authority of nation States everywhere and to
undermine the authority of nation States to work together.
From beyond nations, economic and technological forces all
over the globe are compelling the world towards integration.
These forces are fuelling a welcome explosion of
entrepreneurship and political liberalization. But they also
threaten to destroy the insularity and independence of
national economies, quickening the pace of change and
making many of our people feel more insecure. At the same
time, from within nations, the resurgent aspirations of ethnic
and religious groups challenge Governments on terms that
traditional nation States cannot easily accommodate. These
twin forces lie at the heart of the challenges, not only to our
national Governments, but also to all our international
institutions. They require all of us in this Hall to find new
ways to work together more effectively in pursuit of our
national interests and to think anew about whether our
institutions of international cooperation are adequate to this
moment.
Thus, as we marvel at this era’s promise of new peace,
we must also recognize that serious threats remain. Bloody
ethnic, religious and civil wars rage from Angola to the
Caucasus to Kashmir. As weapons of mass destruction fall
into more hands, even small conflicts can threaten to take on
murderous proportions. Hunger and disease continue to take
a tragic toll, especially among the world’s children. The
malignant neglect of our global environment threatens our
children’s health and their very security. The repression of
conscience continues in too many nations. And terrorism,
which has taken so many innocent lives, assumed a
horrifying immediacy for us here when militant fanatics
bombed the World Trade Center and planned to attack even
this very Hall of peace.
Let me assure the Assembly that whether they be the
plotters of those crimes or the mass murderers who bombed
Pan Am flight 103, my Government is determined to see that
such terrorists are brought to justice.
At this moment of panoramic change, of vast
opportunities and troubling threats, we must all ask ourselves
what we can and what we should do as a community of
nations. We must once again dare to dream of what might
be, for our dreams may be within our reach.
For that to happen, we must all be willing honestly to
confront the challenges of the broader world. That has never
been easy. When this Organization was founded 48 years
ago, the world’s nations stood devastated by war or
exhausted by its expense. There was little appetite for
cooperative efforts among nations; most people simply
wanted to get on with their lives. But a far-sighted
generation of leaders from the United States and elsewhere
rallied the world. Their efforts built the institutions of post-
-war security and prosperity.
We are at a similar moment today. The momentum of
the cold war no longer propels us in our daily actions. And
with daunting economic and political pressures upon almost
every nation represented in this room, many of us are
turning to focus greater attention and energy on domestic
needs and problems, and we must.
But putting each of our economic houses in order
cannot mean that we shut our windows to the world. The
pursuit of self-renewal in many of the world’s largest and
most powerful economies - in Europe, in Japan, in North
America - is absolutely crucial, because unless the great
industrial nations can recapture their robust economic
growth, the global economy will languish. Yet the industrial
nations also need growth elsewhere in order to lift their own.
Indeed, prosperity in each of our nations and regions also
depends on active and responsible engagement in a host of
shared concerns: for example, a thriving and democratic
Russia not only makes the world safer, it also can help to
expand the world’s economy; a strong GATT (General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) agreement will create
millions of jobs world wide; peace in the Middle East,
buttressed as it should be by the repeal of outdated United
Nations resolutions, can help to unleash that region’s great
economic potential and calm a perpetual source of tension in
global affairs; and the growing economic power of China -
coupled with greater political openness - could bring
enormous benefits to all of Asia and to the rest of the world.
We must help our publics to understand this distinction:
domestic renewal is an overdue tonic; but isolationism and
protectionism are still poison. We must inspire our peoples
to look beyond their immediate fears towards a broader
horizon.
Let me start by being clear about where the United
States stands. The United States occupies a unique position
in world affairs today: we recognize that and we welcome
it. Yet, with the cold war over, I know many people ask
whether the United States plans to retreat or remain active
in the world; and if active, to what end? Many people are
asking that in our own country as well.
Let me answer that question as clearly and plainly as I
can. The United States intends to remain engaged and to
lead. We cannot solve every problem, but we must and will
serve as a fulcrum for change and a pivot point for peace.
In a new era of peril and opportunity, our overriding
purpose must be to expand and strengthen the world’s
community of market-based democracies. During the cold
war, we sought to contain a threat to the survival of free
institutions; now we seek to enlarge the circle of nations that
live under those free institutions.
For our dream is of a day when the opinions and
energies of every person in the world will be given full
expression, in a world of thriving democracies that cooperate
with each other and live in peace.
With this statement, I do not mean to announce some
crusade to force our way of life and doing things on others
or to replicate our institutions. But we now know clearly
that throughout the world, from Poland to Eritrea, from
Guatemala to South Korea, there is an enormous yearning
among people who wish to be the masters of their own
economic and political lives. Where it matters most and
where we can make the greatest difference, we will therefore
patiently and firmly align ourselves with that yearning.
Forty-eighth session - 27 September l993 9
Today, there are still those who claim that democracy
is simply not applicable to many cultures and that its recent
expansion is an aberration, an accident in history that will
soon fade away. But I agree with President Roosevelt, who
once said: "The democratic aspiration is no mere recent
phase of human history. It is human history."
We will work to strengthen the free market democracies
by revitalizing our economy at home, by opening world
trade through GATT, the North American Free Trade
Agreement and other accords, and by updating our shared
institutions, asking with you and answering the hard
questions about whether they are adequate to the present
challenges.
We will support the consolidation of market democracy
where it is taking new root, as in the States of the former
Soviet Union and all over Latin America, and we seek to
foster the practices of good government that distribute the
benefits of democracy and economic growth fairly to all
people.
We will work to reduce the threat from regimes that are
hostile to democracy and to support liberalization of
non-democratic States when they are willing to live in peace
with the rest of us. As a country that has over 150 racial,
ethnic and religious groups within our borders, our policy is
and must be rooted in a profound respect for all the world’s
religions and cultures. But we must oppose everywhere
extremism that produces terrorism and hate.
And we must pursue our humanitarian goals of
reducing suffering, fostering sustainable development and
improving health and living conditions, particularly for our
world’s children.
On efforts from export controls to trade agreements to
peace-keeping, we will often work in partnership with others
and through multilateral institutions such as the United
Nations. It is in our national interest to do so. But we must
not hesitate to act unilaterally when there is a threat to our
core interests or to those of our allies.
The United States believes that an expanding
community of market democracies not only serves our own
security interests, it also advances the goals enshrined in this
body’s Charter and its Universal Declaration of Human
Rights.
For broadly based prosperity is clearly the strongest
form of preventive diplomacy, and the habits of democracy
are the habits of peace. Democracy is rooted in
compromise, not conquest. It rewards tolerance, not hatred.
Democracies rarely wage war on one another. They make
more reliable partners in trade, in diplomacy, and in the
stewardship of our global environment. And democracies,
with the rule of law and respect for political, religious and
cultural minorities, are more responsive to their own people
and to the protection of human rights.
But as we work towards this vision, we must confront
the storm clouds that may overwhelm our work and darken
the march towards freedom.
If we do not stem the proliferation of the world’s
deadliest weapons, no democracy can feel secure.
If we do not strengthen the capacity to resolve conflicts
among and within nations, those conflicts will smother the
birth of free institutions, threaten the development of entire
regions and continue to take innocent lives.
If we do not nurture our people and our planet through
sustainable development, we will deepen conflict and waste
the very wonders that make our efforts worth doing.
Let me talk more about what I believe we must do in
each of these three categories: non-proliferation, conflict
resolution and sustainable development.
One of our most urgent priorities must be attacking the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction - whether
nuclear, chemical or biological - and the ballistic missiles
that can rain them down on populations hundreds of miles
away.
We know this is not an idle problem. All of us are still
haunted by the pictures of Kurdish women and children cut
down by poison gas. We saw SCUD missiles drop during
the Gulf War that would have been far graver in their
consequences if they had carried nuclear weapons. And we
know that many nations still believe it is in their interests to
develop weapons of mass destruction or to sell them or the
necessary technologies to others for financial gain.
More than a score of nations likely possess such
weapons and their number threatens to grow. These
weapons destabilize entire regions. They could turn a local
conflict into a global human and environmental catastrophe.
We simply have got to find ways to control these weapons
and to reduce the number of States that possess them by
supporting and strengthening the International Atomic
Energy Agency and by taking other necessary measures.
10 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
I have made non-proliferation one of our nation’s
highest priorities. We intend to weave it more deeply into
the fabric of all of our relationships with the world’s nations
and institutions. We seek to build a world of increasing
pressure for non-proliferation but increasingly open trade and
technology for those States that live by accepted
international rules.
Today, let me describe several new policies that our
Government will pursue to stem proliferation. We will
pursue new steps to control the materials for nuclear
weapons. Growing global stockpiles of plutonium and
highly enriched uranium are raising the danger of nuclear
terrorism for all nations. We will press for an international
agreement that would ban production of these materials for
weapons for ever.
As we reduce our nuclear stockpiles, the United States
has also begun negotiations towards a comprehensive ban on
nuclear testing. This summer I declared that to facilitate
those negotiations, our nation would suspend our testing if
all other nuclear States would do the same. Today, in the
face of disturbing signs, I renew my call on the nuclear
States to abide by that moratorium as we negotiate to stop
nuclear testing for all time.
I am also proposing new efforts to fight the
proliferation of biological and chemical weapons. Today,
only a handful of nations has ratified the chemical weapons
Convention. I call on all nations - including my own - to
ratify this accord quickly so that it may enter into force by
13 January 1995. We will also seek to strengthen the
biological weapons Convention by making every nation’s
biological activities and facilities open to more international
scrutiny.
I am proposing as well new steps to thwart the
proliferation of ballistic missiles. Recently, working with
Russia, Argentina, Hungary and South Africa, we have made
significant progress toward that goal. Now we will seek to
strengthen the principles of the Missile Technology Control
Regime by transforming it from an agreement on technology
transfer among just 23 nations into a set of rules that can
command universal adherence.
We will also reform our own system of export controls
in the United States to reflect the realities of the post-cold-
war world, where we seek to enlist the support of our former
adversaries in the battle against proliferation. At the same
time as we stop deadly technologies from falling into the
wrong hands, we will work with our partners to remove
outdated controls that unfairly burden legitimate commerce
and unduly restrain growth and opportunity all over the
world.
As we work to keep the world’s most destructive
weapons out of conflicts, we must also strengthen the
international community’s ability to address those conflicts
themselves. For as we all now know so painfully, the end
of the cold war did not bring us to the millennium of peace.
Indeed, it simply removed the lid from many cauldrons of
ethnic, religious and territorial animosity.
The philosopher Isaiah Berlin has said that a wounded
nationalism is like a bent twig, forced down so severely that
when released, it lashes back with fury. The world today is
thick with both bent and recoiling twigs of wounded
communal identities. This surge of bitter conflicts has
placed high demands on the United Nations peace-keeping
forces. Frequently, the Blue Helmets have worked wonders.
In Namibia, El Salvador, the Golan Heights and elsewhere,
United Nations peace-keepers have helped to stop the
fighting, restore civil authority and enable free elections. In
Bosnia, United Nations peace-keepers, against the danger
and frustration of that continuing tragedy, have maintained
a valiant humanitarian effort. And if the parties to that
conflict take the hard steps needed to make a real peace, the
international community - including the United States - must
be ready to help in its effective implementation.
In Somalia, the United States and the United Nations
have worked together to achieve a stunning humanitarian
rescue, saving literally hundreds of thousands of lives and
restoring conditions of security to almost the entire country.
United Nations peace-keepers from over two dozen nations
remain in Somalia today - and some, including brave
Americans, have lost their lives - to ensure that we complete
our mission and that anarchy and starvation do not return
just as quickly as they were abolished.
Many still criticize United Nations peace-keeping, but
those who do should talk to the people of Cambodia, where
the United Nations operations helped turn the killing fields
into fertile soil for reconciliation. Last May’s elections in
Cambodia marked a proud accomplishment for that war--
weary nation and for the United Nations. And I am pleased
to announce that the United States has recognized
Cambodia’s new Government.
United Nations peace-keeping holds the promise to
resolve many of this era’s conflicts. But the reason we have
supported such missions is not, as some critics in the United
States have charged, to subcontract American foreign policy,
but to strengthen our security, to protect our interests, and to
Forty-eighth session - 27 September l993 11
share among nations the costs and effort of pursuing peace.
Peace-keeping cannot be a substitute for our own national
defence efforts, but it can strongly supplement them.
Today there is wide recognition that the United Nations
peace-keeping ability has not kept pace with its rising
responsibilities and challenges. Just six years ago, about
10,000 United Nations peace-keepers were stationed around
the world. Today the United Nations has some 80,000
deployed in 17 operations on four continents. Yet until
recently, if a peace-keeping commander called in from
across the globe when it was night-time here in New York,
there was no one in the peace-keeping office even to answer
the call. When lives are on the line, we cannot let the reach
of the United Nations exceed its grasp.
As the Secretary-General and others have argued, if
United Nations peace-keeping is to be a sound security
investment for our nation and for other United Nations
Members, it must adapt to new times. Together, we must
prepare United Nations peace-keeping for the twenty-first
century. We need to begin by bringing the rigours of
military and political analysis to every United Nations peace
mission. In recent weeks in the Security Council, our nation
has begun asking harder questions about proposals for new
peace-keeping missions. Is there a real threat to
international peace? Does the proposed mission have clear
objectives? Can an end point be identified for those who
will be asked to participate? How much will the mission
cost? From now on the United Nations should address these
and other questions for every proposed mission before we
vote and before the mission begins. The United Nations
simply cannot become engaged in every one of the world’s
conflicts. If the American people are to say "Yes" to United
Nations peace-keeping, the United Nations must know when
to say "No".
The United Nations also must have the technical means
to run a modern, world-class peace-keeping operation. We
support the creation of a genuine United Nations peace-
keeping headquarters with a planning staff; with access to
timely intelligence; with a logistics unit that can be deployed
on a moment’s notice; and with a modern operations centre
with global communications.
United Nations operations must not only be adequately
funded but also fairly funded. Within the next few weeks,
the United States will be current on our peace-keeping bills.
I have worked hard with the Congress to get this done. I
believe the United States should lead the way in being
timely in its payments, and I will work to ensure that we
continue to pay our peace-keeping bills in full. But I am
also committed to working with the United Nations to reduce
our nation’s assessment for these missions. The assessment
system has not been changed since 1973, and everyone in
our country knows that our percentage of the world’s
economic pie is not as great as it was then. Therefore, I
believe our rate should be reduced to reflect the rise of other
nations that can now bear more of the financial burden.
That will make it easier for me as President to make sure
my country pays in a timely and full fashion.
Changes in the United Nations peace-keeping operations
must be part of an even broader programme of United
Nations reform. I say that, again, not to criticize the United
Nations but to help improve it. As our Ambassador,
Madeleine Albright, has suggested, the United States has
always played a twin role in regard to the United Nations:
"First friend and first critic."
Today, corporations around the world are finding ways
to move from the industrial age into the information age -
improving service, reducing bureaucracy and cutting costs.
Here in the United States, Vice President Al Gore and I have
launched an effort literally to reinvent how our Government
operates. We see this going on in other Governments
around the world. Now the time has come to reinvent the
way the United Nations operates as well.
I applaud the initial steps the Secretary-General has
taken to reduce and reform the United Nations bureaucracy.
Now we must all do even more to root out waste. Before
this General Assembly is over, let us establish a strong
mandate for an office of inspector general, so that it can
attain a reputation for toughness, for integrity, for
effectiveness. Let us build new confidence among our
people that the United Nations is changing with the needs of
our times.
Ultimately, the key for reforming the United Nations,
as for reforming our own government, is to remember why
we are here and whom we serve. It is well to recall that the
first words of the United Nations Charter are not, "We the
Governments", but "We the peoples of the United Nations".
That means, in every country, the teachers, the workers, the
farmers, the professionals, the fathers, the mothers, the
children, from the most remote village in the world to the
largest metropolis - they are why we gather in this great
Hall; it is their futures that are at risk when we act or fail to
act; and it is they who ultimately pay our bills.
As we dream new dreams in this age when miracles
seem possible, let us focus on the lives of those people, and
especially on the children who will inherit this world. Let
12 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
us work with a new urgency, and imagine what kind of
world we could create for them over the coming generation.
Let us work with new energy to protect the world’s
people from torture and repression. As Secretary of State
Christopher stressed at the recent Vienna Conference, human
rights are not something conditional, bounded by culture but,
rather, something universal, granted by God. This General
Assembly should create, at long last, a high commissioner
for human rights. I hope it will do this soon, and with
vigour and energy and conviction.
Let us also work far more ambitiously to fulfil our
obligations as custodians of this planet, not only to improve
the quality of life for our citizens and the quality of our air,
water and the earth itself, but also because the roots of
conflict are so often entangled with the roots of
environmental neglect and the calamities of famine and
disease.
During the course of our campaign in the United States
last year, Vice President Gore and I promised the American
people major changes in our nation’s policy towards the
global environment. Those were promises to keep, and
today the United States is doing so. Today we are working
with other nations to build on the promising work of the
United Nations Commission on Sustainable Development.
We are working to make sure that all nations meet their
commitments under the global climate Convention. We are
seeking to complete negotiations on an accord to prevent the
world’s deserts from further expanding. And we seek to
strengthen the World Health Organization’s efforts to combat
the plague of AIDS, which is not only killing millions, but
also exhausting the resources of the nations that can least
afford it.
And let us make a new commitment to the world’s
children. It is tragic enough that one and a half million
children have died as a result of wars over the past decade.
But it is far more unforgivable that during that same period
40 million children have died from diseases completely
preventable with simple vaccines or medicines. Every day
- this day, as we meet here - over 30,000 of the world’s
children will die of malnutrition and disease. As the
Director of the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF),
Jim Grant, has reminded me, "each of [those children] had
a name and a nationality, a family, a personality and a
potential".
We are compelled to do better by the world’s children.
Just as our own nation has launched new reforms to ensure
that every child has adequate health care, we must do more
to get basic vaccines and other treatments for curable
diseases to children all over the world. It’s the best
investment we’ll ever make. We can find new ways to
ensure that every child grows up with clean, drinkable water
- that most precious commodity of life itself. And the
United Nations can work even harder to ensure that each
child has at least a full primary education - and I mean that
opportunity for girls as well as boys.
To ensure a healthier and more abundant world, we
simply must slow the world’s explosive growth in
population. We cannot afford to see the human race double
by the middle of the next century. Our nation has at last
renewed its commitment to work with the United Nations to
expand the availability of the world’s family planning
education and services. We must ensure that there is a place
at the table for every one of the world’s children. We can
do this.
At the birth of this Organization, 48 years ago - another
time of both victory and danger - a generation of gifted
leaders from many nations stepped forward to organize the
world’s efforts on behalf of security and prosperity. One
American leader during that period said this: "It is time we
steered by the stars rather than by the light of each passing
ship." His generation picked peace, human dignity and
freedom. Those are good stars. They should remain the
highest in our firmament.
Now history has granted to us a moment of even
greater opportunity, when old dangers are ebbing and old
walls are crumbling. Future generations will judge us, every
one of us, above all by what we make of this magic
moment. Let us resolve that we will dream larger, that we
will work harder, so that they can conclude that we did not
merely turn walls to rubble, but instead laid the foundations
for great things to come.
Let us ensure that the tide of freedom and democracy
is not pushed back by the fierce winds of ethnic hatred. Let
us ensure that the world’s most dangerous weapons are
safely reduced and denied to dangerous hands. Let us
ensure that the world we pass to our children is healthier,
safer and more abundant than the one we inhabit today. I
believe - I know - that together we can extend this moment
of miracles into an age of great works and new wonders.At the outset I should like warmly to congratulate
you, Sir, on your election to the presidency of the current
session of the General Assembly. I am convinced that given
your proven talent and extensive experience, and with the
cooperation of all delegations, you will steer our session to
full success. I also wish to express my sincere thanks to
your predecessor, Mr. Stoyan Ganev, for his remarkable
accomplishments during the last session. I would like to
take this opportunity to extend a warm welcome and
congratulations to the new Members which have been
admitted to the United Nations this year.
The world has moved into a transitional period towards
multipolarity since the disintegration of the bipolar structure.
It had been hoped that the end of the cold war would bring
peace and prosperity to the world. Indeed, the prospects of
avoiding another world war and ensuring a lasting peace
have improved. However, contradictions that had lain
dormant during the cold war have begun to emerge, and
manifestations of hegemonism and power politics in
international relations are on the rise. Peace and development, so ardently aspired to by mankind, still face grave
challenges.
The relative stability Europe once enjoyed has been
upset. Many countries are plagued by severe economic
slumps or by political upheaval. Some regions are torn by
ethnic or religious feuds exacerbated by territorial disputes,
leading to intermittent conflicts and armed clashes. A
regional war is raging at the southern end of the Eurasian
land mass. All this can only have a negative impact on
Europe and on the world at large.
In the meantime, a number of developed countries have
developed a "post-cold-war syndrome". Some have sunk
into the longest recession since the Second World War. In
the new setting, internal contradictions have sharpened,
political scandals are rife, racism has reared its ugly head,
trade protectionism is on the rise, and xenophobic violence
is spreading. Public disaffection has been manifest, and the
entrenched political establishment has been shaken. This
trend has adversely affected the stability of the countries
concerned and complicated international relations.
The new international environment has led to an even
more dire plight for many developing countries. Increasing
foreign intervention has heightened various internal factors
of instability, thus compounding their difficulties. Their
rights to independence, subsistence and development have
been neither duly respected nor safeguarded. Therefore,
interference from the outside should cease, and the
international community should give top priority to helping
those countries achieve political stability and overcome
economic difficulties. Lasting world peace and stability will
remain elusive if the developing countries are still beset by
persistent political unrest and if the North-South gap
continues to widen.
There is no denying the fact that peace and
development remain the overriding issues of our time. To
preserve peace and accelerate development has become the
pressing demand of the people of all countries, but especially
of those in the developing countries.
The world we live in is as diversified as ever. There
are now more than 180 independent sovereign States, which
differ not only in social systems but also in stages of
development. Moreover, they have widely diverse
ideologies, cultural traditions, ethnic identities and religious
faiths. We should recognize and respect those differences
and diversities, and treat each other as equal members of the
international community. We should promote interchanges
in the spirit of seeking common ground while setting aside
differences. We should oppose any attempt to impose a
particular model on large numbers of countries, as diverse as
they are.
We believe that there can be genuine peace,
international harmony and common development among
States only when international relations strictly conform to
the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter
and are based on the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence
and other accepted norms of international conduct.
Increased economic and cultural interchanges between States
have deepened their interdependence. It is absolutely
necessary that States open up to each other; enhance
exchanges, mutual understanding and cooperation; and share
the benefit of complementarity. But all this will be possible
only on the basis of mutual respect, equality and mutual
benefit.
In order to attain the overall objective of peace and
development, the Chinese Government has on many
occasions called for the establishment of a new international
political and economic order of peace, stability, justice and
rationality based on the Five Principles of Peaceful
Forty-eighth session - 29 September l993 19
Coexistence and on the recognition of the diversity of the
world and of the differences among States. Under the new
order, mutual respect and cooperation between States on an
equal footing will replace hegemonism and power politics;
peace talks, dialogue and consultations will replace the use
or threat of force; and equality, mutual benefit and
accommodation of each other’s needs will replace trade
protectionism and unequal exchanges. The Chinese
Government is ready to cooperate extensively with all other
countries and will continue to make unremitting efforts for
the establishment of such a new order, and for peace and
development of the world.
The report "An Agenda for Peace" (A/47/277)
submitted by the Secretary-General contains many important,
thought-provokinq recommendations and ideas that deserve
careful consideration. We commend the Secretary-General
for his efforts therein. As a permanent member of the
Security Council, China has always supported the positive
endeavours of the United Nations in preserving world peace
and stability, promoting global development and resolving
international disputes. We support the further enhancement
and strengthening of the United Nations constructive role in
preventive diplomacy, in peacemaking and peace-keeping on
the basis of the purposes and principles of the Charter.
As the frequency and scope of United Nations
peace-keeping operations is growing, we deem it important
and relevant to stress such basic principles of the Charter as
respect for the sovereignty of, and non-interference in, the
internal affairs of Member States. Those principles must be
strictly observed at all times when undertaking preventive
diplomacy, peace-keeping operations or post-conflict
peace-building. Prior consent and pledges of cooperation by
the parties must be obtained, and strict impartiality should
prevail in all peace-keeping missions. Only in this way can
United Nations preventive diplomacy and peace-keeping
operations fulfil the underlying purposes of the Charter and
achieve the desired positive result.
The peaceful settlement of international disputes is an
important principle of the Charter, one which we deem to be
the essence of preventive diplomacy. Everything should be
done to bring the opposing parties to the negotiating table
before the outbreak of conflicts, so that they can start
consultations to achieve a peaceful settlement. All disputes
between States, regional conflicts or even internal conflicts,
however complex they may be, should be amenable to a
political solution, and nothing should be done to aggravate
the situation.
Not long ago, the Palestine Liberation Organization and
the Government of Israel signed an agreement on mutual
recognition and on the question of self-government for
Palestinians. Although just a beginning, the move was a
major breakthrough in the settlement of the Middle East
question, which has dragged on for nearly half a century.
This agreement was the result of efforts by the international
community and by both Palestine and Israel to settle an
international dispute by peaceful means. We sincerely
welcome and wish to express our congratulations at this
development. We can see from this that as long as a
glimmer of hope remains, one must not give up the pursuit
of a peaceful settlement.
Needless to say, one should adopt a very serious
attitude towards, and firmly oppose, any act of aggression
that tramples on the sovereignty of another country, such as
larger States bullying smaller ones or the strong lording it
over the weak in the international arena. We disapprove of
the indiscriminate use of sanctions or force in the name of
the United Nations. We also believe that humanitarian
missions must not be transformed into military operations
and that a war cannot be stopped by
expanding it.
It must be noted that in a world troubled by recurrent
regional conflicts and interwoven contradictions, the United
Nations alone cannot hope to resolve all international
disputes. It has the duty to undertake this task and
maintain international peace and security. But regional
organizations should also be taken into account and
encouraged, as provided in Chapter VIII of the Charter, to
assume greater responsibility and play a more active role in
this regard. In view of the proliferation of United Nations
peace-keeping operations and the concomitant demands on
the Organization and Member States in terms of manpower,
finance and material resources, we deem it essential that the
United Nations act within the limits of its means and
enhance the cost-effectiveness of such operations.
Peace and development are inseparable. Economic
development cannot get off the ground without the
prerequisites of peace and stability. On the other hand,
unless there is sound economic development, there can
hardly be secure or enduring peace and stability. We
maintain that the United Nations should meet the demands
of the developing countries for social and economic
advancement and should give this very high priority. This
is the way to make the United Nations an Organization that
all the countries of the world will support and count on.
This is also the way to enhance further the role and prestige
of the United Nations. Proceeding from this consideration,
20 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
we in China have stepped up preparations for the fourth
World Conference on Women in Beijing, scheduled for
1995. We also give vigorous support to the convening of
the World Summit for Social Development in Copenhagen
the same year.
It must be pointed out that unless the international
community helps the developing countries break loose
quickly from poverty and backwardness, there can be no
sustained growth or prosperity for all. Hence, we call upon
the developed countries to do more to curb trade
protectionism, contribute more funds for development and
environmental protection, cut back debt burden, increase
official development assistance, reduce restrictions on
technology transfer and open their markets wider so as to
create a favourable environment for the economic recovery
and revitalization of the developing countries. This will
prove a boon to the developed countries themselves. At a
time when the world economy has become increasingly
interrelated, the revitalization of the developing countries
will be a boost to the world and will spur to the economic
recovery and growth of the developed countries.
Since the founding of the United Nations, tremendous
changes have taken place in the world and in the
Organization itself. United Nations membership has
increased from the original 51 to 184 now, the majority
being developing countries. The Chinese Government is of
the view that, in keeping with developments, the United
Nations should be restructured, and the composition of the
Security Council could be appropriately enlarged to enable
the Organization better to respond to the changes in the
world, meet the concerns and wishes of the membership and
enhance its own role in international affairs. Reform of the
Security Council should enable it better to discharge its
mandate in accordance with the purposes and principles of
the Charter. It is the collective will and common aspiration
of the membership that in the new circumstances the United
Nations should be better equipped to address major
international issues vigorously and effectively and in a fair
and balanced manner. Therefore, the reform of the Security
Council and other United Nations organs should take due
account of the principle of equitable geographical
distribution and should accommodate the interests of the
developing countries which make up the overwhelming
majority of the membership. Since any reform would affect
the interests of all Member States and involve a revision of
the Charter, views from all quarters must be heard. The
reform plan should undergo extensive discussions and
consultations by the membership and should be generally
acceptable to all.
The Chinese Government has stated on many occasions
that China stands for the non-proliferation of all weapons of
mass destruction. At the same time we hold that the
ultimate objective of mankind should be the complete
prohibition and thorough destruction of those weapons. Now
that the Conventions banning biological and chemical
weapons have been concluded, we deem it high time that the
complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear
weapons were put on the agenda.
The international community has expressed concern
over the issue of a nuclear-test ban. The Chinese
Government has always stood for a total test ban within the
framework of the complete prohibition and thorough
destruction of nuclear weapons. We support an early start
to negotiations for a comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty
and will work in common with other countries towards a
comprehensive nuclear-test ban at an early date.
China has always exercised great restraint in nuclear
testing. The number of our tests is the smallest among all
nuclear Powers. While a nuclear test ban is necessary, to
undertake not to use nuclear weapons at all is far more
crucial, because this will not only make their testing,
development, production or deployment devoid of any
meaning, but will give great impetus to nuclear disarmament,
which will contribute tremendously to world peace and
security. If, however, complete prohibition and thorough
destruction of nuclear weapons cannot be achieved soon
enough, then let the nuclear Powers reach an agreement not
to be the first to use nuclear weapons and not to use them
against non-nuclear-weapon States or nuclear-free zones.
This is entirely feasible and should be done as soon as
possible. This will put nuclear Powers to the test to see
whether they are genuinely willing to treat non-nuclearweapon States as equals. China long ago unilaterally undertook not to be the first to use nuclear weapons at any time
or under any circumstances, and not to use or threaten to use
them against any nuclear-free zone or non-nuclear-weapon
State. We call upon all the other nuclear Powers to make
the same pledge and conclude an international convention to
this effect as soon as possible.
Now there are international arrangements and
conventions that are designed to control arms transfers and
ban certain types of weapons of mass destruction. Such
conventions are aimed at maintaining international and
regional peace, security and stability. The arrangements
designed to control transfers of missile technology should
also take into account such elements as the arbitrary use of
missiles for attacks on other countries. Otherwise, such an
arrangement will become a means by which certain Powers
Forty-eighth session - 29 September l993 21
can maintain military superiority or play power politics. That
is morally unjustifiable. We oppose the all-too-frequent
arbitrary use of sanctions by one country to bring pressure
to bear on another under the pretext of controlling arms
transfers while engaging in massive arms sales of one’s own
which jeopardize the sovereignty and security of the country
concerned. We also denounce the hegemonic conduct of a
self-styled "world cop" that tramples upon international law
and norms of international relations by endangering another
country’s navigational safety and normal trading under the
pretext of enforcing the ban on chemical weapons and in
disregard of the provisions of the relevant international
conventions.
Thanks to the policy of reform and opening to the
world, China’s economy has expanded considerably over the
past 15 years and is now in high gear. Our gross national
product rose 12.8 per cent last year, and the current year’s
growth rate will again be in double digits. Our foreign trade
and economic cooperation have been expanding rapidly.
Total trade volume in 1992 was a 5.2-fold increase over
1978, the year before the start of the reform and opening-up,
and represents an annual growth rate of 13.9 per cent.
Investments from overseas have flowed in rapidly. Nearly
50,000 overseas-funded projects involving $58 billion were
approved in 1992. The momentum has continued into the
current year. High-speed growth has helped basically solve
the problem of feeding and clothing a population of over 1.1
billion and put China on the road towards prosperity. It has
also boosted economic exchanges and cooperation with other
countries. This is good for both China and the world.
But we have encountered some problems as our
economy has picked up speed. These problems will be
resolved by accelerating and deepening our reform. We
have taken a number of measures to strengthen
macro-control and readjust the economic structure to ensure
healthy, rapid and steady economic growth. We are fully
capable of attaining our objective. We are full of confidence
in the future of our development programme.
It is an objective reality that China has indeed achieved
impressive economic success. But it does not tally with the
facts to exaggerate our economic strength. Given China’s
vast land area, huge population and uneven economic
development in different parts of the country, our per capita
gross national product is still quite low. Ours is still a
developing country. It will require several generations
working very hard for many decades before we can attain
the level of an average developed country.
At this juncture, I would like to draw attention to
assertions recently bruited about on the international scene:
that China’s economic success would entail a military
build-up, or that China would move to "fill up the vacuum",
thus constituting a threat, and so on and so forth. This is
utterly groundless. A China with a burgeoning economy is
an important factor contributing to the economic well-being
of Asia and the world at large. The Chinese people had
long suffered under imperialist aggression, and it regained
independence only after horrible sacrifices in countless grim
struggles spanning more than a century. Nothing can make
us forget the episodes of our history when our country was
subjected to foreign aggression, dismemberment and
enslavement. Our ancient sage Confucius, that great thinker
and statesman, admonished: "Do not do unto others what
you would not like others to do unto you".
Even when China becomes more developed, we will
never engage in aggression or expansionism; nor will we
ever seek hegemony. This is a pledge which has been
enshrined in our Constitution and which has become part of
our consistent and firm basic State policy. It has been borne
out by facts that China is a staunch force for world peace
and stability. Our limited defence capability is solely for
self-defence purposes. Many of our military industrial plants
have been converted to civilian production. Our military
expenditures are the lowest among the major countries. We
have neither troops nor military bases on foreign territory.
We are immersed in economic construction. Therefore, we
need an international environment of enduring peace as well
as long-term amicable relations with our neighbours. We are
ready to cultivate and strengthen similar relationships with
all other countries on the basis of the five principles of
peaceful coexistence.
No matter how the wind may change its direction on
the world scene, China will unswervingly play its part in
preserving world peace and promoting common prosperity
and development.
 Please accept my warm
congratulations, Sir, on your election as President of the
General Assembly at its forty-eighth session. I wish you
luck and success in your high office. At the same time, I
extend a cordial welcome to the new Members of our
Organization.
Addressing the Assembly 20 years ago, Willy Brandt
said that the Federal Republic of Germany’s purpose in
joining the United Nations was to help serve the cause of
world peace. That has always been, and will remain, the
fundamental aim of German foreign policy. At that time, in
a bipolar world, Germany was divided. In that year, 1973,
the October war broke out in the Middle East. In South
Africa the inhuman apartheid regime was dominant. Today
my country is united in peace and harmony with our
neighbours. Today we can congratulate Israel, the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO) and neighbouring Arab
countries on a historic breakthrough. Today the policy of
apartheid has been overcome. Without the resolve to seek
peace, these developments would not have been possible.
World peace, which appears to have come closer as
bipolarity has receded, must not remain an unfulfilled vision.
The international community’s desire for peace led to the
founding of the United Nations after the Second World War.
It remains our moral and political obligation to fulfil that
legacy. There can be no more important task. In the quest
for peace we are faced with a new challenge and a new
danger, but we also have a historic opportunity.
We are faced with the great challenge of overcoming
hunger and poverty around the world, of preserving the
natural sources of life, and of creating the foundations for a
long-term global population policy. When people have to
leave their native lands, when human rights are violated,
there can be no peace. Peace is not merely the silence of
guns. Hence, economic and social challenges must be very
high on the global agenda. The world is deeply unjust. The
distribution of mankind’s opportunities is woefully unequal.
This we should not tolerate.
The danger confronting us is that peace in many parts
of the world is threatened by new conflicts, especially those
of an ethnic nature. The continuing proliferation of modern
weapons and weapon technology increases the destructive
potential of these conflicts.
Our opportunity, after the end of the East-West
confrontation, is to develop the United Nations into what its
founding fathers intended it to be: the principal guardian of
peace. In performing that role the United Nations must have
the support of the numerous other international organizations
that are functioning successfully today.
I truly believe that we can master the economic,
ecological and social challenges and overcome the danger of
a relapse into a confrontation of States, peoples, cultures and
religions only if we resolutely seize the historic opportunity
to strengthen the global multilateral system and the United
Nations.
Today no country alone can cope with global
challenges. Hence we must counteract nationalism with
multilateralism. German foreign policy is aimed at
strengthening the multilateral world order. It is committed
to the goal of European integration. Its purpose is to
harmonize and create a fair balance of interests. German
foreign policy is therefore a policy within, in support of, and
together with the United Nations.
I agree with the Secretary-General: Peace can only be
preserved if we strike at the roots of conflict. His proposed
agenda for development must go hand-in-hand with "An
Agenda for Peace". Misery, starvation and poverty are still
the overriding problem in many countries.
At the eighth session of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development and at the Rio Conference, the
developing and industrial countries agreed on a
comprehensive partnership for promoting development and
protecting the environment. For that partnership to be
successful both sides, North and South, must contribute their
share. By carrying out economic and political reforms,
making more efficient use of their funds and cutting military
expenditure, and ensuring greater democratic control and
respect for the rule of law, many developing countries have
embarked on the right course. The World Summit for Social
Development, scheduled to take place in Copenhagen in
14 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
1995, must be a forum for dialogue on the social issues
re-emerging all over the world.
The industrial countries have undertaken to support the
efforts of the developing countries by improving the general
conditions for world trade in a spirit of solidarity. Such
assistance can never be more than help towards self-help.
What is required is more entrepreneurial cooperation with
developing countries, more direct investment, improved
cooperation in the field of technology, the opening of
markets and the elimination of trade barriers. The Uruguay
Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(GATT) must at long last establish reliable rules for free
trade and be brought to a conclusion by December 15.
Germany, one of the leading trading nations, is committed
to these goals. If new trading blocs were to form, with the
attendant conflicting interests, new political confrontations
would soon follow. Protectionism would be the worst
outcome.
The global economy is in the throes of a fundamental
structural change. International competition is becoming
more intense. Many highly industrialized societies are
confronted with fresh challenges. Unemployment and
sluggish growth are unexpectedly severe burdens on their
productive capacity, both domestically and externally. On
the other hand, the trend towards a single world economy
opens up the first opportunity for billions of people to offer
their products in all markets.
All of us, industrial and developing countries alike,
must make peace with nature. The United Nations is called
upon to protect the natural foundations of life. I propose
that the United Nations develop an early-warning system for
environmental disasters. The momentum of the United
Nations Conference on Environment and Development must
be maintained. My country is ready for comprehensive
cooperation. Germany can make a special contribution,
particularly as regards the transfer of environment-friendly
technologies.
The population explosion is a threat to the planet’s
equilibrium. Whereas in the eighteenth century the world
population increased by a quarter of a billion in 75 years, it
is now increasing by this number every three years. Most
of this increase is taking place in countries whose economic
and ecological resources are already strained to the limit.
Family planning must be enhanced, the poverty gap reduced,
and education and knowledge disseminated among women
and men alike. A successful International Conference on
Population and Development, to be held in Cairo next year,
is therefore mandatory.
Respect for human rights is a universal obligation. It
is a focal point of German foreign policy. Human rights and
the protection of minorities belong together. Racism,
cultural arrogance and the delusion of wanting to create
"ethnically clean" areas constitute a threat to peace.
Yugoslavia is a terrible example of this. Where civic,
economic, cultural and religious rights of minorities are
concerned, the majority may not rule by fiat.
The Declaration and Programme of Action of the
Vienna World Conference on Human Rights represent the
consensus opinion of the community of nations. They
reaffirm the universal validity of the human rights. Now it
is important to seek rapid implementation. I wish to
mention five specific points:
Firstly, my country has long advocated the appointment
of a high commissioner for human rights. He should be
authorized to take steps on his own initiative to protect
human rights and to give active support to those countries
seeking to improve the human rights situation.
Secondly, we need an international criminal court. The
International Law Commission has submitted a full draft
statute for such a court. The pressure on those who trample
human rights under foot must be increased now. Those who
torture on this Earth must live in fear of punishment.
Thirdly, in order to prosecute speedily those who are
responsible for the ghastly violations of human rights in the
former Yugoslavia, the Security Council has set up an ad
hoc Tribunal. The elected judges must now begin their work
right away. A chief prosecutor should be appointed without
delay.
Fourthly, the non-governmental organizations have
become part of the world’s conscience and therefore have an
increasingly important role to play in the defence of human
rights.
Finally, the instruments for ensuring respect for human
rights must be given a higher priority in the United Nations
budget.
The crisis in the former Yugoslavia, and especially the
war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, is one of the most
depressing episodes of our time. A Member of the United
Nations has fallen victim to a war of conquest accompanied
by genocide and mass expulsions. For the first time since
the Second World War, frontiers in Europe are being
redrawn by force of arms. The principles of the United
Nations have been treated with contempt. The credibility of
Forty-eighth session - 29 September l993 15
our institutions - indeed the credibility of the United Nations
itself - is being put to the test.
If the fighting continues, the winter will prove to be an
awful disaster for the suffering people. It must therefore be
stopped as quickly as possible and steps taken to ensure that
humanitarian aid is provided. We therefore support the
Geneva efforts to settle the conflict, in spite of doubts about
the current plan, and we express special thanks to the
Co-Chairmen, Lord Owen and Thorvald Stoltenberg, for the
difficult job they are doing.
A settlement now seems within reach, but it must be
accepted by all parties to the conflict. No party must impose
its will on another. The Bosnian Muslims must be given
viable territory. We need an assurance that the community
of nations will be resolutely and actively involved in the
implementation of a settlement.
We cannot tolerate a situation in which the Muslims,
who have lived in Europe for centuries, would have fewer
rights than their Christian neighbours. Through preventive
measures we must ensure that the tragedy of this war does
not spill over into neighbouring regions. What is now
required is proposals for controlled disarmament in the
region. This is a task for the Conference on Security and
Cooperation in Europe (CSCE).
After decades of war and bitter antagonism, the Middle
East is experiencing a historic breakthrough towards peace.
We all want the peace process to become irreversible.
Germany and its partners in the European Community have
undertaken to provide political, economic and particularly
financial support. They have earmarked about a billion
deutschemarks for this purpose.
I should like to express my respect for both sides for
their political courage and their will for peace. I call upon
those who still hesitate to help sustain the peace process. I
appeal to all to renounce the use of force.
The continuing proliferation of arms in many parts of
the world is still highly disturbing. President Clinton’s
proposals have our support. Encouraging progress has been
achieved in the form of the Convention placing a global ban
on chemical weapons and of the agreement reached on a
mandate for negotiations in the Geneva Conference on
Disarmament with a view to a comprehensive test-ban treaty.
The test moratorium must be extended. There must be no
further testing.
The nuclear and non-nuclear Powers alike are urged to
consolidate the non-proliferation regime. When the matter
comes up for decision in 1995, the Non-Proliferation Treaty
must be extended indefinitely. As the representative of a
country which many years ago unilaterally and bindingly
renounced the possession of nuclear weapons and other
means of mass destruction, I appeal to all Members: accede
to the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
The laying of mines in large regions in many countries
has become a scourge for the population. It prevents the
return of refugees and the resumption of farming.
Thousands have been killed or horribly mutilated. It must
be stopped. The European Community has, with our
support, seized the initiative. We need a fund to finance
mine detection and disposal operations.
My country’s European anchorage is indispensable on
both political and economic grounds. My Belgian colleague,
Willy Claes, has already explained the position of the 12
members of the European Community.
Stability in Europe cannot remain a privilege of the
Western nations. The peoples of the reformist countries
fought for their freedom and we encouraged them to do so.
We shall not abandon them now. We must gradually open
the road to the Euro-Atlantic institutions for the countries of
Central and Eastern Europe. Those institutions include the
European Community and the Council of Europe as well as
the Western European Union and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO). I am expecting a clear message from
the NATO summit - which is to take place at the beginning
of 1994 - like the one that came from the European
Community summit meeting in Copenhagen. In this process,
no new ruptures must emerge. A lasting peaceful order in
Europe is not feasible without including Russia.
Over the last four years Germany has made a greater
financial effort than any other nation to help the reformist
countries on their road to democracy, the rule of law and a
free market economy. This assistance, too, is a major
contribution to conflict-prevention and the safeguarding of
peace. In the present critical phase, Russia’s friends and
partners - who include the Germans in particular - must
continue to provide political and economic support for
President Yeltsin’s reforms.
I am concerned about developments in Georgia. We
must achieve a cease-fire and work out a viable political
solution. This is a task for the United Nations in particular.
16 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
The desire for peace makes it imperative for all
countries to seek closer regional cooperation.We support
intra-Africa efforts to resolve conflicts and welcome the
stronger commitment on the part of the Organization of
African Unity.
We are gratified by the democratic changes to be
observed in Latin America in recent years. Nearly
everywhere democracy and free-market principles have
asserted themselves and sources of conflict have, thank God,
been eliminated.
The Association of South-East Asian Nations has
become an important instrument for cooperation in the
Asia-Pacific region. European-Asian cooperation must be
intensified.
"An Agenda for Peace" has become the lodestone for
the world Organization’s further development. I wish to
take this opportunity, Mr. Secretary-General, to express my
thanks for your commitment. The Security Council and the
General Assembly have constructively taken up the Agenda’s
proposals. However, conflict prevention must begin at an
early stage. Preventing fires is better than having to put
them out. We must focus our energy on the possibilities of
preventive diplomacy, confidence-building measures,
fact-finding and the early detection of conflicts.
The CSCE must back the United Nations within its
sphere of jurisdiction. The relations between the two
organizations have been intensified. The CSCE should be
given wider scope for conflict prevention and crisis
management.
In wars and crises, the Blue Helmets have helped to
protect the civilian population, to prevent the spread of
warfare and to initiate the transition to democracy. Some
80,000 troops from more than 70 countries are engaged in
17 peace-keeping missions around the world. They and the
United Nations Secretariat’s Department of Peace-keeping
Operations deserve our thanks.
One of the most successful operations was the one in
Namibia. In Cambodia the United Nations has sponsored
free elections and restored hopes of lasting peace after
decades of terror and oppression. Of course - and it is
important to stress this - not all the hopes placed in the
United Nations can be fulfilled, and it would be wrong to
deny that difficulties have been encountered. But what
would happen without the United Nations and the Blue
Helmets? To the critics I therefore say that we need not less
but more commitment to the United Nations.
In Somalia starvation has been overcome. The
reconciliation process has been overshadowed by incidents
in which troops and civilians have been killed. These are
tragedies, but without the United Nations Operation in
Somalia, hundreds of thousands would have had to die.
Germany has been providing humanitarian aid within the
scope of this major peace-keeping operation, our largest
commitment of personnel so far within the framework of the
United Nations.
Our involvement in such operations has the backing of
the German people. There is a consensus in our country in
favour of widening our scope for contributing to peace. We
are engaged in a passionate debate over proposed
constitutional amendments which would enable Germany to
participate in all United Nations operations without
restriction.
A policy for peace also means strengthening the rule of
law as opposed to the rule of the strong. If the United
Nations is prevented from carrying out its mandate, it will
have to be in a position to authorize the Security Council to
resort to force, as provided for in Chapter VII of the Charter.
However, the use of military means should be
considered only if we have a clear political blueprint for
resolving the conflict. Force must always be the last resort.
Consequently, our contribution to the United Nations will
continue to be of a mainly political and economic nature.
Greater emphasis will have to be placed on United Nations
peace-keeping measures in view of the growing
responsibilities and demands.
First, the United Nations Secretariat’s Department of
Peace-keeping Operations must be improved logistically and
organizationally and in terms of staff. The German
Government is willing to make further experts available to
the Secretariat.
Secondly, effective crisis management presupposes the
ability to react swiftly. The Secretary-General’s initiative for
the establishment of stand-by forces has my support.
Stand-by forces should not be confined to military units but
should include civilian personnel and experts ranging from
police to election observers. But participation must always
be voluntary and be subject to the fulfilment of national
conditions.
Thirdly, enhancing the efficiency of the United Nations
presupposes a link-up of military forces. The North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) has declared its willingness to
Forty-eighth session - 29 September l993 17
make its capacities available. The same holds true for the
Western European Union (WEU).
Fourthly, in many countries military training is geared
solely to the traditional duties of the army. The specific
tasks of peace-keeping require a completely different kind of
training. The national preparation of "Blue-Helmet" forces
needs to be coordinated to a greater degree by the United
Nations. For this, common training guidelines are needed.
The United Nations should also create its own training
capacity; that is my view. Common training and exercises
are, at the same time, important steps in confidence-building.
Fifthly, peace-keeping operations require sound
financing. The responsibility for peace also includes the
prompt and complete payment of contributions by all
Members.
Humanitarian concerns have been of pivotal importance
for Germany’s involvement in United Nations activities from
the very start. In the Middle East, in Africa, in South-East
Asia, in the Gulf region, in Somalia and in former
Yugoslavia we are providing humanitarian assistance. We
have assumed responsibility for transport, medical care, the
monitoring of disarmament measures and the repatriation of
refugees. Together with our partners in the European
Community we have called for the creation of a post of
coordinator for humanitarian assistance.
Part of our humanitarian commitment is the readiness
to assist refugees from the civil war, whose situation is very
distressing. We have admitted more than 350,000 refugees
from former Yugoslavia. I urge the General Assembly to
use every opportunity to strengthen the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). Mrs.
Ogata deserves high praise for the job she is doing. More
international solidarity and burden-sharing is called for. We
must not abandon those countries which, as neighbouring or
target countries for the refugees, are particularly affected.
The aim must be to offer shelter to refugees from civil wars
or other disasters near their home countries in order to
facilitate their early return to those countries. For this we
need binding rules. I therefore propose the drafting of an
international convention to regulate large-scale refugee
movements.
Another focal point of our involvement in United
Nations activities has been what the Secretary-General refers
to in his "Agenda for Peace" as post-conflict peace-building.
Lasting peace depends on the establishment of democratic
and market-economy structures based on the rule of law.
Investment in the democratization process is an investment
in peace. My country, Germany, sees this as a priority of its
commitment to development. That is why Germany
participates in missions to observe elections, provides
economic experts, and assists in the creation of democratic
administrative, judicial and police institutions.
I should like to stress that a culture of peace is another
prerequisite for lasting peace. Not only governments but
also individual citizens must develop the will for peace if we
want to overcome racial hatred and religious conflict. A
culture of peace encompasses a dialogue between ethnic
groups as well as between religions and cultures. The
Europeans live next door to and in close contact with Islam.
We need bridges of mutual understanding, not new enemy
images. We need to promote education for peace. The
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO), with its mandate to foster relations
between nations, therefore deserves comprehensive support.
Germany advocates the strengthening of all United
Nations bodies. We do not want a never-ending discussion
on reform, but greater efficiency. We welcome the
Secretary-General’s efforts to reorganize the Secretariat.
The efforts to revitalize the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council also meet with our full
support. We would be happy if the United Nations were
better represented in Germany and have therefore made an
offer for the relocation of institutions of technical
cooperation to Bonn.
The most important decisions on security and peace are
today made in the Security Council. This is what the
Charter envisaged right from the start. Anyone who wants
peace must strengthen the Security Council.
In its response to the Secretary-General’s request, the
Federal Government has stated that efficiency and credibility
are of equal importance for the future composition of the
Security Council.
Germany is prepared to assume responsibility as a
permanent member of the Security Council also. I stated
this at the last session of the General Assembly. However,
we will be able to maintain and strengthen the credibility of
the Council only if, in deliberating on reforming it, we also
take into consideration the growing importance of the third
world.
Finally, let me state that Germany wants to be and will
be a driving force in efforts to strengthen the United
Nations. We need to achieve a basic consensus for the
important tasks ahead of us. In my view this consensus lies
18 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
in the rule of law. The law protects the weak and
legitimizes force where it is unavoidable. The law is an
expression of partnership and is opposed to tyranny and
hegemony. It is the acceptance of law that creates justice.
Only where justice reigns can peace flourish.
I
should like first to say, Mr. President, that France is pleased
to see the General Assembly meeting under your guidance
this year. Your election is just testimony to the esteem in
which the international community holds your country. It
also affords us the opportunity to welcome the "silent
revolution" that has been taking place in Latin America over
the past few years, which has put many States back on the
path of national reconciliation, democracy and economic
development.
22 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
The year which is ending will have been as rich in
promise as it has been fraught with danger. Conflicts once
thought to be insoluble suddenly seem to be on track
towards resolution. On behalf of my country, I should like
to pay tribute to the men in the Middle East, in South Africa
and in Cambodia who found the courage to take the path
towards reconciliation and peace: Yitzhak Rabin and Yasser
Arafat, F.W. de Klerk and Nelson Mandela, His Majesty
King Norodom Sihanouk and all those, known and unknown,
who accompanied or even preceded them on this courageous
path.
The agreement between Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO) opens the way to the
settlement of a conflict which some had despaired of seeing
resolved, and makes it possible to conceive of a radically
new future for the entire region. This revolution gives us
new reason to believe in human will and encourages us
never to consider the hope for peace as a chimera. From us,
it calls for collective effort, including financial effort, in
order to translate this hope into reality as soon as possible.
It also invites us to erase the aftermath of conflicts as
reflected in past resolutions of this Assembly.
But the end of what was for years called the balance of
terror has also led to new kinds of uncertainty and disorder.
Russia is going through a political and economic
transition that could lead to serious internal difficulties, as
the events of the past few days have shown. In that context,
I should like to reaffirm France’s support for the process of
democratization and reform courageously undertaken by
President Yeltsin.
In the former Yugoslavia war has been raging for two
years, with its attendant death, suffering and destruction.
Other regions in Africa, Central Asia, the Balkans and the
Caucasus are falling or could fall victim to this new type of
conflict, resulting from the break-up of States and the
resurgence of nationalist, ethnic or religious passions.
Elsewhere, States put under a sanctions regime by our
Organization for failing to comply with the obligations of
international law or with commitments they have made
persist in refusing to take the measures that would permit
them to regain their place in the international community.
Almost everywhere, the proliferation of weapons is a
fearsome factor for instability.
In the face of the promises and dangers I have just
outlined, France bases its foreign policy on a few guiding
principles. Whether they are found reassuring or disturbing,
I should like to recall them to the Assembly.
The first principle is the desire for independence.
France has amply demonstrated that it is ready to act in
concert with others where the ends are genuinely collective.
But, needless to say, it does so in complete sovereignty.
Exercising freedom of judgement and choice, France refuses
to follow the orthodoxy of the moment or to succumb to
pressures resulting from relative material strengths.
The second principle, shared by many in this Hall, is a
commitment to our fundamental interests. Like every other
State in this Organization, France has its own strategic,
commercial and cultural interests which it seeks to preserve.
While we are open to negotiation and to the mutual
concessions it implies, we cannot be made to give up
anything we consider to be an essential element of our
security, our prosperity or our culture.
The third principle is devotion to law and justice.
Beyond its own interests, France aspires to help ensure that
certain fundamental principles first inspired by France,
among others, triumph throughout the world: the right of
peoples to self-determination and security, human rights and
the right to development.
Finally, one last aspect of our diplomacy, in the service
of the others, is France’s perseverance, and at times
stubbornness. May I recall our resolve - despite obstacles -
in opening up the path that would eventually lead to the
restoration of peace in Cambodia, and our determination to
see institutional legality restored in Haiti.
These unchanging principles dictate the two main lines
of the policy which my country hopes to implement on the
international stage.
Our ambition concerns Europe first of all.
Whatever the present difficulties, whatever the
prevailing scepticism, France will not falter in its resolve to
build with its neighbours a strong, prosperous, democratic
and generous Europe, capable of making its voice heard and
of contributing to world peace. This is an irrevocable choice
for us because the peoples of Europe need a plan that brings
them together, and European unity is the only goal that
measures up to the values they share. Moreover, the
building of a united Europe is the only way to avert the
dangers threatening our continent at this time: dangers
arising from the resurgence of the most implacable forms of
nationalism and from the persistence of unacceptable
economic disparities. Europe’s success will serve as an
example for other regions of the world as did in its day the
Forty-eighth session - 29 September l993 23
reconciliation between France and Germany sought by
General de Gaulle and Chancellor Adenauer.
I have already spoken of the conflict raging in the
former Yugoslavia.
France has spared no effort to put an end to it. As you
know, France initiated most of the Security Council
resolutions designed to discourage or punish aggressors.
Together with its partners, France provides an essential part
of the humanitarian aid sent there. Its soldiers represent the
largest of the contingents made available to the United
Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR), and more than a
dozen of them have paid for their generous presence there
with their lives. It has so far been the only country to send
reinforcements in accordance with resolution 836 (1993) in
order to contribute to the security of the protected areas and
the Muslim populations there. France was, as well, the first
nation to deplore the inadequacy of the actions taken by the
international community in regard to the former Yugoslavia.
The efforts it has made entitled it to tell those who have
been free with their advice and lessons that they might be
better heard if they were agreeing, when they are able to do
so, to commit their own troops to the field. Once in contact
with the realities of the situation, they would undoubtedly
better appreciate the fact that between negotiated peace and
chaos there is no middle ground.
Let us learn the lessons of this painful experience. It
is essential for us to acquire the means to avoid the
repetition of such a conflict, and to ensure, without waiting
for future progress in the construction of a united Europe,
that preventive diplomacy, military openness and respect for
the rule of law prevail wherever latent tensions remain. This
is the intent of the proposed pact on European stability
which France has submitted to its European partners and to
which it would like to associate Russia, as well as its allies
across the Atlantic, Canada and the United States.
Europe is, of course, far from being the sole horizon of
France’s action. My country has long-standing, close
relations with many parts of the world. For the long-term
organization of the international scene in the aftermath of the
cold war, France naturally turns to the United Nations.
Because it believes in the mission of the United
Nations, France wants a strong and effective Organization.
This goal involves, first of all, the reforming of the
Security Council. Its enlargement, which has become
necessary today in the light of the world’s evolution, must
be envisioned as the way to increase its effectiveness.
France understands and supports the aspirations of some
of its partners to exercise their international responsibilities
more actively, provided that they are ready to commit
themselves in the field. However, the expansion of the
Council should not be achieved at the expense of one or
another group of States; in particular, it must preserve the
capacity of the developing countries to make their voices
heard. In our view, this is an essential requirement.
In their wisdom, those who drafted the Charter
recognized that only a group of limited size could take
prompt measures to restore peace when confronted with an
urgent crisis. We should therefore take care that the
projected enlargement does not lead to a paralysis of the
Council.
France hopes that at its present session the General
Assembly will decide to open discussions on ways to reform
the Security Council. A solution will have to be found that
reconciles the will to reform with the desire for
effectiveness. This is why enlargement, in our view, will
have to be decided according to a formula combining new
permanent members and additional non-permanent members.
The Secretary-General is a key institution of the United
Nations. France would like him to be given the means to
carry through the innovative action he has undertaken.
Allow me to pay a tribute to the energy, authority and
courage with which our Secretary-General is carrying out his
missions.
France approves not only of his political initiatives but
also of his tireless efforts to rationalize the functioning of
our Organization. We must combat the proliferation of
institutions, which consumes our resources and threatens the
coherence of our efforts. We must improve the coordination
of activities linked to development and restore to the
Economic and Social Council its role as a provider of
stimulus and organization. We must combat administrative
waste wherever it exists, without hesitating to punish any
abuses that may be uncovered. Lastly, we must have more
supervision and greater transparency in peace-keeping
operations.
The Secretary-General still does not have all the means
to exercise his responsibility to the full. France calls on the
Member States to provide him with those means without
delay. Strengthening the Department of Peace-keeping
Operations, establishing a mechanism for a true general
inspection, and setting up a court for budgetary discipline
are, in our eyes, indispensable measures.
24 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
The third requirement for strengthening the
Organization is a clean-up of its finances.
Perhaps I should have begun with this point.
According to an old French saying, money is "the sinew of
war". It is also the sinew of peace. Our projects for this
Organization will be no more than empty words unless we
have the courage to adopt the new measures that its financial
bankruptcy requires.
First, Member States which do not pay their
contributions within 30 days following the
Secretary-General’s call for contributions should be
penalized. France proposes that market-rate interest should
be imposed on all late payments. This firm stance seems
particularly necessary because the payment of accumulated
arrears alone would suffice to resolve the financial crisis. It
is also consistent with considerations of fairness and political
morality. One cannot simultaneously speak of United
Nations reform, justice and international development and
exempt oneself from the primary financial obligation
resulting from adherence to our Charter. It is high time to
measure the generosity of words against the yardstick of
arrears due our Organization.
The establishment of a mechanism for a true general
inspection will, as I have said, make it possible to rationalize
the functioning and costs of the United Nations. France will
support all initiatives to supplement the existing procedures
of internal assessment, which have already shown their
limitations despite the judicious reorganization recently
introduced by the Secretary-General.
Lastly, we must adopt an exemplary budget for the
1994-1995 period. We must not hesitate to reduce
expenditures for obsolete activities. We will also have to
provide sufficient funding for the new mandates entrusted to
the Organization. If, from that, it is necessary to consider a
reasonable increase in the ordinary budget, France, which
has never espoused a dogmatic idea of zero growth, will
readily accept this.
These are concrete measures. They require a collective
effort on the part of Member States. But France is
convinced that we can no longer be satisfied, as in previous
years, with marginal adjustments. The very ability of the
United Nations to carry out its mandate is at stake.
France, as you will have realized, is ambitious for the
United Nations. With the support of renovated institutions
and reorganized financing, the United Nations will be able
to meet the great responsibilities incumbent on it: to preserve
peace and collective security, to promote development and
to address global problems whose international scale
removes them from the individual action of States.
Peace is of course the first of our responsibilities.
The present instability in several parts of the world
compels the United Nations to intervene more and more
frequently in order to check the spread of conflicts and allow
a negotiated solution to be sought. France, for its part, has
wished to participate fully in this effort and is today in the
front rank of States participating in peace-keeping
operations.
This commitment obviously does not confer any
privilege on us. But our experience enables us to cast a lucid
eye over the operations in which we have participated and
encourages us to reaffirm certain principles and to propose
certain common-sense measures that might help increase the
future effectiveness of our action.
First, greater political control is needed over operations
that have become increasingly complex. Purely military
considerations should never thwart - or even obscure -
political ends. Naturally, regional or defence organizations
may make useful contributions in terms of expertise,
personnel or matériel. But the use of force presupposes that
the guardian of the law - that is, the Security Council -
exercises its authority in the name of the international
community. This it cannot relinquish. That is why France
insisted that the Secretary-General’s Special Representative
to the former Yugoslavia should have authority over all
operations under international mandate. It is important, it
seems to me, that we should maintain this requirement at all
times. By the same token, France insists that the political
ends of the operation in Somalia should not be lost sight of.
Next, we should systematically consider the question of
the timetable of operations.
As a matter of principle, time-frames should be
explicitly assigned to each operation in the actual resolution
that institutes it. It is also important to know when to
terminate operations that go on and on, needlessly dipping
into the means of the Organization and its Member States.
France fully supports the Secretary-General’s efforts on this
score.
Lastly, we must expand the capacity of the
Organization to react. The time that elapses between our
decision to create a force and the implementation of that
decision is far too long. How many weeks did we have to
Forty-eighth session - 29 September l993 25
wait before the air power authorized by resolution
836 (1993) on Bosnia was eventually deployed? And how
many weeks for the ground reinforcements that had been
announced to reach Sarajevo?
We cannot but note that the current procedures do not
meet the criteria for rapid reaction and flexible use which
are called for in this area.
France does not, however, believe that the Organization
should have its own force. On the other hand, it has
participated in discussions organized by the
Secretariat-General on the concept of stand-by units. These
discussions have resulted in original proposals for "tailormade" forces for the United Nations. In this way, the
Organization could have at its disposal support, transport and
communications capabilities which it currently lacks for
carrying out military actions speedily.
France, which has already offered, in a statement made
by the President of the French Republic, to make available
to the Secretary-General a 1,000-strong contingent for peacekeeping operations at 48 hours’ notice, will take part in this
effort.
These measures will have another advantage. They will
add an extra degree of effectiveness to preventive diplomacy,
which has to be central to the ambitions we have for the
Organization. This policy requires us to develop and put in
place mechanisms for crisis alert, evaluation and prevention.
Several ideas were put forward in the "Agenda for
Peace" - they included use of fact-finding missions and the
effective deployment of United Nations forces - and have
already been applied to certain difficult situations in Africa,
Central Asia and the Balkans.
In this spirit, the United Kingdom and France are ready
to submit to the Secretary-General proposals for compiling
a list of prominent individuals who could intervene promptly
at his request, in liaison with appropriate regional
organizations, and provide them with equipment -
specifically in the communications field - necessary for
carrying out their mission completely.
It is through concrete initiatives of this sort, which may
seem modest at first, that preventive diplomacy will
gradually assume its rightful place in the maintenance of
peace.
The effort made in relation to disarmament in the past
few years, finally, should continue.
Considerable progress has already been made with the
reduction of stockpiles from the cold-war era. But a new
priority is becoming evident: the struggle against the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. To attain this
goal, we must be extremely vigilant in the threefold domain
of nuclear weapons, chemical weapons and ballistic
technologies.
In this light, France welcomes the signing in Paris by
nearly 150 States of the Convention banning chemical
weapons, the first real multilateral disarmament pact of
general scope, and calls on the States which have not yet
ratified this Convention to do so. It supports the efforts
being made by several groups of countries to institute
systems of control of missile technology, nuclear exports and
the sale of so-called sensitive products.
France asks, finally, that the non-proliferation regimes
be strengthened. It reaffirms in particular its desire to see
the Non-Proliferation Treaty prolonged indefinitely and
unconditionally. It continues to believe that it is only the
Security Council that can decide on sanctions against
irresponsible behaviour. This would be the case if North
Korea were to fail to respect its commitments to the
International Atomic Energy Agency.
What guarantees can be given for collective security
and peace if nothing is done to try to resolve the economic
and social disparities that are so often the source of conflict?
We know that there can be no lasting peace without lasting
economic development. That is why the "Agenda for Peace"
unquestionably requires also an "agenda for development".
France, as is known, has consistently spoken for the
interests of the developing countries, particularly the least
developed, in discussion with its industrialized partners. It
has tirelessly pleaded - sometimes as a voice crying in the
wilderness - for a substantial increase in the level of official
development assistance in order to permit these countries to
enjoy trade advantages without reciprocity, to ease their debt
burden and stabilize raw-material prices. Our resolve in this
matter will not weaken: how can we accept, for example, a
situation in which every year the African countries pay the
World Bank more than they receive from it?
Nor can we accept the persistence, and sometimes the
worsening, of the most glaring situations of distress. France
has not forgotten the depth of the crisis in sub-Saharan
Africa, with which it has so many ties. It believes it is
26 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
essential that the basic achievements of cooperation between
the European Community and the African, Caribbean and
Pacific countries, should be maintained, especially with
regard to trade.
Lastly, our third ambition for the United Nations
concerns the vast issue of societal questions, linked naturally
to the requirements of development but distinct from it.
The protection of human rights, the preservation of the
environment, aid to refugees, the struggle against full-scale
epidemics, organized crime and drug trafficking all have a
worldwide dimension. The Organization must address these
problems with the same energy it expends in the search for
peace and the promotion of development.
Several important dates lie ahead of us. Let us apply
without delay the recommendations unanimously adopted at
the Vienna Conference on Human Rights, particularly the
creation of a post of high commissioner for human rights.
Let us prepare for the conferences in Cairo and Beijing and
the social development summit in Copenhagen with all the
necessary determination, so as to reinforce the cooperation
required in addressing demographic problems, the promotion
of women’s rights and the demands for social development.
Great epidemics have always been a threat to the
world’s nations. But the need for full-scale international
mobilization is becoming particularly acute in the case of
AIDS in view of the havoc of all kinds caused by the spread
of this malady. I earnestly hope that, as we approach the
second decade of this struggle, the coherence of United
Nations action, and that of its specialized agencies and of all
States and interested organizations, will be equal to this new
challenge. In this context, France proposes the convening of
a conference next year to bring together the main contributor
countries in the war against this scourge in order to improve
coordination of their efforts and give them a new impetus.
In most cases, these phenomena are not new. However,
the challenge they pose to our societies, in the North and in
the South, is of unprecedented seriousness. They affect
underdevelopment as much as they do the excesses of the
consumer society, and our traditional responses are proving
to be inadequate or ineffective. We need new ideas in this
area. The Secretary-General should have broad power to
take initiatives and make proposals in this matter. France
therefore suggests the formation of a group of prominent
figures chosen for their intellectual and scientific abilities
and moral influence to assist him in this vital task at the end
of our century.
Forty-eighth session - 29 September l993 27
Setting forth such ambitions for the United Nations
might have made the sceptics smile a few years ago. With
the end of the cold war the international community has a
historic opportunity: no longer to dismiss problems but
perhaps to solve them; no longer to limit conflicts but
perhaps to settle them.
Let us remain clear-sighted. This period could be
merely a brief interlude. If we were to hesitate, would it be
long before peoples succumbed to their basest inclinations,
cast off the rules of international law or put themselves - in
the best of cases - under the sole protection of regional,
competing and potentially hostile solidarities?
We do not have unlimited time. It is therefore our duty
to undertake without delay the reforms required to strengthen
our Organization and to realize its new objectives.
I should like to assure the Assembly that in the pursuit
of these twin goals, the United Nations can count on
France’s firm resolve.
Mr. President, may I
first of all congratulate you on your election, and on the
dignified and effective way in which you are already
presiding over this Assembly. You have a burdensome job
and we wish you all good fortune as you discharge it.
I have sometimes heard speakers from this rostrum
patrol the world in their speeches in the general debate,
dealing at length with one continent after another. Indeed,
I have done so myself in past years. There is much to
describe: events in the Middle East and South Africa are
particularly encouraging, and developments in Russia, as we
have just heard from Mr. Kozirev, are particularly important.
But today it seems to me that in the time available, the focus
of interest should not only be on distant events or distant
tragedies, but here, in this building, on this institution.
Never has there been a time when the United Nations has
been so discussed, so misunderstood, so needed.
The international task of this decade is managing
disorder. I believe it is possible. But it demands cool
heads, low voices, and an understanding of what we can and
cannot do. It demands concertation between all countries
that take on part of the responsibility for steering the world
through channels which are certainly strewn with rocks.
This concertation takes place in many forums, but nowhere
with greater legal and political authority than here at the
United Nations.
We can now see the events of 1989 in their true
perspective. They did not usher in a new world order. I
think we have to be sober about this. What happened in
1989 was not the birth of a new world order, it was the
collapse of one super-Power and the end of communism as
a threat to world peace.
The tragedies of the world have continued. Indeed,
they have probably increased since 1989. "Tragedy" is a
better description than the usual, and overworked, term
"crisis", because "crisis" implies a threat to world peace.
Now that the cold war is over and super-Powers no longer
exert themselves on behalf of clients, it is no longer a crisis
in that sense - a threat to world peace - if Sudan, Bosnia,
Angola, Liberia, Georgia, Afghanistan, Rwanda, Somalia,
Tajikistan, Azerbaijan and others are racked by civil war.
But these are appalling tragedies for those who are killed or
driven from their homes, and indeed for all of us, because
we are all diminished when the bell tolls.
18 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
Some of these tragedies are illuminated by the
haphazard light of television. In those cases, millions of our
citizens, in all our countries, share feelings of sympathy,
indignation and horror. But other tragedies equally foul are
played in a darkened theatre: no television, no audience,
little pressure. But all these tragedies are a reproach to those
of us who are convinced that it is possible slowly and
painstakingly to construct a more decent world.
How do we do that? Not, it is clear, by the remaining
super-Power using its superiority to impose its own solutions
by force. In the 10 tragedies that I listed, the United States
has intervened with troops only in one, Somalia - and that
now on a reduced scale and under the United Nations -
because the United States, quite rightly in my view, is not
prepared to send its troops all over the world, as Rome once
sent its legions all over Europe, to fight, to pacify and to
rule. There are British, French, Spanish and other European
troops in Bosnia today under the command of the United
Nations. But their role is to save Bosnian lives - they do
that daily - implementing United Nations decisions.
Likewise, they are not imposing a European imperium on
that country.
If America and its allies are not to exert themselves as
a joint imperial Power, imposing on other countries and
sustaining laws and rulers of their choice, then the answer
can only lie in reforming and making much better use of the
international institutions to which we belong. They were
mostly built after the Second World War for one purpose
and are now, after the end of the cold war, being hurriedly
adapted for another. The British architect Norman Foster
has just been given the responsibility of designing in Berlin
the new parliament house for a united Germany. If his plans
are accepted, he intends to include the old Reichstag
building alongside the line of the Berlin Wall in a splendid
new structure reaching across the old Wall into East Berlin.
There is a parable here for us as well as for Germany.
Inevitably, we have to cope as best we can with what
we have. A man, after all, may take some shelter in an
unfinished building. I do not believe that an international
organization like ours, which is not a colonizing Power, will
ever be able to guarantee solutions to civil wars or even to
that pernicious variant of a civil war which we see today in
Bosnia. But if there are no guarantees of success, the
United Nations can be helped greatly to improve on its
record. With greater experience, greater resources for
preventive action and effectively coordinated humanitarian
efforts, it can act before the situation gets out of control and
the demand grows for the implementation of sanctions and
for peace enforcement.
I hope that within the next few weeks the European
Community will move into a new phase of working together
on a common foreign and security policy once the Treaty of
Maastricht is ratified by all 12 member States. Our
President, Willy Claes, the Foreign Minister and Deputy
Prime Minister of Belgium, has just illustrated that point.
But one of our main aims as European partners must be to
support and strengthen the role and the work of the United
Nations, for the United Nations is not "them"; it is us, all of
us. We have to take responsibility for it and its failures.
If we want the United Nations to work better, it is up
to us to give the Secretary-General the support he needs in
thoughts, words, deeds and money. I suppose there are few
more lonely or more demanding jobs than that of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, and the present
Secretary-General certainly has the misfortune to hold his
office in interesting times. He has already given and
continues to give a firm and effective lead. He needs and
deserves our support.
The United Nations is unique. It alone conveys the
word of the international community. Only the United
Nations has the legal powers to translate those words into
action for the maintenance of world peace. We need, as
President Clinton said yesterday, to look at tasks closely, to
ensure that they are properly defined and that the resources
are there to meet them. We may on occasion have to accept
that a mandate should not be given because in reality it
cannot be fulfilled.
Let me follow that by looking briefly at the way we
carry out peace-keeping operations, the way we deploy
preventive diplomacy and the way we run our finances.
Peace-keeping: United Nations blue-helmets are
deployed on nearly every continent. We can reel off the
statistics, but actually we hear too little of individual soldiers
and small detachments. Who knows, for example, of the
single military observer in a remote part of Cambodia who
found himself not only acting as the local arbiter of family
disputes but also providing a local, much appreciated,
medical service using a handbook called When There is No
Doctor, who kept on securing supplies from his wife in
Germany and the field hospital in Phnomh Penh for his
Khmer community? Or the United Nations military observer
who spent his leave in Bangkok fund-raising for a water
filter for a remote Cambodian village? Now, they happen to
be British, but such servants of the world come from many
countries.
Forty-eighth session - 28 September l993 19
We in Britain are committed to our peace-keeping
contribution. We now have over 3,300 men and women in
blue berets around the world.
In June the Secretary-General asked Member States to
identify for him those areas of United Nations peace-keeping
operations which needed strengthening and for our ideas on
positive steps we could take. I look forward to his report
drawing all those responses together.
Useful steps have certainly been taken. There is now
a 24-hour operations room, improving the ability of those
here in New York to oversee operations around the world.
The standby force planning project has been started. A new
Department of Peace-keeping Operations is responsible for
all United Nations field missions. We can build on these
improvements.
Good organization involves clarity and sobriety in
setting out our objectives. That means that any operation
must have clear and achievable objectives linked to a
political process which offers reasonable hope of a solution,
and to which all parties should be committed. The mandate
should be precise and finite. That means adequate support
at Headquarters for planning and reconnaissance missions.
It means that the Security Council must resist the temptation
to become involved in the detailed conduct of operations. It
means the mandate must not create impossible obligations
for a force commander on the ground. Once an operation is
agreed, command and control relationships could be more
clearly defined.
Unity of command at the highest level is essential.
Where the United Nations is charged with executing as well
as authorizing a peace-keeping operation, all aspects of it
should be handled by a single department in New York.
That is why we have suggested the creation of an expanded
planning and operations staff. This in effect is a general
staff for peace-keeping. These men and women, civilian and
military, would be able together to provide the necessary
core of the United Nations strategic-planning chain. They
would operate mainly here in New York, but also in the
field. They would provide the United Nations with the
nervous system for which its present staff is neither
structured nor resourced.
We are not proposing here some new and heavy
bureaucracy. On the contrary, we are talking about core
staff: trained staff officers, United Nations civil affairs and,
increasingly, humanitarian advisers, and chief administrative
officers. The example of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), of a special
envoy for all humanitarian and refugee aspects of an
operation, is good.
Then, there must be flexibility in running peace-keeping
operations. The more comprehensive a bureaucracy
becomes, the harder it is for it to stay nimble on its feet.
Doctrinal and administrative difficulties in working with
other international organizations can be overcome. For
example, the United Nations is already building valuable
links with the Conference on Security and Cooperation in
Europe (CSCE) and with the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO). Many peace-keeping and
peacemaking operations can be run more effectively by
regional organizations or single countries on behalf of the
United Nations. That depends on the nature of the problem
and on the proposed action agreed by the United Nations.
I am thinking, for example, of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) in Liberia, the Organization
of African Unity (OAU) in Rwanda, and the European
Community and NATO in the former Yugoslavia.
Regional organizations can also be asked to help with
training. We might look at getting certain nations with well-
trained, equipped and available forces to provide the first
wave of a peace-keeping force, allowing other nations the
time to train and equip their forces to the required standard.
A commitment to deploy early would of course need to be
matched by a United Nations commitment to agree a firm
end-date for the deployment, because exits can be as
important as entrances.
What we cannot do, we should not pretend to do. If
we play a game of bluff, we can deceive and disappoint
others, and sometimes we deceive and disappoint ourselves.
Rarely can we attain our ends that way. It is empty to
pretend that we can impose peace with justice on every
disorder, every dispute, outside our national borders.
But what the United Nations can do, it should do well.
Cambodia, for example, is a success story. So was Namibia.
Our peace-keepers have been able to limit, though not stop,
conflict and to assuage, though not bring to and end,
suffering in Bosnia and Somalia. But the authority of the
United Nations will suffer if it fails to approach new
challenges realistically and flexibly.
However important peace-keeping may be, successful
preventive diplomacy would be better. I have just been
reading the book published this week by our Australian
colleague, the Australian Foreign Minister, Senator Gareth
Evans. His new book, Cooperating for Peace, brings this
point out well and is full of fruitful ideas. Defusing trouble
20 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
costs a great deal less than a military operation. You can
field plenty of emissaries for the price of a battalion. But to
be useful, of course, an emissary has to set about his work
before the excitement of violence has taken hold.
The Secretary-General has been energetic here. He has
sent missions to several areas of tension - to Tajikistan and
other regions of the former Soviet Union, to Macedonia, to
South Africa and elsewhere.
But in this as in other parts of the United Nations
system money is tight. Many missions create an acute need
for additional international staff with the necessary skills. I
am thinking not just of eminent people, of retired ministers
or distinguished ambassadors who can head such missions.
The Secretary-General will find them when he needs them.
What he needs from Member States is personnel at a more
junior level with local experience and negotiating skills.
Now, we have discussed this problem in particular with
the French Government, and as an Anglo-French initiative
we stand ready to provide the Secretariat with a list of such
people, people who have experience in Government service -
sometimes outside Government service - and whom we
would be prepared to make available for particular missions.
We would also be prepared to provide a certain amount of
equipment where personnel provided by the United Kingdom
were involved. We are ready to respond to the invitation of
the Secretary-General in "Agenda for Peace" to provide
information crucial to the task of preventive diplomacy. The
British and French Governments are both committed to
support him in this way, and we hope that others may join
in a similar enterprise.
All this work means a financial burden. Of course we
should all pay our assessed contribution in full and promptly.
We do so. So do most of our European partners, the Nordic
countries and those with a long tradition of peace-keeping
like Australia and Canada. But others, not entirely or
always through their own fault, others who share the heavy
burden of international responsibility, do not.
The fact is, the United Nations will always be short
of money. Even if everybody pays up in full and on time,
the United Nations will still have to choose priorities within
the resources available to it. That means - and will always
mean - turning down some good causes, and reappraising
and sometimes bringing to an end existing commitments.
The United Nations needs to conduct a rigorous
scrutiny of what it needs and what it spends. Obviously, it
would be able to afford more operations if it ran the existing
ones more economically. Without thrift, without financial
probity, the authority of the United Nations will weaken and
vanish. So we welcome the Secretary-General’s recent
additional senior appointments at the level of Assistant
Secretary-General, covering administrative and financial
affairs. We support proposals for a system of inspection
with teeth, which can match more delegated financial
authority to the field.
I mention these three areas - peace-keeping, preventive
diplomacy and finance. If we can tackle these three areas
constructively and vigorously, there is no reason why even
under present strains the authority of the United Nations
should not grow as strikingly as the burden of expectations
now placed upon it. People will always continue to turn to
the United Nations, even if they will always expect more of
us than is conceivable.
We are discussing, in that context, reform, and we in
Britain welcome the debate on Security Council reform. We
are discussing positively the enlargement of the Council.
This will be complex, as our debate already makes clear,
because there are many currents and cross-currents of view.
I do not doubt that if there were to be consensus on
enlarging the Security Council there are some countries
which, because of their global interests, their contribution to
international security, their contribution to United Nations
peace-keeping, could undertake the full range of
responsibilities of a permanent member and can certainly be
expected to do so.
I have concentrated simply on this Organization for the
reason which I gave. Few tasks are more important than
improving the way the United Nations works if we are to
secure a more stable world. We have lived through the
events of these last few years. They have been dramatic and
exhilarating, they have changed the political and strategic
landscape, but they have not removed from us our
responsibility to work constructively for a better United
Nations. This better world order will not happen because we
make a few speeches or pass a few resolutions. It will be
constructed steadily, brick by brick, learning always the right
lessons from the past, developing steadily our international
institutions and our international relations.
It is fair to say that in the last four years, with its ups
and downs, we have come a long way, and I believe that,
together, we have the will and the wisdom to continue along
that road.
Mr. President, your
unanimous election as President augurs well for the forty-
eighth session of the General Assembly. I extend my
heartiest congratulations to you and best wishes for success.
Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, the Secretary-General, has
given a new vision and a new impetus to the United Nations
at a crucial time in its history. We wish him well in his
efforts.
My Government is deeply touched by the sympathy and
compassion expressed by the leaders of several delegations
on the devastating earthquake in India on
30 September 1993, and, with your permission,
Mr. President, I shall have to go back to India immediately.
The United Nations will soon be 50 years old. It has
had many achievements to its credit: decolonization; efforts
to alleviate poverty; peace-keeping; disarmament; devising
an accepted code of international law; respect for human
rights and concern for the environment. I would like to
reiterate India’s faith in and consistent support for the United
Nations and its efforts to establish peace and the well-being
of peoples. We take note that the United Nations is trying
to evolve so as to better serve the principles and purposes of
the Charter. We support the Secretary-General’s efforts to
make what he has called a transition from the old to the new
United Nations, which would be particularly useful and
fruitful for the less developed and less fortunate States.
The euphoria generated by the end of the cold war has
in the past two years given way to concerns about the
difficulties of achieving a new global equilibrium and
stability. Essentially, we can see these difficulties arising
from the contradictory pulls and pressures exerted by the
forces of positive integration and harmony on the one hand
and fragmentation and discord on the other.
The end of the divisions of the cold war and the efforts
to halt and reverse the arms race have generated some of the
integrative forces. Some forces of integration have also been
at work in the global economy, which has been characterized
by the globalization and interdependence of countries’
factors of production and of issues of trade, money, finance,
technology, environment, population and development. The
desire of the developing countries to participate more
actively in the growth of the world economy and the
building-up of free-market, liberalized economies for
themselves adds another positive dimension. Issues of
common concern and global survival - economic
development and regeneration, environmental sustainability,
demographic management, technological dynamism and
health for all - have provided a sense of common destiny.
The communications revolution has resulted in greater
cultural intermingling and openness around the world.
These forces of integration are, unfortunately, opposed
by those of fragmentation. Represented by sectarian and
subnational aggression, racism, religious fundamentalism,
bigotry, terrorism, drug trafficking and arms smuggling, they
pose a threat to peace, global security, democracy, human
rights and economic and social development. We are also
witnessing strife, conflicts and cruel, unceasing and irrational
civil wars in many parts of the world. Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Somalia and Afghanistan cause us anxiety and
concern. The proliferation of such local conflicts and the
ever-increasing flow of refugees across national frontiers re-
affirm the truism that peace, like freedom, is indivisible and
that the disruption of peace anywhere is a danger to peace
everywhere.
These divisive forces have caused not only political
instability but also economic collapse in several instances.
Conversely, economic sluggishness and lack of development
in several cases have led to political upheavals. Inward-
looking, exclusivist and narrowly self-centred global
economic policy-making has been in evidence at a time
when the global economy is overshadowed by recession and
lack of dynamism. Macroeconomic coordination is at its
weakest. Protectionist tendencies are strong. The potential
of developing countries to act as vigorous engines of growth
for revitalizing the world economy stands largely ignored.
In developing countries, absolute and deepening poverty,
hunger and malnutrition, disease, illiteracy and the lack of
shelter and sanitation for a large portion of the population
have caused political and social tensions. The structural
imbalances and flaws of the post-Second-World-War
international economic order persist and prevent the
maximization of the benefits of interdependence and
globalization.
Against this backdrop, the task of the United Nations
should be to construct a new global equilibrium by fostering
positive integrative forces and discouraging, if not
counteracting, the forces of fragmentation and discord. For
this, the new United Nations will have to reiterate the
fundamental and immutable principles on which it was built:
respect for the national sovereignty, territorial integrity and
sovereign equality of nation States. I am glad that the
12 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
Secretary-General stated in his report to the forty-eighth
session:
"National sovereignty is the art of rendering
unequal power equal. Without State sovereignty, the
very instrument of international cooperation might be
destroyed and international organization might itself
become impossible." (A/48/1, para. 16)
The United Nations will have to set an example for the
conduct of relations amongst nation States on the basis of
respect for the rule of law, democracy and pluralism. Any
international framework, whether it be associated with peace
or development, must be transparent and must deal with
issues of global concerns on a non-selective and non--
discriminatory basis.
In the final analysis, the institutions, concepts and
agencies that represent the new world order will be judged
by their ability to harness and channel the beneficial and
creative forces of integration for the benefit of peace and
development for all and by the ability of the United Nations
to ensure that the interests of its weaker Member States are
fully reflected therein. In these still perilous times, they
would have to promote development cooperation and
effectively arrest the plunge into insecurity, strife and chaos,
particularly when these threaten the very foundation of
Member States, where ultimately the United Nations is
rooted.
There have been references in this Assembly to all
these conflicts, big or small, local or with international
dimensions, describing them in the generic terms of ethnic,
religious and civil wars. The plurality and complexity of our
post-cold-war world do not permit such generic labelling.
Nor are these conflicts amenable to generic and instant
remedies. A number of instances of strife or aberrations are
part of the historical legacies inherited by Member States.
Each is posited in a different socio-economic and cultural
matrix of causation; each is caught up in a different cycle of
circumstance and violence. The imposition of peace through
unilateral external intervention will only perpetuate situations
embodying the Orwellian logic of "peace is war" that we see
in many parts of the world today.
Wisdom lies in overcoming conflict situations with a
positive vision animated by peace and amity and in creating
the necessary confidence and will for peace among countries
and peoples. It is in this spirit that India is ready to initiate
a dialogue with Pakistan to build mutual confidence and to
promote a climate of stability in our region. I can only hope
that Pakistan will respond to this, and have a dialogue with
us, instead of trying to go around the world accentuating
differences that will be difficult to resolve later.
We welcome the recently concluded peace accord
between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO), and earnestly hope that this will be a true harbinger
of further positive developments aimed at establishing lasting
peace and prosperity in West Asia. We also welcome the
announcement by Mr. Nelson Mandela that irreversible
progress towards a non-racial, democratic South Africa has
been made. In response to his suggestion, India, which had
imposed trade sanctions against South Africa as early as
1946, has initiated action to lift those sanctions and to
normalize relations with South Africa.
We trust that the recognition by the Security Council of
the international boundary between Iraq and Kuwait will
contribute to the stabilization of the situation in the Gulf
region. We hope that the faithful implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions will lead to the
alleviation of the present difficulties of the peoples of the
region.
In Somalia, a whole population has gone through a
protracted civil war and famine with hardly any
governmental machinery to tackle the situation. This made
it imperative for the United Nations to act. As an
unprecedented humanitarian mission, the multilateral action
in Somalia enjoyed the support of the entire world, including
the factional Somali leaders themselves. India, for its part,
has contributed one of the largest contingents to this mission.
Now that the situation has improved and starvation has been
averted, the United Nations operation faces new problems.
It is necessary for the United Nations to reassure all sectors
of the people of Somalia about its role in the country,
intensify the process of political reconciliation and adhere
strictly to the original objectives of the mission.
The phenomenal increase in peace-keeping operations
in the post-cold-war period and their inclusion as an element
of the new agenda for peace is at once a matter of comfort
and concern. It is a matter of comfort because the United
Nations at long last has started playing its Charter role in the
area of peace and security. In the altered international
political environment, we would like the United Nations to
realize its full potential. At the same time, the involvement
of the United Nations on an unprecedented scale with peace-
keeping operations causes us concern because operationally
the United Nations is not fully prepared and equipped to
discharge this role effectively. And, legally and
conceptually, the limits, procedures and rules of the
involvement of the United Nations are not clearly defined.
Forty-eighth session - 1 October l993 13
For peace-keeping operations to be successful, it is
necessary to follow certain guidelines and criteria. All
avenues of pacific settlement of disputes, as laid down in
Chapter VI of the Charter, should be fully explored and
exhausted before resorting to peace-keeping operations under
Chapter VII. Decisions on such operations should be taken
in a democratic and broad-based manner, and after thorough
consideration of all aspects. To command universal
endorsement and maintain their non-partisan character,
United Nations peace-keeping operations must be based on
the consent of all the States parties to a dispute. They
should be undertaken with a specific mandate and a clear
time-frame. Greater efficiency should be achieved in both
planning and execution of peace-keeping operations. The
Foreign Minister of the Russian Federation, in his address to
the General Assembly a few days ago, put forward a few
proposals in this respect which merit consideration by the
General Assembly. The concept of invoking humanitarian
relief as a basis for peace-keeping operations may have to be
approached with a great deal of caution and circumspection.
Any new United Nations operation for providing
humanitarian relief must be completely non-partisan - in fact
and in the perception of the parties involved.
That consideration must also guide any discussion or
decision on preventive deployment. The United Nations
must not allow itself to be burdened indefinitely with
obsolete and ineffective peace-keeping operations. Every
possible measure should be taken to ensure the safety of
peace-keeping personnel.
Another aspect of the agenda for peace which we
would like to underline is the particular importance we
attach to Article 50, which enjoins the Security Council to
find solutions to the special economic problems faced by
third States on account of the implementation of sanctions
imposed by the Security Council. We call for an automatic
mechanism that would put remedial action in place
simultaneously with the imposition of sanctions.
An integral element of any agenda for peace in our
time is the achievement of disarmament, particularly nuclear
disarmament. Having endorsed the Chemical Weapons
Convention, the United Nations should move on to consider
similar steps in other areas of disarmament.
We welcome the unilateral decision of the United States
to extend its moratorium on nuclear testing until the end
of 1994. The focus of the nuclear-weapon Powers should
now be on the early conclusion of a universal, verifiable and
comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty leading to the
elimination of all nuclear weapons.
India’s commitment to non-proliferation is complete
and unequivocal. India has an unblemished track record.
India’s proposal made in 1988 for an action plan for nuclear
disarmament within a specific time-frame is of continuing
relevance in our bid to rid the world of the global scourge
of nuclear weapons. We believe that a new, just and
uniformly applicable regime for non-proliferation which does
not discriminate between the nuclear-weapon and the
non-nuclear-weapon States should be considered at an early
date. Such a treaty should place equal obligations on all
States. For a non-proliferation regime to be truly
meaningful, it must also address the questions of a
convention on the non-use of nuclear weapons, a verifiable
freeze on the production of fissionable material, a total ban
on nuclear-weapon tests and negotiations on general and
complete disarmament. The global spread and reach of
nuclear weapons reduce to a travesty the objective of
achieving genuine peace and security within a narrow
regional framework. It is our hope that the United Nations
will take firm action in this direction to achieve this in the
sense I have mentioned.
One area of concern for developing countries is the
question of ad hoc and unilateral export controls and other
restrictions being placed on the transfer of dual-use and high
technology with the ostensible purpose of curbing
proliferation. Non-proliferation concerns must not be made
a pretext for denying developing countries access to
technologies critical for their development. There is,
therefore, need to evolve multilateral, non-discriminatory and
transparent arrangements to regulate the transfer of such
technologies so that peaceful uses and dissemination of some
key technologies are not denied to the developing world.
There is perhaps merit in convening a special session
on disarmament to examine the whole gamut of
disarmament-related issues that arise in the new context of
today. The question of a peace dividend arising from
disarmament in the form of financial and technical resources
for the enhancement of international development
cooperation in the context of the United Nations could be
one of the issues that special session could address.
It is obvious that there can be no global security unless
development is ensured, and we therefore attach as much
importance to an agenda for development as to the "Agenda
for Peace". Agenda 21 of the Rio Declaration, outlining the
plan and programme for global cooperation in ensuring
sustainable development; the outcome of the Final Act of the
eighth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development (UNCTAD VIII), on the partnership for
development between the North and the South; and the
14 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
forthcoming Conference on Population and Development, as
well as the World Summit on Social Development, provide
the international community enough opportunity to promote
economic and social development and environmental
sustainability, particularly in developing countries. The work
on an agenda for development should build on all these
development-related action programmes and provide a new
impetus to development cooperation, both under United
Nations auspices and in bilateral and other multilateral
contexts. Enhancement of the role, resources and
capabilities of the organs and agencies dealing with
development in the United Nations system should be
stressed. The United Nations should also be enabled to have
a more interactive relationship with the Bretton Woods
institutions in a spirit of finding considered and innovative
solutions to global economic problems and pooling all
available resources for that purpose.
Comprehensive and constructive dialogue between the
North and the South and the strengthening of a global
partnership for development are the needs of our times if we
are to avoid the replacement of the East-West divide by a
North-South one. India has always participated in the
ongoing North-South dialogue through the Group of 77 and
the Non-Aligned Movement and in keeping with the
requirements of a more focused dialogue. India has become
part of the new group of 15 developing countries for
South-South consultation and cooperation, the G-15. We are
acting as host to the fourth summit meeting of that group at
New Delhi in December. Representing the developing
countries, we have had a promising start through an informal
dialogue with the G-7 and we hope to build on those
beginnings in a spirit of "global partnership for global
benefit", as was stated by my Prime Minister,
Mr. P. V. Narasimha Rao in his message to the
G-7 Chairman.
Some key issues where there is an ongoing dialogue but
which none the less need further consideration and
implementation include: participation of developing
countries in global macroeconomic coordination and
decision-making; reciprocation by the North of the efforts of
the South at restructuring and economic liberalization
through the pursuit of expansionist policies conducive to
long-term growth and opening them up to global competition
in goods, services and manpower through reduction and
elimination of protectionist barriers; increased capital flows,
both official and private, bilateral and multilateral, to
developing countries to offset the crippling effects of the
debt burden and to accelerate growth and development; and
a balanced, successful conclusion of the Uruguay Round,
which should ensure substantial enhancement of market
access for developing-country exports and of their access to
the tool of competitiveness.
The profoundly humanistic traditions of the Indian
civilization, with its emphasis on tolerance, harmony,
non-violence and the inviolability of the individual, have
found their modern expression in the setting up of a
democratic, secular and egalitarian polity and society in free
India.
Being the largest practising democracy and effecting a
synthesis between a multiplicity of ethnic, religious and
linguistic groups and peoples has been no easy task, as some
in the West are themselves realizing even in the context of
their relatively lesser diversities. The Constitution of free
India consolidated this humanistic tradition and is indeed a
veritable bill of human rights. A strong and independent
judiciary and a totally free press have also been watchdogs
of democracy and human rights in India.
India’s commitment to the effective protection of
human rights has now received another institutional impetus
with the establishment of a National Human Rights
Commission comprised of a retired Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court of India, a retired judge of the Supreme
Court of India, a former Chief Justice of the State High
Court and other eminent persons as well as the chairmen of
the three separate national commissions which already exist
to protect the interests of scheduled castes and scheduled
tribes, women and minorities. The Commission has been
mandated to inquire into allegations of violations of human
rights and has been invested with wide-ranging powers,
including the power to establish special investigation teams
to carry out effective investigations. The findings of the
Commission are to be published from time to time besides
being reflected in its annual report, which will also be laid
before Parliament. The law also provides for the
establishment of human rights commissions by the State
Governments, on the pattern of the national Commission, as
also special courts for the speedy trial of cases involving
human rights violations.
I am confident that members of the Assembly will
accept that India has established the most appropriate human
rights commission to ensure that there will be full human
rights protection in the country.
Our commitment to universally acceptable
non-discriminatory norms of human rights and their
protection and promotion cannot be questioned. It was in
that spirit that we participated actively in the World
Conference on Human Rights, which recognized the
Forty-eighth session - 1 October l993 15
importance of this issue. We are however pained that not
enough emphasis is put on a major threat and impediment to
the realization of human rights, namely, terrorism, especially
the kind that is aided and abetted by one State against
another. Why is it that a few so-called human rights
advocates and Member States of the United Nations choose
to focus on the human rights of terrorists - those who
indulge in senseless murder, destruction, pillage, the
disruption of civilized existence and the undermining of
democratic institutions? Why do they virtually turn a blind
eye to the violation of the human rights of the victims of
such terrorism - innocent civilians or those upholding law
and order and the territorial integrity of States? Can they in
true conscience allow terrorists and their supporters to usurp
the moral high ground on human rights?
The United Nations will have to take strong action
against terrorists because terrorists engage in all kinds of
violence. They try to upset democratically taken decisions
in a country by using force and killing people. This must be
totally condemned by the United Nations and stopped
completely so that people can live in peace and in
democracy and express their views in accordance with the
constitution of their country.
In sum, we believe that international cooperation in the
protection of human rights can succeed only if it is within
the framework of respect for the sovereignty and integrity of
States and of a vigorous global programme for anti-terrorist
action. We would, however, like to point out that any
unilateral use of human rights as an instrument of political
pressure or intervention, or as an obstacle to trade or a
condition for development cooperation and aid, in fact serves
the opposite purpose and impedes the full realization of the
human rights of people of affected countries.
The enhanced role of the United Nations in
international affairs calls for the restructuring and redefining
of the functions of its principal organs.
The responsibilities of the Security Council have grown
dramatically in the past few years, requiring a greater degree
of participation by the overall membership of the United
Nations in the Council’s decision-making process. We must
recognize that the membership of the United Nations has
grown enormously over the years. A more balanced and
expanded representation for Member States in the Council is
therefore inevitable. Unity of purpose among its members
rather than size determines the efficiency of any
organization. The expansion should not be done selectively
or in a piecemeal manner. The principles or criteria of
expansion of the permanent and non-permanent membership
should be agreed upon by consensus. For the selection of
additional States in an expanded Council, the population -
which represents the principle of democracy and an element
of power - the size of the economy and the future potential
of the countries concerned should be taken into account,
along with equitable geographical distribution and the
contribution to the maintenance of international peace and
security. There is virtual unanimity among those who have
responded to the Secretary-General that an expansion of the
Council is imperative. Interesting suggestions have been put
forward by several countries. The logical next step would
be to start a process of consultations to arrive at a suitable
and fair formula that commands universal support.
The permanent members should be responsive to the
aspirations of developing countries represented in the
General Assembly on the basis of equality. It is therefore
essential also to revive the role of the General Assembly, as
was originally envisaged in the Charter.
We stand on a decisive threshold incomparable to any
in history, a moment in time when we must bring to bear a
larger vision and foster the forces of positive integration,
democracy and cooperation at national and international
levels.
My Prime Minister has, in characterizing the 1990s as
watershed years in global affairs in the realm of political,
economic and environmental challenges and changes,
conveyed an unequivocal message:
"We cannot go wrong if we make coexistence
and peace our watchword, and common universal
good our objective".
It is my Government’s belief that this quest for the common
good, jointly undertaken, will be central to the success of
our endeavour and for the achievement of the Charter’s
objective of harmonizing the actions of nations in the
attainment of these common ends.
I should like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your unanimous election to preside over
the forty-eighth session of the United Nations General
Assembly.
We feel strongly that the time has come for all of us -
communities, nations, peoples, families - finally to lay the
last collective wreath on the tombs of the fallen combatants
and on the monuments of our beloved. It is the right way to
honour their memories and to answer the needs of the newly
born. We have to lay the foundations for a new Middle
East.
The peace agreement between us and the Palestinians
is not just an accord signed by political leaders. It is an
ongoing, profound commitment to the next generation of
Arabs and Israelis, Christians, Muslims, Jews and people of
all other faiths.
We know it is not enough to declare an end to war.
We have to try to eradicate the roots of all hostilities. If we
only bring violence down but ignore misery, we may
discover that we have traded one menace for another peril.
Territorial disputes may have been the reason for wars
between nations, and poverty may again become the seed of
violence between peoples. While signing the documents on
the lawn of the White House, I could almost sense the
breeze of a fresh spring, and my imagination began to
wander to the skies of our land, which may have become
brighter to the eyes of all people, both those who agree and
those who oppose. On the lawn one could almost hear the
heavy tread of boots leaving the stage after a hundred years
of hostility. One could have heard the gentle tiptoeing of
new steps making a debut in a world awaiting peace.
Yet we could not depart from reality. I know that the
solution to the Palestinian issue may be the key to a new
beginning, but it is in no way the answer to the many needs
awaiting us upon our return home.
The last decade saw great changes, including the end of
East-West confrontation and the opening of the way for the
gradual disappearance of North-South polarization. The
great continent of Asia and the picturesque continent of
South America introduced the dynamics of an economic
development of their own. The dramatic event in South
Africa is a declaration to the same effect. So, contrary to all
assumptions, it has been demonstrated that neither geography
nor race is a hindrance or an advantage to economic
promise.
We witnessed the end of some wars only to discover
that the warriors did not reach their own promised land.
Some colonized people gained their independence, but they
hardly enjoyed its fruits. The dangers may have been over,
but their hopes evaporated. We have learned that the end of
a war should be the beginning of a new genesis, which will
be the end of belligerency and will put an end to
psychological prejudices.
No nation, rich or poor, is able nowadays to attain
security unless the region in which it exists is secure. The
scope of regional security must exceed the range of ballistic
missiles, which may hit each and all of us.
As we strive to achieve a comprehensive peace, no
wound must remain unhealed.
Geographically speaking, we live side by side with the
Jordanian Kingdom, and what is so obvious geographically
must become clear politically. We have already agreed with
the Hashemite Kingdom on many complicated issues, and
there is no doubt that we can complete the story fully, that
we can offer the people on both sides of the river full peace,
that the Dead Sea can become a spring of new life and that
the old waters of the River Jordan can be a source of
prosperity flowing from each side to the other.
We hope - as a matter of fact, we are determined - to
make peace with Syria, yet we ask the Syrian leadership, if
it has chosen peace, why it refuses to meet openly. If Syria
is aiming for the Egyptian fruits of peace, it must follow the
process that led to them. Both of us have to look ahead and
realize that the threats of war are no more than an illusion
that one can return to an unbearable past.
We shall not give up our negotiations with our
Lebanese neighbours. We do not have any territorial claims
or any political pretensions concerning Lebanon. We pray,
together with many Lebanese, that their country will no
longer be a back yard for troublemakers. It is for Lebanon
to make a choice between Hizbollah, on the one hand, which
operates from its territory and then takes orders from another
Government, and, on the other, insisting on having one
army, one policy, and offering real tranquillity to its people
and security to its neighbours. Lebanon does not need a
license to regain its independence, and Lebanon should not
postpone its return to its balanced, traditional policy.
I am not sure whether there is a new order in the
world, but all of us feel there is a new world awaiting an
order. We are encouraged by the new attempt of the United
Nations and its Secretary-General to answer the social and
22 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
economic call of the present era. The United Nations was
created as a political answer; today it must face social and
economic questions.
The Middle East, which has been an important agenda
item in United Nations history, must become prosperous, not
only peaceful. To construct a modern Middle East we need
wisdom no less than financial support.
We have to rid ourselves of the costly follies of the
past and adopt the principles of modern economy. Who
will, and who should, pay the cost of oversized armies?
Who will, and who should, bear the price of an arms race
whose cost has reached $50 billion annually? Who will, and
who should, pay for the inefficiencies of old systems? Who
will, and who should, compensate for outmoded censorship
of mail and control of trade and travel? And who will
comply with the State where suspicion intercepts the
enterprising spirit of the people?
We can, and we should, turn to the promises of
scientific development, the market economy and
comprehensive education. We must base our industry,
agriculture and services on the highest of today’s
technologies. We have to invest in our schools. Israel, a
country of immigration, is blessed with many scientists and
engineers. We shall gladly make this human wealth
available as a contribution.
I know that there is suspicion; that, when referring to
a common market in the Middle East or announcing an
Israeli contribution, it may be perceived as an attempt to win
preference or to establish domination. May I say sincerely
and loudly that we did not give up territorial control to
engage ourselves in economic superiority. The age of
domination, political or economic, is dead. The time of
cooperation has begun.
As a Jew, may I say that the virtue and the essence of
our history since the times of Abraham and the
commandments of Moses have been an uncompromising
opposition to any form of occupation, domination and
discrimination. For us, Israel is not just a territorial
homeland, but a permanent moral commitment as well.
There are other questions, concerning the building of a
common market in the Middle East, as to how to attain this
when governments are so varied and economies are so
different. The differences in governments and economies
should not prevent us from doing together what can be done
together: combating the desert and offering fertility to an
arid land.
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations declared that the Middle East must double its
agricultural production in the 25 years to come. The
population of the region in the same period will double itself
anyway. The land is cut by many and large deserts and its
water resources are stingy and scarce. Yet we know that in
a similar period of time - the 25 years between 1950 and 1975 -
Israel was able to increase its agricultural output twelvefold -
an increase unprecedented in history.
During the past decade, 95 per cent of the growth of
our agriculture resulted from research, planning, training and
organizing. High technology permits nations to attain real
independence and to experience genuine freedom, political
as well as economic. There is nothing new about the
scarcity of water in our midst. Jacob and Esau drank from
the same wells even when their paths were separated. But
then, unlike today, they could not desalinate the sea water;
they could not computerize irrigation; nor could they enjoy
the potential of biotechnology.
We are meeting again with an entirely different
opportunity. Greening the land can be accompanied by the
creation of many new jobs for all people in the area. The
most promising opportunity may be the development of
tourism. No other branch of modern industry assures an
immediate growth of the Middle East like this one. Our area
is blessed by nature and by history, a history which is still
very much alive: the eternity of Jerusalem, the magnificence
of the pyramids, the symbols of Luxor, the Hanging Gardens
of Babylon, the Pillars of Wisdom in Baalbek, the red
palaces of Petra, the inimitable charm of Marakesh, the old
winds which still blow in Carthage, not forgetting the
beaches of Gaza or the scent of Jericho’s perfumed fruits.
We have to open roads to those wonders and keep them safe
and hospitable. Tourism depends on tranquility; tourism
enhances tranquillity. It makes friendship a vested interest.
Thirdly, we have to build an infrastructure with modern
means so as to avoid the pitfalls of the past. Modern
transportation and revolutionary communications crossing the
air, covering the ground and connecting the seas will turn
geographical proximities into an economic advantage. We
should not ask taxpayers of other countries to finance follies
of our own. We have to correct them ourselves. We do not
have the moral right to ask for the financing of unnecessary
wars or wasteful systems.
If the thumping of hammers replaces the thunder of
guns, many nations will be more than willing to extend a
helping hand. They will invest in a better future. They will
support the replacement of unwarranted confrontation with
Forty-eighth session - 28 September l993 23
much-needed economic competition. Markets can serve the
needs of the people no less than flags can signify their
destinies. The time has come to build a Middle East for the
people and not just for the rulers.
It was not simple to open the locked doors to peace. In
the name of God, let them not be closed again. Let peace
be comprehensive, embracing all issues, all countries, all
generations. We suggest that we all negotiate together as
equals. We offer a common ground of mutual respect and
mutual compromise. Thirteen years have passed since we
made peace with Egypt. We are grateful to Egypt and its
President for expanding understanding, overt and hidden. In
a world in which so many insoluble problems reside, the
Palestinians and we have finally shown that in fact there are
no insoluble problems, only people who tend to believe that
many problems are insoluble.
We have negotiated one of the most complicated issues
of the last 100 years. We are grateful to the United States
for its support and leadership. We are grateful to both
President Clinton and Secretary Christopher for their crucial
role. We appreciate the Egyptian role and the Norwegian
encouragement; the European involvement and serious
contribution; the Asian support and blessing. Maybe we
now have the right to say to other people in conflict: "Do
not give up. Do not surrender to old obsessions and do not
take fresh disappointments at face value." What we did,
others can do as well.
We are determined to make the agreement with the
Palestinians into a permanent success. Israel would consider
the economic success of the Palestinians as though it were
its own, and I believe that a newly achieved security will
serve the aspirations of the Israelis and the necessities of the
Palestinians.
Gaza, after 7,000 years of suffering, can emancipate
itself from want. Jericho, without its fallen walls, can see its
gardens blossom again.
As the twentieth century comes to a close, we have
learned from the United States and Russia that there are no
military answers to the new military dangers, only political
solutions. Successful economies are no longer a monopoly
of the rich and the mighty. They represent an open
invitation to every nation ready to adopt the combination of
science and open-mindedness. We see at the end of this
century that politics can achieve more by good will than by
power, and that the young generation watching their
televisions compare their lot with the fortunes or misfortunes
of others. They see freedom, they watch peace, they view
prosperity, all in real time. They know that they can attain
more if they work harder.
If we want to represent their hopes, we have to
combine wise policies and regional security with market
economies. Historically we were born equal, and equally we
can give birth to a new age.
"Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that the
plowman shall overtake the reaper, and the treader of
24 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
grapes him that soweth seed; and the mountains shall
drop sweet wine, and all the hills shall melt." (The
Holy Bible, Amos 9:13)
So said the Prophet.
The United Nations
is our Organization; we are its custodians, and we have to
adjust to change. We have a huge responsibility to pass it
on in better shape than we found it. Historians in future
years will acknowledge this period of radical change.
But what are the objectives of this Organization of ours
in 1993? Well, they are not very difficult to enumerate,
because they are set out for us and by us in the Preamble to
the Charter, and they remain as valid today as they were
when they were agreed in 1945.
The first, of course, is peace, because without peace
and security no human society can flourish; then human
dignity, because if we do not treat each other with respect as
individuals, we will not do so as nations; justice, because
unless relations between nations are grounded in law, the
powerful will always be able to triumph over the weak;
social and economic progress, because without the sustained
and sustainable development of our economies, all our other
achievements will be as nothing.
I believe that to this list we must now add the
maintenance of a clean and attractive environment. We are
learning, painfully, that our planet also has rights. We
ignore them only at our peril.
These are the foundations for the vision of what the
world should be. In New Zealand, we would say that they
give opportunities to all. When the United Nations came
into existence almost 50 years ago, the vision was sharper
than the reality, but the founders of the United Nations were
certainly not deterred. They were at the watershed in the
affairs of the world. They had just experienced the awful
reality of a global conflict in which millions had died, and
they were determined to do everything in their power to
make sure that such a conflict could never occur again.
They did build well. They embodied their vision not only
in this Organization but also in a whole series of economic,
financial, social and humanitarian institutions, and they gave
it the only strength that counted: their sheer determination,
as men and women from very different countries, to make
it happen.
Only the utmost patience and perseverance has kept that
dream and that determination alive through most of the
50 years since 1945. Progress has been slow and it has been
halting. Some great things were done, but too often the
Members of the United Nations could agree only at the
lowest common denominator, a reflection of the political
gaps and strains within the United Nations membership.
There are, however, four reasons why I believe that that
long, grey era has closed.
The first is that the cold war, that shadow and threat of
a global conflict, is now over. Freed of that constraint, the
United Nations can operate, as it was intended that it should,
as the ultimate guardian of the security of all its Members,
the ultimate arbiter of world peace.
Secondly, democracy, one of the most effective
guarantors of peace between nations, is spreading. We
welcome the establishment of democratic institutions and
processes in countries that have for too long been without
them.
The third point is that in the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade Uruguay Round of multilateral trade
negotiations, the world has a major opportunity to turn its
back on protectionism and lock in the prospects for
economic growth through trade and other forms of economic
integration. Freedom and free trade go hand in hand.
Fourthly, and last, the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro
and Agenda 21 contain a global consensus, a universal
determination to act to preserve our environment.
This combination of developments marks a new
watershed; if we are to keep faith with the founders of this
Organization, we must do what they did in 1945 at their
watershed, and build well, not just for ourselves, but of
course for those who follow.
On the issue of security and peacemaking, the first
point that I raised was that the elimination of confrontation
between the super-Powers has opened up new possibilities
for the practice of collective security and peacemaking. The
unfortunate consequence of 50 years of super-Power
confrontation is, paradoxically, that we are not yet very good
at working together: like a novice sports team, we are really
rather uncoordinated, sadly lacking in strategy, sadly lacking
in team skills or knowledge of the new rules, and sadly
lacking in collective determination. We cannot correct these
deficiencies overnight, but we must keep on trying to
improve.
Forty-eighth session - 29 September l993 39
The other paradox is that peace has not broken out
simply because the former Soviet Union and the United
States have stopped squaring off against each other. There
have been unexpected consequences: some would liken the
result to taking the lid off a pressure-cooker. Conflicts,
internal and between neighbours, seem to have burst out
everywhere. These consequences, in human terms, are
horrific.
So here we are, in the United Nations, underresourced,
undertrained and facing an enormous peacemaking, peace-
building and peace-keeping challenge. We really have no
alternative to learning as we go, and I believe that we are
doing so.
During the past year, I have spoken to soldiers and
relief workers in the field in United Nations missions as
widely spread as Somalia and Croatia, and I pay my highest
tribute to their dedication under some of the most adverse
circumstances. United Nations people are trying there, as
elsewhere, to create conditions where their work will
ultimately no longer be required. They are actually trying to
do themselves out of a job.
The Secretary-General’s document "An Agenda for
Peace" is now in a consolidation phase. The problems are
clear: rising expectations; machinery due for reform; lack of
funds; and the lack of ready, well-trained and well-equipped
forces. Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali has already made some
thoughtful proposals, including sending teams to Member
States to help identify in advance resources available for the
United Nations operations. New Zealand is willing to
respond positively to this approach.

The Secretary-General has also made organizational
changes in the Headquarters departments that support peace-
keeping. The revamping of the Department of Peace-
Keeping Operations is a very good start, providing we
recognize that we need more than just a shifting of the
resources. The new philosophy of peace-building and
peacemaking must work in tandem with the well-tried and
successful peace-keeping philosophy of the past.
On the issue of safety and security of United Nations
personnel, recent peace-keeping operations have highlighted
the risks to United Nations personnel working in dangerous
and unstable situations. That does not help the recruitment
of peace-keepers, and it does not help the recruitment of
contributing countries. The United Nations must have the
means to hold personally responsible and accountable those
who attack or commit other acts of violence against the
United Nations and associated personnel.
Earlier this year the New Zealand Government took the
initial step of calling for all possible measures to ensure the
safety of United Nations personnel. We asked the Secretary-
General to report on the adequacy of existing arrangements.
His report makes a number of positive recommendations.
He has highlighted the need for the General Assembly to
elaborate a new multilateral instrument on the role the
Security Council might play in setting the appropriate
conditions designed to improve the safety of personnel.
I was very pleased just this afternoon to participate in
a Security Council meeting that adopted a resolution
welcoming the Secretary-General’s report and spelling out
the conditions the Council will impose in the future for the
protection of United Nations personnel. I was also delighted
that the General Assembly last week agreed to New
Zealand’s proposal to include a new item on the safety of
personnel in this year’s agenda. I hope that the Sixth
Committee will establish a working group to consider the
issue and make urgent progress. I hope the subject will also
be very fully discussed in all other relevant United Nations
bodies.
Of course, any mechanisms for protecting peace-keepers
must also require that parties to any conflict respect the
integrity of those personnel that have been deployed on their
behalf. Such an undertaking should, in principle, form part
of the mandate for any peace-keeping operation. The recent
practice of the Security Council of establishing clear
mandates for peace-keeping operations at the outset of
deployment is especially welcome, but there remains an onus
on a host State both to explain carefully to its people the
reason for the United Nations presence and also to take
active steps to ensure the safety of United Nations personnel.
But the purpose of peace-keeping or peacemaking and
peace-building is not solely to deal with conflicts that have
already arisen, urgent though that task is. We must improve
our capacity to prevent conflicts before they break out, and
I should like to acknowledge here the importance and
timeliness of recent improvements in conflict-resolution
mechanisms and the ongoing work on preventive diplomacy.
I welcome very warmly the contribution made by my
Australian colleague, Senator Gareth Evans, to the debate on
this subject. He has given us much food for thought and
some helpful suggestions for concrete steps we can take to
improve our performance in this area.
40 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
Disarmament measures remain a key element in conflict
prevention. This year, as the international community
moves towards the extension - I hope for an indefinite
period - of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, the Assembly will have non-proliferation as one
of its major themes. In this regard, North Korea’s continued
evasion of its responsibilities under that Treaty demands a
firm international response.
We welcome very strongly the restraint being shown by
the nuclear-weapon States on testing and their positive
attitude towards the launching of negotiations for a
comprehensive test-ban treaty. It is not before time. New
Zealand has sponsored a draft resolution on comprehensive
test-bans for many years. Its purpose now is on the brink of
fulfillment. The subject needs to be taken up in the
Conference on Disarmament. Given the importance of the
tasks now on the agenda of the Conference on Disarmament,
membership of the Conference must be open to all who have
the will to participate constructively.
In respect of conventional weaponry, we applaud the
enhancement of controls through the commencement of the
Register of conventional-arms transfers. We now have a
chemical weapons Convention in place alongside the
biological weapons Convention.
It is timely to consider what similar work can be done
in respect of conventional weapons. As disarmament moves
from the realms of Utopia into the achievable, we must lend
every effort, here in the United Nations and outside it, to
ensure disarmament’s more rapid progress. No sensible
proposal should be discarded simply for outdated ideological
reasons.
The spread of democratic institutions to every corner of
the globe is, I believe, one of the most encouraging
phenomena of recent years, and the pace is astonishing. In
the space of just 24 hours last week, the Parliament of Israel
approved a Declaration of Principles on Palestinian self-
government; the Parliament of South Africa enacted
legislation establishing the Transitional Executive Council to
take charge of that country until a democratically elected
Government is in office; and a constitutional Government
took office in Cambodia.
We welcome these historic events and the promise they
hold for a more just and prosperous existence for the peoples
of those nations. As delegations will remember, the Middle
East and South Africa dominated the political agenda of the
Assembly for many years. These positive developments in
both regions will give a new cast to the Assembly’s
deliberations.
We can also take heart from progress on another front
of long-standing concern to the Assembly. The United
Nations is now three years into the International Decade for
the Eradication of Colonialism. The good news is that we
are already seeing evidence that the goals and objectives of
the United Nations in this area are almost completely
realized. The number of Self-Governing Territories on the
United Nations list is now very small, and many of these are
exploring innovative ways to complete the decolonization
process. The recent United Nations Seminar on Colonialism,
held in Papua-New Guinea in June, confirmed this trend. It
also revealed that in some cases some very small Non-Self-
Governing Territories do not want fundamental constitutional
change thrust upon them.
New Zealand has always been a strong advocate of the
principle that in all cases decisions on self-determination are,
of course, for the local people to make. We are comfortable
with the notion that certain Territories, such as the Tokelaus,
may finally choose to develop concepts of self-government
and free association that further develop models that have
already been successfully employed for other very small
former Territories.
In that connection, and consistent with New Zealand’s
principled approach to all matters of decolonization, I am
pleased to confirm that the New Zealand Government and
the people of the Tokelaus have extended an invitation to the
United Nations to send a further visiting mission to the
Tokelaus early in 1994 to meet local leaders and, of course,
discuss recent developments.
Democracy is a sure foundation for peace between
nations. It is the political expression of that universal
respect for human rights to which we are all committed.
The Vienna Declaration and Plan of Action arising out of
this year’s World Conference on Human Rights gives some
direction to steps the Organization can take to strengthen the
observance of human rights.
I believe we should move quickly to approve a high
commissioner for human rights. The United Nations needs
an officer with a mandate to play a constructive role in
preventing, monitoring and alleviating human rights abuses
throughout the world. The Centre for Human Rights should
be given the resources to match the immense task it will
have before it. There is a clear need for an enhanced
programme of advisory services and technical assistance to
Forty-eighth session - 29 September l993 41
help countries build up their national human rights
infrastructure.
Human rights is also about recognizing the rights of
peoples to self-identity. In this, the International Year for
the World’s Indigenous People, I would like to support a
proposal that the United Nations declare a decade for
indigenous peoples. We need to build on what has been
achieved, first at Rio de Janeiro and subsequently during the
International Year world wide. This is a long-term task. It
will require a sustained and very coordinated effort.
Unhappily, our task is not just to enhance the
observance of human rights. In this last decade of the
twentieth century, we seem at times to be actually moving
backwards, witnessing the abuse and deprivation of human
rights on a scale that we really believed we had put a long
way behind us. The suffering of millions of refugees
displaced by conflict is beyond our comprehension but
cannot and should not be beyond our compassion. This
dimension is starkly evident in nearly every issue now
before the Security Council. Last June, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees put the
figure at 19 million people - 19 million displaced people
around the world - and it continues to rise.
It is appropriate to pay a special tribute to Mrs. Ogata
and her staff for the way in which they are meeting, often in
dangerous and trying circumstances, the challenges which
this problem brings. New Zealand has responded to these
increased demands by making a special provision for
refugees from Bosnia, Somalia and Cambodia by
establishing special programmes for particularly vulnerable
groups, such as women at risk, and by providing aid. We
now have one of the highest per capita resettlement ratios in
the world. But this is, of course, addressing the symptoms,
not the cause. The ultimate objective must be to create or
recreate conditions that allow refugees to return in safety and
dignity to their own homes and homelands.
Nor can we neglect the need to bring to justice those
who have brought about such suffering. The establishment
of a war crimes Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia is
certainly a central pillar in the international response to this
particular conflict. The full achievement of the Tribunal’s
mandate is of the highest priority. At the same time, and in
a broader context, New Zealand also welcomes the
consideration being given to the creation of an international
criminal court. We would like to see further progress on
this issue made during this session of the Assembly.
Sustainable economic growth for all countries is
essential for stability and peace in the world. A principal
determinant for that is an open, healthy and international
trading system, a system that encourages closer economic
relations and strengthened North-South exchanges. There is
no greater assistance developed countries can give to the
developing countries than to open their markets. A
satisfactory conclusion to the Uruguay Round of multilateral
trade negotiations would be of immense benefit to us all and
has been mentioned, I believe, by just about every speaker
on this rostrum during this debate.
Progress to that end in the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade, of course, has been slow, as we know.
Many deadlines have come and many deadlines have gone
without resolution. We should not be under any illusion.
Come this December, after seven years of negotiations on
the Uruguay Round, either we will have the liberalization of
multilateral trade with a benefit to all or the prospects of
avoiding global economic warfare will have suffered the
most serious setback. The New Zealand Government sees
the purpose of these negotiations being to lock in place
today the politically attainable, and to build on what might
be possible tomorrow. In preparing for that, we also have
to focus our attention on what is needed to ensure that all
countries are placed where they can reap the benefits of the
future.
We still have much to follow up from the Rio
Conference on Environment and Development. But time is
not on our side. Environmental degradation continues to
pose a serious threat to the planet and its resources, and no
country - no country - is immune from its impact. The
levels of responsibility for environmental damage may differ
from country to country, but we must face up to their
consequences together. We must meet the objectives of
Agenda 21 and the Rio Declaration. All countries should
move to ratify the climate and biodiversity Conventions, a
step that New Zealand took just recently. New Zealand will
contribute to the global environmental facility that is to fund
both of those Conventions. We have begun work to reduce
carbon dioxide emissions and are developing a
comprehensive strategy for reducing net greenhouse gas
emissions. We are also making excellent progress on
phasing out consumption of ozone-depleting chemicals.
New Zealand is ready to share its expertise on biological
diversity with other countries to assist them in meeting
obligations under the Conventions.
I suppose that one of the most useful exercises that we
can conclude here is to draw some lessons from the
experiences and views that I have set out. The most obvious
42 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
one to me is that, however important it is to deal with the
particularities of human aspirations for peace, respect for the
individual, economic well-being and a good, clean
environment, one should never lose sight of the connections
between them all. The Secretary-General has pointed out
how peace, development and democracy form a mutually
reinforcing circle, and we agree. Getting the linkages right
can be as important for success as the elements of each.
Peace and security are not likely to be soundly based if
people are hungry. Economic growth cannot last if the
natural resources used to create it are not conserved. People
are not likely to make the effort required by economic
restructuring if the important choices are made for them.
Economic growth cannot be sustained if countries keep
coming up with new pretexts, such as environmental
protection, to justify excluding outside competition from
their own markets.
Human aspirations and human security must be seen in
the round. That is one of the major challenges facing the
membership of this Organization. The work done by the
United Nations in post-peace-keeping situations, I believe,
deserves renewed attention. For those countries where there
is still a need to foster economic, political and social
development, we should look at establishing a partnership
arrangement between the United Nations and the sovereign
Government. A coordinating body comprising the
Governments and a group of friends of the Secretariat could
help to ensure that the gains of peace-keeping are taken
through to reconstruction. I believe that we need a new
institutional framework to graduate problems out of the
security area and into a forum more able to cope with the
needs of redevelopment and reconstruction.
The second lesson is that we need to keep looking at
how well the United Nations is fitted to meet the challenges
it is facing and be prepared to change it where necessary.
Membership of the United Nations has continued to grow
and I warmly welcome the newest Member States.
Many speakers have referred to Security Council
reform. The Security Council is in need of early reform.
We support a modest increase in membership and a fresh
look at the institution as a whole. The possibility of some
members representing regional groupings for, say, a 10-year
period is worth considering. New Zealand will continue to
oppose any extension of veto rights.
Another imperative is for the Council’s work methods
to be improved. Wider consultation with the broader
membership of the United Nations is essential. United
Nations agencies are also ripe for restructuring. The General
Assembly has made a good start on itself. We have
streamlined the Committees, but we also must streamline the
overall workload. It is unmanageable at present.
For several years now, we have been looking hard at
ways to fund new demands on the Organization by making
compensating savings elsewhere. We still need to ask hard
questions about whether all that has been done traditionally
still needs to be done. I welcome the fact that the Secretary-
General’s budget proposals already envisage some major
steps in this area. He has also identified better contracting
as a source of further savings.
At the end of the day, however, all that can be done to
increase efficiency and cut costs will come to naught if the
financial commitment by Member States is lacking. New
Zealand pays its dues on time; most others do not. I urge
them to do so. Let us certainly go on talking about financial
reform, but let us also secure the financial basis of the
Organization while we are doing so.
But what is the real dream that all of us have? I would
urge all members to keep making, from year to year, real
progress towards satisfying those basic human aspirations I
mentioned at the outset and to do so with a strong, well-
equipped and well-focused United Nations. Specifically, I
want to see a reshaped Security Council, a more tightly
focused General Assembly, better peace-keeping practice, a
Secretariat equipped to handle peace-building and partnership
arrangements, and financial arrangements built on efficiency
and punctuality. Would that not give a point to the fiftieth
anniversary celebrations that lie ahead in 1995, and would it
not make the United Nations of the next 50 years a more
effective, more dynamic and exciting place to do the world’s
business in than the conditions of the last 50 years have
allowed? The deprived of this world expect no less. The
well-off know the world is too small for the huge gap that
now exists amongst all people to remain.
First of all, I should like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your election to your important post. I see
it as a manifestation of respect for the peace-loving policy
of Guyana, and as a tribute to the growing role of Latin
American and Caribbean countries in international affairs.
Last year demonstrated the great potential for drama
inherent in the post-confrontational and post-communist
world. We have seen that the very highest levels of
cooperation are achievable. We see truly exciting prospects
in yesterday’s address by President Bill Clinton of the
United States and in other statements already delivered from
this rostrum.
At the same time, developments in the former
Yugoslavia, Abkhazia and Karabakh have also revealed the
true depths of barbarism and the significant new threat of
aggressive nationalism.
Outbursts of violence caused by xenophobia, even in
traditionally prosperous countries, have shown that no one is
safe from this danger. It is no less serious a threat to peace
today than nuclear war was yesterday. The world
community mustered the strength to stave off the nuclear
danger. An important guarantee against this was the
Russian-American START II Treaty. Nowadays we all
confront the equally formidable challenge of a new
generation of conflicts and wars triggered by nationalist,
political and religious intolerance. That is why democracy
and peacemaking must be the key terms defining the strategy
of the world community as it moves into the twenty-first
century.
The United Nations is now turning to face this new
challenge. The successful United Nations operation in
Cambodia was one of the largest in the history of the
Organization. Life is returning to normal in a country so
long torn by civil war. We stand ready, together with other
members of the international community, to help the people
of Cambodia to rebuild their country.
Forty-eighth session - 28 September l993 15
We have seen a political and psychological
breakthrough in the solution of the key problem of the
Middle East settlement, which is the problem of Palestine.
We pay tribute to the courageous leaders of Israel and the
PLO who have taken the first and most difficult step towards
mutual recognition and reconciliation. We are ready to
participate in an international conference on the economic
development of self-governing Palestinian territories.
Russia, as a co-sponsor of the Conference on the Middle
East, will spare no effort to advance the peace process in all
other areas.
However, the key to the settlement of many conflicts
has not yet been found. Russia will continue to encourage
the parties to the Bosnian conflict not to lose the chance of
a peaceful settlement and will contribute to the operation for
its implementation under United Nations command.
Twice during wartime I have had occasion to visit
Sarajevo. I propose that the United Nations should place the
city under its moral and political protection and that it
should be declared a centre of coexistence and a meeting
point for Islam, the Orthodox Church, Catholicism and other
religions. The city should become a symbol for the whole
world, a reminder that political violence and intolerance
under the banner of religion are the worst possible crimes
against religion itself and the human spirit. In any case, it
is surely time to think of establishing closer contacts
between the United Nations and the world’s leading
religions.
The international community seems to have turned a
blind eye to Afghanistan and Angola as soon as they ceased
to be pawns in the cold war. The United Nations has no
right to leave millions of people who live there in the grip
of an epidemic of ethnic, clan and religious extremism and
to forget their economic and humanitarian problems,
including that of the liberation of former Soviet prisoners of
war.
We must learn the lessons of the United Nations
operation in Somalia and considerably improve its
effectiveness. Conscious of its special responsibility for
maintaining peace, Russia has made peacemaking and the
protection of human rights, particularly those of national
minorities, the priority of its foreign policy, first and
foremost in the territory of the former USSR.
We will spare no effort to strengthen the
Commonwealth of Independent States and make it a positive
factor, not only regionally, but globally. I call upon
Members of the United Nations to support proposals
submitted jointly by the members of the Commonwealth of
Independent States to the present session, relating in
particular to the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, the struggle against international terrorism and
the protection of the environment.
Our peacemaking efforts are already yielding their first
results. For more than a year now there have been no
hostilities in the Transdniester region and South Ossetia.
With our participation, the process of normalization of the
situation and national dialogue has started in Tajikistan.
Russia is making active efforts to put an end to the
Abkhazian and Karabakh conflicts and to render
humanitarian assistance to their victims.
All these problems are too serious and too tragic for
speculation about neo-imperial plans of Russia, diplomatic
rivalry, or the search for new spheres of influence by
neighbouring and distant Powers. The United Nations, the
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE),
and all States truly interested in peace, along with Russia,
will have enough work to do together. We want to see
much more active assistance for our peacemaking efforts,
not in words, but in deeds.
In most cases this means that the United Nations should
give a mandate for operations conducted at the request of
conflicting parties on the basis of appropriate agreements.
For this, close interaction with the United Nations and the
CSCE missions is essential. Also, our minds should be open
to non-traditional methods, such as the participation of
contingents of the conflicting parties themselves and those
of a neighbouring mediating State. The pragmatic nature of
such a model was shown in particular in the Transdniester
region and in South Ossetia. This model should be used,
and not disregarded, in other regions, in the interests of the
United Nations, which is facing an overload of peace-
keeping operations. The collective peacemaking forces of
the Commonwealth of Independent States could also interact
with the United Nations itself. It is in any case time to
establish closer relations between the two organizations.
In material and financial terms the burden of
peacemaking borne by Russia alone today in the territory of
the former USSR must be lightened. This could mean
establishing a voluntary fund for this purpose. Of course,
Russia realizes that no international organization or group of
States can replace our peacemaking efforts in this specific
post-Soviet area.
16 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
By and large, taking into consideration the wide
experience gained throughout the world, it is time to think
of a modern overall strategy of peacemaking which would
be integrated with "An Agenda for Peace" proposed by the
Secretary-General.
The Russian Federation, as an initiator of the statement
of the President of the Security Council on peacemaking and
peace-keeping issues, made on 28 May 1993, makes the
following proposals.
The first is to define a clear-cut concept of political
leadership by the Security Council, create an effective
military command under the supervision of the Secretary-
General and establish a procedure for involving, on that
basis, regional organizations.
The second is to establish under Article 29 of the
United Nations Charter a special Security Council committee
on improving peace-keeping operation practices. This could
include those States which have already gained considerable
experience in this area of United Nations activity.
Our third proposal is to set up United Nations stand-by
forces which would be at the disposal of Member States and
used in peacemaking operations with the consent of their
Governments on a case-by-case basis at the request of the
Secretary-General.
All these questions directly relate to the process of
renewal of the United Nations. The reform of United
Nations bodies, including the Security Council, will make
sense and be effective if it allows for a more adequate
response to new challenges in the field of peacemaking.
The settlement of conflicts should go hand in hand with
the international protection of their victims. As a follow-up
to the Geneva International Conference on the Protection of
Victims of War, we propose that international legal
restrictions be imposed on the use in internal conflicts of the
most destructive and indiscriminate types of weapons,
primarily military aircraft and artillery-rocket systems. We
should also eliminate or call a halt to the use of mercenaries
and volunteers both in domestic and international conflicts.
We propose the establishment of a permanent
international tribunal to deal with crimes against humanity.
The inevitability of punishment will help to prevent the
recurrence of such atrocities.
It has become crucially important to address
comprehensively the problem of refugees and to specify the
relevant principles of international law at a special
conference.
Peacemaking cannot be separated from the protection
of human rights. The international community is duty-bound
to condemn strongly "double" or lower standards of human
rights protection, the theory and practice of the superiority
of rights of an "indigenous" nation and the creation of mono-
ethnic States. The time has come to establish a United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. Following
the example of the Conference on Security and Cooperation
in Europe, it is time for the United Nations also to have a
Special Rapporteur on National Minorities. We support the
proposals of the Secretary-General in the field of human
rights protection.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction would
directly contradict the peacemaking efforts of the United
Nations. This poses an ever growing threat not only in the
future but even at the present. We are ready to cooperate
with the United States and other countries in solving the
problems connected with cutting off fissionable material
production and banning the construction of facilities for such
production, particularly in conflict areas.
We are in favour of transforming the Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Treaty into a universal agreement of
unlimited duration. The United Nations should also work to
ensure the universality of and strict compliance with the
Convention on the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
Russia reiterates, from this rostrum of the General
Assembly, its intention to adhere to the international regime
of non-proliferation of missile technology. In the very near
future, we intend to take concrete steps to strengthen our
relevant domestic legislation, going so far as to envisage
criminal prosecution for violations of the rules governing the
export of missile equipment and technology. We call on all
States that possess such technology to join the Missile
Technology Control Regime (MTCR). It is also necessary
to provide for equality of rights and obligations of the
participants, so as to enable them freely to export peaceful
space technology.
Successful economic reform is one of the guarantees of
peace. This is of particular relevance to the many developing
countries and to the post-communist States. Easier access to
world markets for countries with transitional economies,
including Russia, and the lifting of all discriminatory
restrictions is becoming an issue of the highest priority. We
Forty-eighth session - 28 September l993 17
believe that the General Assembly should express its support
for efforts in this direction. We also propose the
establishment of a mechanism to coordinate programmes
carried out by the institutions of the United Nations system
in support of economic reforms in countries in transition.
The strengthening of democracy is the principal
guarantee of security and socio-economic development in the
world today. This has been true in Europe, Asia, Africa and
Latin America, although the process is not proceeding easily
and automatically everywhere. Peoples who have risen up
against totalitarianism are threatened by the risk of political
violence and ultra-nationalism.
We categorically reject such an alternative. Russia is
peacefully transforming itself in accordance with the
fundamental principle of democracy: free elections. In 1991,
the people of Russia elected their country’s first democratic
President, and they confirmed their confidence in his policies
at the April referendum this year. On the basis of this
twofold mandate, the President has taken decisive measures
to ensure democratic elections to the Parliament in
December of this year. Thus, the old totalitarian system of
power will be definitively dismantled and replaced by a new
system of power elected by the people and responsible only
to the people. We invite international observers to monitor
the elections to the Parliament.
In building a new democratic Russia, we of course must
first of all rely on our own potential. Yet we very much
appreciate the solidarity the democratic community has
shown us. Such solidarity is neither an act of interference
in our domestic affairs nor the whimsical gesture of
romanticists in international politics. It is simply an
expression of the human duty to protect the rights of
individuals in other countries.
Next month will mark the fiftieth anniversary of the
Moscow Conference when, in the turbulent year of 1943, the
foundation was laid for the establishment of the United
Nations, which was conceived as an organization of
democratic countries having triumphed over Nazi
totalitarianism. Half a century later, the success of
democracy in Russia and many other countries has made it
possible for the first time to realize fully the lofty destiny of
the United Nations and to help it become a truly efficient
peacemaking Organization.
We should not allow political short-sightedness, current
economic difficulties, egoism and conceit to make us lose
the chance to transform the still fragile post-communist
world into a democratic one. I hope that this session will
move us closer to an understanding of this goal and of the
ways of reaching it in the interests of all States and nations.
Let me first congratulate you,
Sir, on your election as President of the General Assembly
for this session.
Mr. Secretary-General, distinguished representatives and
guests, it is a great honour for me to address you and to
stand in this great Hall, which symbolizes so much of the
twentieth century - its darkest crises and its brightest
aspirations.
I come before you as the first American President born
after the founding of the United Nations. Like most of the
people in the world today, I was not even alive during the
convulsive world war that convinced humankind of the need
for this Organization, nor during the San Francisco
Conference that led to its birth. Yet I have followed the
work of the United Nations throughout my life, with
admiration for its accomplishments, sadness for its failures
and the conviction that, through common effort, our
generation can take the bold steps needed to redeem the
mission entrusted to the United Nations 48 years ago. I
pledge to you that my nation remains committed to helping
make the United Nations vision a reality.
The start of this session of the General Assembly offers
us an opportunity to take stock of where we are as common
shareholders in the progress of humankind and the
preservation of our planet. It is clear that we live at a
turning point in human history.
Immense and promising changes seem to wash over us
every day. The cold war is over. The world is no longer
divided into two armed and angry camps. Dozens of new
democracies have been born.
It is a moment of miracles. We see Nelson Mandela
stand side by side with President de Klerk proclaiming a
date for South Africa’s first non-racial elections.
We see Russia’s first popularly elected President,
Boris Yeltsin, leading his nation on its bold democratic
journey.
We have seen decades of deadlock shattered in the
Middle East as the Prime Minister of Israel and the
Chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization reached
past enmity and suspicion to shake each other’s hand and
exhilarate the entire world with the hope of peace.
We have begun to see the doomsday weapons of
nuclear annihilation dismantled and destroyed. Thirty-two
years ago President Kennedy warned this Assembly that
humanity lived under a nuclear sword of Damocles that hung
by the slenderest of threads. Now the United States is
working with Russia, Ukraine, Belarus and others to take
that sword down, to lock it away in a secure vault, where we
hope and pray it will remain for ever.
It is a new era in this Hall as well. The super-Power
standoff that for so long stymied the work of the United
Nations, almost from its first day, has now yielded to a new
promise of practical cooperation.
Yet today we must all admit that there are two
powerful tendencies working from opposite directions to
challenge the authority of nation States everywhere and to
undermine the authority of nation States to work together.
From beyond nations, economic and technological forces all
over the globe are compelling the world towards integration.
These forces are fuelling a welcome explosion of
entrepreneurship and political liberalization. But they also
threaten to destroy the insularity and independence of
national economies, quickening the pace of change and
making many of our people feel more insecure. At the same
time, from within nations, the resurgent aspirations of ethnic
and religious groups challenge Governments on terms that
traditional nation States cannot easily accommodate. These
twin forces lie at the heart of the challenges, not only to our
national Governments, but also to all our international
institutions. They require all of us in this Hall to find new
ways to work together more effectively in pursuit of our
national interests and to think anew about whether our
institutions of international cooperation are adequate to this
moment.
Thus, as we marvel at this era’s promise of new peace,
we must also recognize that serious threats remain. Bloody
ethnic, religious and civil wars rage from Angola to the
Caucasus to Kashmir. As weapons of mass destruction fall
into more hands, even small conflicts can threaten to take on
murderous proportions. Hunger and disease continue to take
a tragic toll, especially among the world’s children. The
malignant neglect of our global environment threatens our
children’s health and their very security. The repression of
conscience continues in too many nations. And terrorism,
which has taken so many innocent lives, assumed a
horrifying immediacy for us here when militant fanatics
bombed the World Trade Center and planned to attack even
this very Hall of peace.
Let me assure the Assembly that whether they be the
plotters of those crimes or the mass murderers who bombed
Pan Am flight 103, my Government is determined to see that
such terrorists are brought to justice.
At this moment of panoramic change, of vast
opportunities and troubling threats, we must all ask ourselves
what we can and what we should do as a community of
nations. We must once again dare to dream of what might
be, for our dreams may be within our reach.
For that to happen, we must all be willing honestly to
confront the challenges of the broader world. That has never
been easy. When this Organization was founded 48 years
ago, the world’s nations stood devastated by war or
exhausted by its expense. There was little appetite for
cooperative efforts among nations; most people simply
wanted to get on with their lives. But a far-sighted
generation of leaders from the United States and elsewhere
rallied the world. Their efforts built the institutions of post-
-war security and prosperity.
We are at a similar moment today. The momentum of
the cold war no longer propels us in our daily actions. And
with daunting economic and political pressures upon almost
every nation represented in this room, many of us are
turning to focus greater attention and energy on domestic
needs and problems, and we must.
But putting each of our economic houses in order
cannot mean that we shut our windows to the world. The
pursuit of self-renewal in many of the world’s largest and
most powerful economies - in Europe, in Japan, in North
America - is absolutely crucial, because unless the great
industrial nations can recapture their robust economic
growth, the global economy will languish. Yet the industrial
nations also need growth elsewhere in order to lift their own.
Indeed, prosperity in each of our nations and regions also
depends on active and responsible engagement in a host of
shared concerns: for example, a thriving and democratic
Russia not only makes the world safer, it also can help to
expand the world’s economy; a strong GATT (General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) agreement will create
millions of jobs world wide; peace in the Middle East,
buttressed as it should be by the repeal of outdated United
Nations resolutions, can help to unleash that region’s great
economic potential and calm a perpetual source of tension in
global affairs; and the growing economic power of China -
coupled with greater political openness - could bring
enormous benefits to all of Asia and to the rest of the world.
We must help our publics to understand this distinction:
domestic renewal is an overdue tonic; but isolationism and
protectionism are still poison. We must inspire our peoples
to look beyond their immediate fears towards a broader
horizon.
Let me start by being clear about where the United
States stands. The United States occupies a unique position
in world affairs today: we recognize that and we welcome
it. Yet, with the cold war over, I know many people ask
whether the United States plans to retreat or remain active
in the world; and if active, to what end? Many people are
asking that in our own country as well.
Let me answer that question as clearly and plainly as I
can. The United States intends to remain engaged and to
lead. We cannot solve every problem, but we must and will
serve as a fulcrum for change and a pivot point for peace.
In a new era of peril and opportunity, our overriding
purpose must be to expand and strengthen the world’s
community of market-based democracies. During the cold
war, we sought to contain a threat to the survival of free
institutions; now we seek to enlarge the circle of nations that
live under those free institutions.
For our dream is of a day when the opinions and
energies of every person in the world will be given full
expression, in a world of thriving democracies that cooperate
with each other and live in peace.
With this statement, I do not mean to announce some
crusade to force our way of life and doing things on others
or to replicate our institutions. But we now know clearly
that throughout the world, from Poland to Eritrea, from
Guatemala to South Korea, there is an enormous yearning
among people who wish to be the masters of their own
economic and political lives. Where it matters most and
where we can make the greatest difference, we will therefore
patiently and firmly align ourselves with that yearning.
Forty-eighth session - 27 September l993 9
Today, there are still those who claim that democracy
is simply not applicable to many cultures and that its recent
expansion is an aberration, an accident in history that will
soon fade away. But I agree with President Roosevelt, who
once said: "The democratic aspiration is no mere recent
phase of human history. It is human history."
We will work to strengthen the free market democracies
by revitalizing our economy at home, by opening world
trade through GATT, the North American Free Trade
Agreement and other accords, and by updating our shared
institutions, asking with you and answering the hard
questions about whether they are adequate to the present
challenges.
We will support the consolidation of market democracy
where it is taking new root, as in the States of the former
Soviet Union and all over Latin America, and we seek to
foster the practices of good government that distribute the
benefits of democracy and economic growth fairly to all
people.
We will work to reduce the threat from regimes that are
hostile to democracy and to support liberalization of
non-democratic States when they are willing to live in peace
with the rest of us. As a country that has over 150 racial,
ethnic and religious groups within our borders, our policy is
and must be rooted in a profound respect for all the world’s
religions and cultures. But we must oppose everywhere
extremism that produces terrorism and hate.
And we must pursue our humanitarian goals of
reducing suffering, fostering sustainable development and
improving health and living conditions, particularly for our
world’s children.
On efforts from export controls to trade agreements to
peace-keeping, we will often work in partnership with others
and through multilateral institutions such as the United
Nations. It is in our national interest to do so. But we must
not hesitate to act unilaterally when there is a threat to our
core interests or to those of our allies.
The United States believes that an expanding
community of market democracies not only serves our own
security interests, it also advances the goals enshrined in this
body’s Charter and its Universal Declaration of Human
Rights.
For broadly based prosperity is clearly the strongest
form of preventive diplomacy, and the habits of democracy
are the habits of peace. Democracy is rooted in
compromise, not conquest. It rewards tolerance, not hatred.
Democracies rarely wage war on one another. They make
more reliable partners in trade, in diplomacy, and in the
stewardship of our global environment. And democracies,
with the rule of law and respect for political, religious and
cultural minorities, are more responsive to their own people
and to the protection of human rights.
But as we work towards this vision, we must confront
the storm clouds that may overwhelm our work and darken
the march towards freedom.
If we do not stem the proliferation of the world’s
deadliest weapons, no democracy can feel secure.
If we do not strengthen the capacity to resolve conflicts
among and within nations, those conflicts will smother the
birth of free institutions, threaten the development of entire
regions and continue to take innocent lives.
If we do not nurture our people and our planet through
sustainable development, we will deepen conflict and waste
the very wonders that make our efforts worth doing.
Let me talk more about what I believe we must do in
each of these three categories: non-proliferation, conflict
resolution and sustainable development.
One of our most urgent priorities must be attacking the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction - whether
nuclear, chemical or biological - and the ballistic missiles
that can rain them down on populations hundreds of miles
away.
We know this is not an idle problem. All of us are still
haunted by the pictures of Kurdish women and children cut
down by poison gas. We saw SCUD missiles drop during
the Gulf War that would have been far graver in their
consequences if they had carried nuclear weapons. And we
know that many nations still believe it is in their interests to
develop weapons of mass destruction or to sell them or the
necessary technologies to others for financial gain.
More than a score of nations likely possess such
weapons and their number threatens to grow. These
weapons destabilize entire regions. They could turn a local
conflict into a global human and environmental catastrophe.
We simply have got to find ways to control these weapons
and to reduce the number of States that possess them by
supporting and strengthening the International Atomic
Energy Agency and by taking other necessary measures.
10 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
I have made non-proliferation one of our nation’s
highest priorities. We intend to weave it more deeply into
the fabric of all of our relationships with the world’s nations
and institutions. We seek to build a world of increasing
pressure for non-proliferation but increasingly open trade and
technology for those States that live by accepted
international rules.
Today, let me describe several new policies that our
Government will pursue to stem proliferation. We will
pursue new steps to control the materials for nuclear
weapons. Growing global stockpiles of plutonium and
highly enriched uranium are raising the danger of nuclear
terrorism for all nations. We will press for an international
agreement that would ban production of these materials for
weapons for ever.
As we reduce our nuclear stockpiles, the United States
has also begun negotiations towards a comprehensive ban on
nuclear testing. This summer I declared that to facilitate
those negotiations, our nation would suspend our testing if
all other nuclear States would do the same. Today, in the
face of disturbing signs, I renew my call on the nuclear
States to abide by that moratorium as we negotiate to stop
nuclear testing for all time.
I am also proposing new efforts to fight the
proliferation of biological and chemical weapons. Today,
only a handful of nations has ratified the chemical weapons
Convention. I call on all nations - including my own - to
ratify this accord quickly so that it may enter into force by
13 January 1995. We will also seek to strengthen the
biological weapons Convention by making every nation’s
biological activities and facilities open to more international
scrutiny.
I am proposing as well new steps to thwart the
proliferation of ballistic missiles. Recently, working with
Russia, Argentina, Hungary and South Africa, we have made
significant progress toward that goal. Now we will seek to
strengthen the principles of the Missile Technology Control
Regime by transforming it from an agreement on technology
transfer among just 23 nations into a set of rules that can
command universal adherence.
We will also reform our own system of export controls
in the United States to reflect the realities of the post-cold-
war world, where we seek to enlist the support of our former
adversaries in the battle against proliferation. At the same
time as we stop deadly technologies from falling into the
wrong hands, we will work with our partners to remove
outdated controls that unfairly burden legitimate commerce
and unduly restrain growth and opportunity all over the
world.
As we work to keep the world’s most destructive
weapons out of conflicts, we must also strengthen the
international community’s ability to address those conflicts
themselves. For as we all now know so painfully, the end
of the cold war did not bring us to the millennium of peace.
Indeed, it simply removed the lid from many cauldrons of
ethnic, religious and territorial animosity.
The philosopher Isaiah Berlin has said that a wounded
nationalism is like a bent twig, forced down so severely that
when released, it lashes back with fury. The world today is
thick with both bent and recoiling twigs of wounded
communal identities. This surge of bitter conflicts has
placed high demands on the United Nations peace-keeping
forces. Frequently, the Blue Helmets have worked wonders.
In Namibia, El Salvador, the Golan Heights and elsewhere,
United Nations peace-keepers have helped to stop the
fighting, restore civil authority and enable free elections. In
Bosnia, United Nations peace-keepers, against the danger
and frustration of that continuing tragedy, have maintained
a valiant humanitarian effort. And if the parties to that
conflict take the hard steps needed to make a real peace, the
international community - including the United States - must
be ready to help in its effective implementation.
In Somalia, the United States and the United Nations
have worked together to achieve a stunning humanitarian
rescue, saving literally hundreds of thousands of lives and
restoring conditions of security to almost the entire country.
United Nations peace-keepers from over two dozen nations
remain in Somalia today - and some, including brave
Americans, have lost their lives - to ensure that we complete
our mission and that anarchy and starvation do not return
just as quickly as they were abolished.
Many still criticize United Nations peace-keeping, but
those who do should talk to the people of Cambodia, where
the United Nations operations helped turn the killing fields
into fertile soil for reconciliation. Last May’s elections in
Cambodia marked a proud accomplishment for that war--
weary nation and for the United Nations. And I am pleased
to announce that the United States has recognized
Cambodia’s new Government.
United Nations peace-keeping holds the promise to
resolve many of this era’s conflicts. But the reason we have
supported such missions is not, as some critics in the United
States have charged, to subcontract American foreign policy,
but to strengthen our security, to protect our interests, and to
Forty-eighth session - 27 September l993 11
share among nations the costs and effort of pursuing peace.
Peace-keeping cannot be a substitute for our own national
defence efforts, but it can strongly supplement them.
Today there is wide recognition that the United Nations
peace-keeping ability has not kept pace with its rising
responsibilities and challenges. Just six years ago, about
10,000 United Nations peace-keepers were stationed around
the world. Today the United Nations has some 80,000
deployed in 17 operations on four continents. Yet until
recently, if a peace-keeping commander called in from
across the globe when it was night-time here in New York,
there was no one in the peace-keeping office even to answer
the call. When lives are on the line, we cannot let the reach
of the United Nations exceed its grasp.
As the Secretary-General and others have argued, if
United Nations peace-keeping is to be a sound security
investment for our nation and for other United Nations
Members, it must adapt to new times. Together, we must
prepare United Nations peace-keeping for the twenty-first
century. We need to begin by bringing the rigours of
military and political analysis to every United Nations peace
mission. In recent weeks in the Security Council, our nation
has begun asking harder questions about proposals for new
peace-keeping missions. Is there a real threat to
international peace? Does the proposed mission have clear
objectives? Can an end point be identified for those who
will be asked to participate? How much will the mission
cost? From now on the United Nations should address these
and other questions for every proposed mission before we
vote and before the mission begins. The United Nations
simply cannot become engaged in every one of the world’s
conflicts. If the American people are to say "Yes" to United
Nations peace-keeping, the United Nations must know when
to say "No".
The United Nations also must have the technical means
to run a modern, world-class peace-keeping operation. We
support the creation of a genuine United Nations peace-
keeping headquarters with a planning staff; with access to
timely intelligence; with a logistics unit that can be deployed
on a moment’s notice; and with a modern operations centre
with global communications.
United Nations operations must not only be adequately
funded but also fairly funded. Within the next few weeks,
the United States will be current on our peace-keeping bills.
I have worked hard with the Congress to get this done. I
believe the United States should lead the way in being
timely in its payments, and I will work to ensure that we
continue to pay our peace-keeping bills in full. But I am
also committed to working with the United Nations to reduce
our nation’s assessment for these missions. The assessment
system has not been changed since 1973, and everyone in
our country knows that our percentage of the world’s
economic pie is not as great as it was then. Therefore, I
believe our rate should be reduced to reflect the rise of other
nations that can now bear more of the financial burden.
That will make it easier for me as President to make sure
my country pays in a timely and full fashion.
Changes in the United Nations peace-keeping operations
must be part of an even broader programme of United
Nations reform. I say that, again, not to criticize the United
Nations but to help improve it. As our Ambassador,
Madeleine Albright, has suggested, the United States has
always played a twin role in regard to the United Nations:
"First friend and first critic."
Today, corporations around the world are finding ways
to move from the industrial age into the information age -
improving service, reducing bureaucracy and cutting costs.
Here in the United States, Vice President Al Gore and I have
launched an effort literally to reinvent how our Government
operates. We see this going on in other Governments
around the world. Now the time has come to reinvent the
way the United Nations operates as well.
I applaud the initial steps the Secretary-General has
taken to reduce and reform the United Nations bureaucracy.
Now we must all do even more to root out waste. Before
this General Assembly is over, let us establish a strong
mandate for an office of inspector general, so that it can
attain a reputation for toughness, for integrity, for
effectiveness. Let us build new confidence among our
people that the United Nations is changing with the needs of
our times.
Ultimately, the key for reforming the United Nations,
as for reforming our own government, is to remember why
we are here and whom we serve. It is well to recall that the
first words of the United Nations Charter are not, "We the
Governments", but "We the peoples of the United Nations".
That means, in every country, the teachers, the workers, the
farmers, the professionals, the fathers, the mothers, the
children, from the most remote village in the world to the
largest metropolis - they are why we gather in this great
Hall; it is their futures that are at risk when we act or fail to
act; and it is they who ultimately pay our bills.
As we dream new dreams in this age when miracles
seem possible, let us focus on the lives of those people, and
especially on the children who will inherit this world. Let
12 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
us work with a new urgency, and imagine what kind of
world we could create for them over the coming generation.
Let us work with new energy to protect the world’s
people from torture and repression. As Secretary of State
Christopher stressed at the recent Vienna Conference, human
rights are not something conditional, bounded by culture but,
rather, something universal, granted by God. This General
Assembly should create, at long last, a high commissioner
for human rights. I hope it will do this soon, and with
vigour and energy and conviction.
Let us also work far more ambitiously to fulfil our
obligations as custodians of this planet, not only to improve
the quality of life for our citizens and the quality of our air,
water and the earth itself, but also because the roots of
conflict are so often entangled with the roots of
environmental neglect and the calamities of famine and
disease.
During the course of our campaign in the United States
last year, Vice President Gore and I promised the American
people major changes in our nation’s policy towards the
global environment. Those were promises to keep, and
today the United States is doing so. Today we are working
with other nations to build on the promising work of the
United Nations Commission on Sustainable Development.
We are working to make sure that all nations meet their
commitments under the global climate Convention. We are
seeking to complete negotiations on an accord to prevent the
world’s deserts from further expanding. And we seek to
strengthen the World Health Organization’s efforts to combat
the plague of AIDS, which is not only killing millions, but
also exhausting the resources of the nations that can least
afford it.
And let us make a new commitment to the world’s
children. It is tragic enough that one and a half million
children have died as a result of wars over the past decade.
But it is far more unforgivable that during that same period
40 million children have died from diseases completely
preventable with simple vaccines or medicines. Every day
- this day, as we meet here - over 30,000 of the world’s
children will die of malnutrition and disease. As the
Director of the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF),
Jim Grant, has reminded me, "each of [those children] had
a name and a nationality, a family, a personality and a
potential".
We are compelled to do better by the world’s children.
Just as our own nation has launched new reforms to ensure
that every child has adequate health care, we must do more
to get basic vaccines and other treatments for curable
diseases to children all over the world. It’s the best
investment we’ll ever make. We can find new ways to
ensure that every child grows up with clean, drinkable water
- that most precious commodity of life itself. And the
United Nations can work even harder to ensure that each
child has at least a full primary education - and I mean that
opportunity for girls as well as boys.
To ensure a healthier and more abundant world, we
simply must slow the world’s explosive growth in
population. We cannot afford to see the human race double
by the middle of the next century. Our nation has at last
renewed its commitment to work with the United Nations to
expand the availability of the world’s family planning
education and services. We must ensure that there is a place
at the table for every one of the world’s children. We can
do this.
At the birth of this Organization, 48 years ago - another
time of both victory and danger - a generation of gifted
leaders from many nations stepped forward to organize the
world’s efforts on behalf of security and prosperity. One
American leader during that period said this: "It is time we
steered by the stars rather than by the light of each passing
ship." His generation picked peace, human dignity and
freedom. Those are good stars. They should remain the
highest in our firmament.
Now history has granted to us a moment of even
greater opportunity, when old dangers are ebbing and old
walls are crumbling. Future generations will judge us, every
one of us, above all by what we make of this magic
moment. Let us resolve that we will dream larger, that we
will work harder, so that they can conclude that we did not
merely turn walls to rubble, but instead laid the foundations
for great things to come.
Let us ensure that the tide of freedom and democracy
is not pushed back by the fierce winds of ethnic hatred. Let
us ensure that the world’s most dangerous weapons are
safely reduced and denied to dangerous hands. Let us
ensure that the world we pass to our children is healthier,
safer and more abundant than the one we inhabit today. I
believe - I know - that together we can extend this moment
of miracles into an age of great works and new wonders.