At the outset, I should like warmly to
congratulate you, Sir, on your election to the presidency of
the current session of the General Assembly. I am
convinced that given your outstanding talent and
consummate experience, you will fulfil this lofty mission
with distinction. At the same time, I should like to express
my appreciation and thanks to Mr. Samuel Insanally for the
positive contribution he made during his presidency at the
last session.
I wish to avail myself of this opportunity to extend a
hearty welcome and congratulations to the delegation of
South Africa, which is taking part in the work of the
current session. We are convinced that a united,
democratic and non-racial new South Africa led by
President Nelson Mandela will contribute positively to the
peace and development of Africa and of the world as a
whole.
The world is still undergoing profound changes, and
the transition toward multipolarity has accelerated.
Economic factors are playing a greater role in
international relations. Relaxation of tensions has become
the main trend of the world today. However,
hegemonism and power politics continue to hold out.
Regional hot spots flare up intermittently. Destabilizing
factors tend to multiply, thus compounding the volatility
of the international scene. The maintenance of peace,
strengthening of cooperation and promotion of
development remain the major challenges of our era.
To eliminate regional hot spots and settle
international disputes are the world’s priorities and the
common concern with which the international community
has been trying to deal in one way or another.
Experience has shown that such practices as interfering in
other countries’ internal affairs and resorting to pressure,
sanctions or even force at will cannot help; they can only
increase the complications and difficulties that stand in
the way of a final solution. In the interest of maintaining
regional peace and stability, the international community
and regional organizations should take an appropriate and
effective approach, that is, to promote dialogue and
negotiations between parties directly concerned so as to
reach a solution acceptable to all sides. This has been
best illustrated by the breakthrough achieved in the
Middle East peace process and by the progress made on
the Korean nuclear issue.
United Nations peace-keeping operations can play a
positive role, but not all of them have been successful.
Experience and lessons learned in this regard should be
summed up. It is our consistent view that peace-keeping
operations should strictly conform to the principles of the
United Nations Charter and the norms of international
relations. Such operations should be undertaken with the
consent and cooperation of the parties concerned, and an
impartial and unbiased attitude should be maintained. No
peace-keeping operations or humanitarian aid programmes
should be permitted to interfere in the internal affairs of
any country, still less to use force or become embroiled
in a conflict between the parties. A lesson should be
drawn from what befell the United Nations peace-keeping
forces in Somalia.
Here I wish to underline the importance of strict
adherence to the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence
as the basic means to prevent international conflicts.
9


These principles, namely, mutual respect for sovereignty
and territorial integrity, mutual non-aggression,
non-interference in each other’s internal affairs, equality
and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence, were jointly
initiated four decades ago by China, India and Myanmar -
called "Burma" at the time - and were subsequently
embodied in the 10 principles formulated by Asian and
African countries at the Bandung Conference and in the
purposes and principles espoused by the Association of
South-East Asian Nations and other regional organizations
of the developing countries.
The history of the past four decades has testified to
the immense vitality of the Five Principles. All nations,
notwithstanding their differences in social systems,
ideologies, values or religious faiths, can live in amity and
carry out mutually beneficial cooperation as long as they
abide by these principles. Failure to do so will lead to
friction, confrontation or even military conflicts. In a world
as diversified as ours, nations have no alternative but to
adhere to the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence and
to find common ground while shelving their differences in
order to live together amicably and pursue common
development.
The peoples of the world have long lived in the
shadow of a nuclear holocaust, due to the all-out nuclear
arms race between the two super-Powers during the cold
war, which resulted in a massive stockpiling of nuclear
weapons. Now the international situation has drastically
changed. Not only can we avert another world war, but the
chances have increased for the complete prohibition and
thorough elimination of nuclear weapons and for mankind
ultimately to eliminate the threat of a nuclear war.
China has always stood for the complete prohibition
and thorough elimination of all weapons of mass
destruction. The Chinese Government holds that a
convention on the complete prohibition of nuclear weapons
should be concluded in the same way as the conventions
banning all biological and chemical weapons, respectively.
As a signatory to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, China is in favour of its extension. Yet
a mere extension of the Treaty is obviously not sufficient.
With a view to ultimately ridding mankind of the threat of
a nuclear war and ushering in a nuclear-weapon-free world,
the Chinese Government proposes the following.
All countries that possess nuclear weapons should
pledge unconditionally not to be the first to use them and
should immediately start negotiations to conclude a treaty
on non-first-use of nuclear weapons against each other;
efforts for the establishment of nuclear-free zones should
be supported and all nuclear Powers should undertake not
to use or to threaten to use nuclear weapons against any
non-nuclear-weapon State or nuclear-free zone;
negotiations should be undertaken with a view to
concluding a comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty not
later than 1996; the principal nuclear Powers should
implement their existing nuclear disarmament treaties as
scheduled and go on to drastically cut back their nuclear
stockpiles; negotiations should be undertaken to conclude
a convention banning the production of weapon-grade
fissile materials; a convention on the complete prohibition
of nuclear weapons should be signed under which all
nuclear Powers should undertake the obligation to destroy
all their nuclear weapons under effective international
supervision; and international cooperation in the peaceful
use of nuclear energy should be vigorously promoted
simultaneously with the efforts to prevent the proliferation
of nuclear weapons and step up the nuclear disarmament
process.
The above points make up an integrated and
interrelated nuclear disarmament process. We hold that
all States, whether they possess nuclear weapons or not,
are entitled to participate fully in this process.
Since mankind has been able to make nuclear
weapons and tap nuclear energy for peaceful purposes in
the twentieth century, we are confident that in the twenty-
first century it will be able to completely ban and destroy
nuclear weapons and fully harness nuclear energy to
enhance its own welfare. Before the advent of the new
century, we stand ready to join the other nuclear as well
as non-nuclear States to blaze the way towards this lofty
goal and make our due contribution to its ultimate
realization.
It is now an international trend to give priority to
economic problems. Hence all countries are devoting
themselves to economic development and the expansion
of international cooperation. This year the world
economy has started a recovery and East Asia continues
to maintain a high growth rate. But there is unevenness
in the world as a whole. It is disturbing to note that the
impoverishment of some developing countries has
worsened. In the interest of common development, we
call for the abolition of protectionism and of
discrimination in international economic relations and
trade. Neither global multilateral trade arrangements nor
regional economic and trade cooperation should be
exclusive. The principles of openness, equality and
mutual benefit should be upheld. The World Trade
10


Organization, to be founded next year, should from the
outset be a broadly representative and open trade institution
based on equality and mutual benefit.
The world economy is an interdependent whole.
Developed countries should make more tangible
contributions to global economic development and the
expansion of international economic cooperation. Primarily
they should take effective measures to open their markets,
provide development funds, transfer technology and
increase assistance to the developing countries to reduce
their debt burden, thereby contributing to their economic
growth, social stability and relief from poverty. Such
actions will in turn bolster the economic growth of the
developed countries themselves.
The international community and the United Nations
should be more concerned with development matters and in
particular should actively help the developing countries to
achieve prosperity. We appreciate the Secretary-General’s
efforts in submitting the Agenda for Development pursuant
to General Assembly resolutions. We hope that our
deliberations thereon will serve to reinvigorate world
economic development and international cooperation.
The Chinese Government considers economic
development the central task of the whole nation and makes
reform and opening its basic state policy. This year we
have taken a new series of major steps to intensify the
reform and opening which have the effect of ensuring
sustained, rapid and healthy economic growth. Gross
domestic product, foreign trade volume and overseas
investments registered increases in the first six months of
11.6 per cent, 25.5 per cent and 54.9 per cent respectively,
compared with the corresponding period last year. We will
step up our all-directional opening-up and continue to work
for world prosperity. We have been striving for an early
resumption of our contracting party status in the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. A solution to this matter
will be in the interest of both China and the world as a
whole. China needs to cooperate with the rest of the world
which in turn needs such an important trading partner as
China. A World Trade Organization without China would
be inconceivable.
Human society continues to move forward and make
progress. But social ills still stand out starkly such as
poverty, unemployment, the deteriorating environment, the
population explosion, refugees, illegal immigration, drug
trafficking, crime and injurious and unfair treatment of
social groups such as women, children and the disabled.
Some of these problems have become even more acute, and
have cried out for a remedy by the world community
through international cooperation. We consider that it is
necessary to step up such cooperation. Because
conditions vary, different countries face different social
problems. Each country has to draw up social
development policies adaptable to its own conditions.
International cooperation in this field should adhere to the
principles of mutual respect, equality and mutual benefit
without political strings or interference in domestic
affairs. Developing countries account for the majority of
the world’s population and are in a disadvantaged position
socially. This is where the emphasis of the United
Nations social programmes should be placed.
In recent years we have actively supported and
participated in important international conferences on the
environment, human rights and population under the
auspices of the United Nations. We will actively take
part in the World Summit for Social Development, to be
held in Copenhagen next March. The Chinese
Government attaches great importance to the Fourth
World Conference on Women, to be held in Beijing in
September 1995. The Chinese people, our women folk in
particular, are preparing for and looking forward to this
grand event with tremendous enthusiasm.
In response to the call in the documents of the 1992
United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, the Chinese Government has analysed the
actual conditions in the country and drawn up "Agenda 21
- White Paper on China’s Population, Environment and
Development in the 21st Century", which will be an
important guide in the formulation of our medium- and
long-term national, economic and social development
plans.
To ensure and protect human rights is an essential
part of a nation’s social policy. My Government makes
it a basic policy to constantly enhance the people’s
enjoyment of human rights commensurate with our
economic and social development. We always hold that
the principle of universality of human rights must be
viewed in the context of the actual conditions of a given
country. Conditions vary from country to country. It is
inevitable and normal that there is divergence of views on
human rights issues. We are in favour of dialogue on the
basis of equality and mutual respect so as to increase
mutual understanding. We are against using human rights
as a pretext to interfere in the internal affairs of other
countries.
11


Next year will mark the fiftieth anniversary of the
founding of the United Nations. Both the world and the
United Nations have undergone drastic changes in that half
century. The United Nations is the most representative
intergovernmental Organization of sovereign States.
Members of the Organization are equal, irrespective of size,
strength or wealth.
Notwithstanding its shortcomings, the status and role
of the United Nations in global international affairs remain
irreplaceable by any other international organizations or
groupings. It is the hope of the people of the world that
the Organization will better fulfil the mission conferred on
it by the Charter and and that it will make even greater
contributions to the maintenance of peace and the
promotion of development.
To cope with the greatly changed international
situation and grim challenges ahead, United Nations
institutions should undergo relevant and necessary reforms.
In our view, any such reforms should serve to maintain and
enhance the positive role of the United Nations in
international affairs and improve its efficiency. At the
same time, the reforms should take full account of the
concerns and interests of the developing countries, which
make up the majority of the membership, so that their role
may be enhanced. The function and role of the General
Assembly should be strengthened. Reform of the Security
Council must be aimed at facilitating a better performance
of its functions under the Charter. Any enlargement of the
Council’s membership must fully conform to the principle
of equitable geographical distribution to ensure broader
representation. Actions by the Council should better reflect
the collective will and common aspirations of the entire
United Nations membership.
To prepare for the commemoration of the fiftieth
anniversary of the United Nations, China has set up a
national committee, in accordance with the relevant United
Nations resolution. We hope that the commemoration in
various countries in the coming year will be used to review
the experience of the past and look to the future so that we
may carry forward the purposes and principles of the
Charter and enable the Organization to do a better job in
maintaining peace and promoting development.
It was sad that the first half of our century witnessed
two world wars with disastrous consequences for mankind.
The ensuing cold war cast a dark and menacing shadow of
war over the world for the greater part of the second half
of the century. It is gratifying, none the less, that we have
been able to fulfil the historic mission of eliminating the
centuries-old colonial system from the Earth within this
century. This is unquestionably one of the greatest
achievements of contemporary human society.
Looking ahead to the twenty-first century, we are
fully confident of the future of humanity. The Chinese
people will make common efforts with all other peoples
of the world to usher in a new century of peace and
prosperity.
First, I should like to
offer you, Sir, my personal congratulations on your election
as President of the General Assembly at its forty-ninth
session, and also those of the European Union, on whose
behalf I am addressing the Assembly today. We wish you
luck and success in your high office.
We thank Ambassador Insanally for the wise
leadership with which he guided the forty-eighth session
of the General Assembly to a successful conclusion.
I am addressing the Assembly on behalf of a Europe
that has become more closely integrated as a result of the
Maastricht Treaty, a Europe which in a few weeks’ time
will admit four new members, and which intends to
broaden its cooperation based on partnership with the
world’s other regions as well. I am speaking for a
Europe that is committed to world peace and development
and whose political actions are determined by its belief in
individual freedom, democracy and the rule of law, a
Europe which sees in the realization of justice a crucial
precondition for avoiding war and the use of force and
which is prepared to play its part in promoting the
economic development of all regions, the struggle against
hunger, and measures to protect the Earth’s natural
sources of life. But I am speaking above all on behalf of
a Europe that wishes to place the United Nations in a
better position to meet its foremost obligation as
guarantor of peace and security in the world.
Next year’s fiftieth anniversary of the United
Nations coincides with that marking the end of the
Second World War. The founding of the United Nations
was the response to that catastrophe, which had its origins
in Europe. Today we can look back on impressive
achievements by the United Nations. The 51 members in
1945 have grown into a membership of 184. The United
Nations has thus developed into a truly universal
Organization.
By recently concluding the negotiations on the Law
of the Sea Convention, the United Nations has made
outstanding progress in promoting the reconciliation of
interests and the peaceful settlement of disputes around
the world. The choice of Hamburg as seat of the
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea is a token
of confidence in Germany and an obligation for my
country.
The achievements of the United Nations are
considerable, yet it is often the object of unfair criticism.
The United Nations can be only as good as its Members
allow it to be. It needs their active support. Many of its
personnel, both soldiers and civilians, have done their
utmost to help alleviate distress and save lives. No small
number of them have lost their own lives in the process.
We pay tribute to them and honour their memory.
15


Many of us believed that the ending of the cold war
would usher in an era of peace. Today we know,
unfortunately, that that hope was premature. Day in and
day out, hundreds of people are falling victim to hostilities
and thousands more are dying of starvation or disease.
What has happened and is still happening in Bosnia,
Somalia and Rwanda is appalling.
The European Union sees a response to these global
challenges in a strengthening of the United Nations and of
the multilateral system for the safeguarding of peace world
wide, in more intensive preventive diplomacy and conflict
prevention within the United Nations and regional
institutions, in respect for human rights in the world and for
the rule of law, and in closer development cooperation in
and among the regions.
We Europeans therefore welcome the report of the
Secretary-General on an Agenda for Development. An
Agenda for Development must soon find its place alongside
the Agenda for Peace. With his report, Mr. Boutros-Ghali
has again pointed the way for our Organization’s future
development and work. I wish to convey to him the
appreciation of the European Union. We pledge a
constructive contribution to the debate on this document.
Following the disaster of the Second World War,
Europe had the opportunity for political renewal and it took
that opportunity. We Europeans derive courage and
strength from that renewal. No other region in the world
has such a dense network of regional, intergovernmental
and supranational institutions, and no region in the world
has such close relations with other nations and their
organizations. In the field of security, therefore, it is our
aim to create a network of mutually supporting institutions
which will include, together with the European Union (EU),
the Western European Union (WEU), the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) and the Conference on
Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE). All must
work closely with the United Nations. NATO and the
WEU are already helping the United Nations to carry out
its difficult mission in the former Yugoslavia.
Because our interests are interwoven as they have
always been, we will not allow ourselves to be discouraged
by set-backs and will therefore do our utmost to bring
about a peaceful settlement in the former Yugoslavia. The
United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) has our
unreserved support. The terrible war of destruction in
Bosnia and Herzegovina must be brought to an end.
Federation is, we believe, a first and indispensable step
towards a peace settlement. Winter will be here soon and
the people will once again have cold and hunger to
contend with. But the precondition for lasting progress
and for peace is the will for reconciliation among all
ethnic groups. The European Union is trying to help, and
we shall continue to do so. For that reason we have
established an administrative office in Mostar, which
began its work in July under the courageous leadership of
Hans Koschnick.
The entire international community must constantly
make it unmistakably clear to the Bosnian Serbs that in
rejecting the peace plan they cannot reckon with tacit
approval. There must be no toleration of a policy of war
and expulsion. We seek a solution for the Croatian
territories under UNPROFOR protection which will be
acceptable to both sides. The territorial integrity of
Croatia must be respected. Autonomy arrangements will
have to be found for the Krajina Serbs. We Europeans
believe that an extension of the mandate of UNPROFOR
is absolutely essential for this purpose.
The United Nations envisages a world in which it is
not the law of the strongest but rather international law
that prevails. We Europeans share that vision. We are
even more convinced by what has happened in the former
Yugoslavia that a relapse into divisive nationalism must
be prevented.
We, the Members of the United Nations, must
summon the strength to make a great joint effort to
provide the United Nations and its Secretary-General with
the means to meet their global responsibility. The United
Nations must become what its founding fathers aspired to
in their noble vision nearly 50 years ago: mankind’s
principal guardian of the peace.
But we, the Members of the United Nations, must
above all be prepared to stand up for the cause of peace.
The members of the European Union have played, and
are continuing to play, a major role in helping maintain
or restore peace in many of the world’s trouble spots on
behalf of the United Nations. We Europeans are guided
by the following basic principles.
First, for its peace-keeping measures the United
Nations should be able to rely on the broadest possible
support and involvement of its Members. Such
operations ought to foster peace and unity among them
but not divide the community of nations.
16


Secondly, we Europeans will always be in favour of
giving priority to non-military means of safeguarding peace
wherever possible. But aggressors must also realize that
the United Nations is capable of military intervention where
other means of achieving the aims of the Charter have
failed, and that it has the will to take such action.
Thirdly, the use of military force cannot be an end in
itself. Successful peace-keeping presupposes an
unequivocal mandate based on international law, a
convincing political plan for settling the conflict, and the
equitable participation of the Member States.
Fourthly, we Europeans welcome the idea of stand-by
arrangements developed by Secretary-General
Boutros-Ghali. It can effectively help reduce the length of
time between the decision to mount a peace-keeping
operation and its actual implementation. Many members of
the European Union, including Germany, are willing to
contribute to stand-by arrangements.
Fifthly, in many countries military training is geared
solely to the traditional duties of the army. The specific
tasks of peace-keeping require a completely different kind
of training. The national preparation of Blue Helmets
needs to be coordinated to a greater degree by the United
Nations. What is needed for this are common training
guidelines and the training capacity of the United Nations.
Joint training and exercises are, at the same time, important
steps in confidence-building.
Speaking as the Foreign Minister of Germany, I would
add that last year I stated in the Assembly that my country
was willing to shoulder more responsibilities with regard to
United Nations peace-keeping operations. Today I can
confirm that Germany will be able to join fully in
peace-keeping operations of the United Nations, the
German Federal Constitutional Court having cleared the
way a few months ago.
The European Union looks for the revitalization of the
United Nations and its various organizations. In the course
of the forty-eighth session of the General Assembly a
working group considered all aspects of the question of
increasing the membership of the Security Council and
other matters related to the Security Council. The working
group had a substantive and constructive discussion. Its
report states that
"... while there was convergence of views that the
membership of the Security Council should be
enlarged, there was also agreement that the scope and
nature of such enlargement require further
discussion." (A/48/47, para. 8)
Security Council reform is an important issue which
requires a productive outcome. These days, the most
important decisions on security and peace are made in the
Security Council. We therefore look forward to a report
on enlargement of the Security Council membership and
related issues from the open-ended working group, and to
productive results.
Transparency in the Council’s decision-making
processes is important, particularly in peace-keeping,
where the interests of contributor nations are involved.
Indeed, the cost of establishing and consolidating peace
is enormous. The explosion of the peace-keeping budget
has almost brought the United Nations to a standstill. In
order to overcome the financial crisis, three tasks must be
accomplished.
The United Nations urgently requires more efficient
management and better organization. The creation of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services by the General
Assembly at its forty-eighth session was an important step
towards this objective, and the fact that a German has
been appointed as the first head of that Office is a mark
of confidence in my country. Members’ contributions
must be brought more into line with their actual capacity
to pay. The aim of comprehensive financial reform must
be to establish a scale that is transparent and reliable,
reflects Members’ financial situations, is automatically
adapted to changed national circumstances, and gives
consideration to the needs of countries with low per
capita incomes. But it is crucial that all Members be
willing to meet their membership obligations. We cannot
have a situation in which the United Nations has
difficulty carrying out its responsibilities because
individual Members feel exempted from their duties.
It is always better to prevent a fire than to have to
put it out. The European experience is that conflicts must
be prevented -but this is not a purely European
experience. We bank on the power of preventive
diplomacy, confidence-building and the early detection of
conflicts. The United Nations must further enlarge and
strengthen its instruments of preventive diplomacy. This
includes helping countries along the road to democracy
and observing elections. The establishment of and respect
for human and minority rights, as well as measures to
bring about economic and social stability, are other basic
elements of prevention.
17


The Declaration and Programme of Action of the
World Conference on Human Rights held in Vienna calls
for more active implementation. Our priority must be to
support the High Commissioner for Human Rights. In
addition, we must substantially increase the resources
available in the United Nations for human rights activities.
It is, I believe, inadequate for the United Nations to provide
only 1 per cent of its funds for this task.
Work on the establishment of an international criminal
court must proceed apace. Human rights and the protection
of minorities are indivisibly linked. Ethnic or cultural
arrogance and the curtailing of minority rights are one
cause of the ever-swelling refugee flows in our world
today. That is why minorities need the protection of the
United Nations. We Europeans are striving to implement
this objective. In Europe, the Pact on Stability is designed
to promote political stability and the protection of
minorities.
We do not want to close our eyes to our own
shortcomings. There must be no room for racism and
xenophobia in Europe. That is why we have made it our
goal to develop a Union-wide strategy against racism and
xenophobia in the course of the coming year. We need
more efficient management of humanitarian relief actions.
The need for resources and measures to alleviate emergency
situations through disaster relief operations is likely to
increase rather than decrease.
We expect the United Nations Disaster Relief
Coordinator to ensure more effective coordination of
measures within the United Nations system. He must be
able to intervene before it is too late for the people
affected. I should like to stress that point. Work on the
drafting of a convention for the protection of the work of
humanitarian organizations must be brought to a speedy
conclusion.
One task of preventive policy as we understand it is to
combat terrorism. There is no justification for terrorism.
Drugs and organized crime are an ever-increasing danger
not only to our young people, but also to the social and
political stability of whole societies. To combat these
dangers we need international alliances, and we need them
urgently. The European Union offers comprehensive
cooperation and the experience it has gained in this field.
Disarmament policy, too, is preventive policy. Over
the past few years, major successes have been attained in
this field. These must now be made irreversible. The
START Treaties must be implemented quickly. In Europe,
the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces has proved to
be a milestone.
Uncleared mines are amongst the worst legacies of
war and civil war. We Europeans are in favour of the
establishment of a United Nations fund for mine-clearing
and of more stringent provisions under international law
to protect civilian populations.
The increasing proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, the continuing operation of unsafe nuclear
plants and the smuggling of plutonium and other nuclear
materials are among the new global dangers of our age.
We must counter them at the national and global levels.
We Europeans urgently appeal to North Korea to fulfil its
international obligations. We in the European Union are
committed to the indefinite, unconditional extension of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. In
Geneva, we want to arrive at a universal and universally
verifiable comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty. I
believe that it is also high time that consensus was
reached there on negotiations to bring about a ban on the
manufacture of weapons-grade fissile material.
The European Union, together with its partners, is
providing considerable funds for improving the safety of
nuclear plants in the neighbouring countries to our east.
What happened at Chernobyl must never, ever be
repeated. That would indeed be terrible.
I appeal to all signatory States to ensure speedy
ratification and implementation of the chemical weapons
Convention at the national level in order for it quickly to
become fully effective.
The dangers I have just mentioned affect us all. As
those dangers have a global dimension, action by the
United Nations, too, is called for. At its summit meeting
on 31 January 1992, the Security Council rightly stated
that the proliferation of all weapons of mass destruction
constitutes a threat to international peace and security.
The United Nations, the Security Council and all of us
must resolutely shoulder our responsibility to overcome
these new threats.
A fair balancing of interests through the ever-closer
regional integration of States and ever-increasing
cooperation between regions of our planet in the spirit of
Article 1 of the Charter of the United Nations are the
necessary response to the huge economic, ecological and
social challenges and the manifold ethnic conflicts we are
facing today - unfortunately, I might add. No one region
18


alone can master the global tasks confronting us. Nor can
the United Nations accomplish everything itself. The
burden on the United Nations can be substantially reduced
with the help of regional associations and cooperation. We
should strive to achieve that objective.
For Europe, the post-war era has finally reached an
end. A few weeks ago, the last Russian soldiers left
Germany. Russian troops have also withdrawn from the
Baltic States and other Eastern European countries. Now
the aim must be to prevent new divides from emerging in
Europe. The European Union will become not a "Fortress
Europe" but a Europe based on partnership and solidarity.
The European Union is supporting the countries of
Central and Eastern Europe on their way to democracy and
the establishment of market economies. The peoples in the
reformist States fought for their freedom. We encouraged
them in their struggle and we will not now abandon them.
We will gradually smooth their path towards the
Euro-Atlantic institutions. It is important to mention that
there will be no pan-European order of peace without or
against Russia. The European Union has concluded
partnership and cooperation agreements with Russia and
Ukraine. The North Atlantic Alliance’s "Partnership for
Peace" enhances Europe’s security.
The CSCE, as a new instrument of conflict-prevention,
confidence-building and conflict resolution, can set an
example for other regions of the world. And it can, as a
regional arrangement under Chapter VIII of the Charter,
relieve the United Nations as the guardian of peace. At the
CSCE Summit in December the European Union will urge,
on the basis of a German-Dutch initiative, that the CSCE be
given priority in conflict settlement and prevention within
its area and that it be equipped accordingly.
The European Union wants to further extend and
tighten its network of regional cooperation. Transatlantic
relations with the United States and Canada remain the
cornerstone of European policy. The Summit meeting
between the European Union and the United States in
Berlin in July this year confirmed our resolve to further
strengthen transatlantic relations.
We are seeking closer relations with the countries of
Asia. In Germany a few days ago we discussed with the
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) the
possibilities for even more intensive political and economic
cooperation. We are following with interest ASEAN’s
initiative to launch a policy dialogue on security in
South-East and East Asia, and I wish to emphasize the
European Union’s interest in and willingness to cooperate
more closely with the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
Council (APEC).
The European Council meeting in Corfu reaffirmed
that it attaches great importance to relations with the
countries of Latin America and with their regional
associations. The institutionalized dialogue with the Rio
Group has become for us an important element for the
consolidation of democracy and peace. We intend to
broaden the cooperation agreement with the States of the
Southern Cone Common Market (MERCOSUR).
Through its policy on the Mediterranean, the
European Union will have made available a total of
roughly $9.6 billion between 1975 and 1996. Europe
attaches great importance to security in the
Mediterranean.
From the outset the European Union actively
supported the Middle East peace process, playing a
leading role in international assistance for the
development of the Palestinian economy and society.
With the roughly $600 million earmarked for direct aid
from 1994 to 1998, the European Union is the
Palestinians’ largest international donor.
Cooperation in southern Africa has made great
strides. The course South Africa has embarked upon
under Nelson Mandela shows that it is possible for former
adversaries to be reconciled and to shape a common
future, given the necessary political will and wise
leadership. At the Berlin conference with the States of
the Southern African Development Community (SADC)
early this month the European Union initiated a new
phase of cooperation with southern Africa.
We in Europe want closer dialogue with the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) on conflict
prevention and security cooperation because we want
partnership with the countries of Africa and thereby a
greater United Nations peace-keeping capacity.
Agreement on an agenda for development is
becoming ever more urgent. One billion people in this
world are still living in absolute poverty. Global
expenditure on arms still amounts to as much as the
income of half of the five and a half billion people on our
planet.
Poverty, increasing demographic pressure and
irresponsible harming of the environment have made the
19


dangers to peace and stability greater, not smaller. The
Conference on Environment and Development in Rio and
the International Conference on Population and
Development, which ended in Cairo a few days ago,
confirmed that there are no simple answers to global
problems. The two conferences none the less sent out an
encouraging signal: there is growing recognition that we
must tackle such problems together, and this I believe is a
very important basis for the World Social Summit, which
will be held next year in Denmark.
In many countries women are still excluded from
active participation in public life. We expect the World
Conference on Women, to be held in Beijing next year, to
heighten awareness of this.
In the Maastricht Treaty we Europeans for the first
time made development policy an integral part of a treaty
system for Europe. We undertook to seek the sustainable
economic and social development of the South, to promote
its integration into the global economy and to combat
poverty.
Despite the huge budget difficulties facing its member
States, the European Union has increased its development
assistance from over $1 billion in 1988 to almost $3 billion
today. Funds for emergency disaster relief and food aid
were increased to $1 billion this year. Even more
important than such financial transfers, however, is the task
of integrating the countries of the South into the world
economy. Without doubt, the conclusion of the Uruguay
Round improved the chances of growth for all States
participating in world trade. The aim now must be for the
Treaty to enter into force on 1 January 1995, as planned,
and for the newly-established World Trade Organization to
commence work.
The treaty-based cooperation between the European
Union and the other regions of the world is designed to
further liberalize world trade. Every region should be able
to participate in the European market. That is why we
want to complete the forthcoming review of Lomé IV,
including the new finance protocol, on time, and we are
working to achieve that end.
Speaking here last year I suggested the development
of an early detection capacity for environmental disasters in
developing countries, and for the European Union I can
today say this: World-wide energy consumption is
increasing, although the use of fossil fuels is already
endangering climatic stability. In particular, we, the
industrialized countries, therefore need a more
environment-friendly and resource-friendly attitude on the
part of producers and consumers and increased recycling
of raw materials. Reducing carbon dioxide emissions
must be tackled as a matter of urgency.
The destruction of the forests continues mercilessly.
Soil erosion, loss of bio-diversity and impaired
regeneration are the consequences. This destruction must
be halted. We Europeans will seek better international
cooperation in the United Nations for the sustainable
utilization and protection of the forests. The United
Nations is the guardian not only of peace, but also of the
environment.
The historian Arnold Toynbee was right when he
concluded that people are entirely capable of learning
from disasters and finding responses to historic
challenges. Today we Europeans know that only
integration and cooperation lead to the desired goal, and
the international community’s response to the global
problems is and has to be to strengthen the United
Nations. Our central tasks for the future are: first, to
secure peace world-wide; secondly, to respect human
rights and the rule of law; and, thirdly, to create the
conditions for lasting stability through economic and
social development.
Our common goal is to create a better world for all.
But the determination with which we implement this goal
in practice is the precondition for success against which
we will be measured.
France is especially pleased, Mr. President, to see the
General Assembly meeting under your authority. At the
end of a year marked by the passing of an extraordinary
statesman, President Houphouët-Boigny, your election has
given the international community another occasion to
stop and think about the situation in the African continent,
which in recent months has brought us both hope and
tragedy.
In South Africa, a decisive evolutionary process took
concrete form this year in the first elections there with
universal suffrage. We can now express our joy at seeing
that country take its rightful place in the concert of
nations. The choice of the South African people, inspired
by outstanding men to whom France wishes again to pay
a tribute, provides an example for all those who aspire to
democracy, reconciliation and peace and gives them hope.
In Rwanda, on the other hand, an unprecedented
tragedy has set the international community’s
responsibility squarely before it. The Assembly is
familiar with the efforts made by France to respond to
that tragedy and with the support it managed to find,
primarily among the African States. The operation that
was carried out enabled us to shelter more than 3 million
Rwandans from the fighting. None the less, we have
found it necessary once again to say the word "genocide",
which, almost 50 years after the birth of the United
Nations, amounts to saying that the worst is still possible.
During the darkest years of the Second World War,
General De Gaulle spoke of the need to establish a world
order that could guarantee the security of all, to make
rational use of all the world’s riches and to bring together
all the people on the face of the Earth. The time has
come for us to rediscover the ideal that inspired the
12


generation of the founders and to ask ourselves with clarity
what means are necessary to implement it.
Almost everywhere in the world we are seeing the
positive movement of nation-States into groups. France
has made the building up of Europe one of the pillars of its
foreign policy. How could it not, then, encourage the
formation of new areas of solidarity?
The experience of building Europe, which began 40
years ago, is a case in point. It has done more than just do
away with the age-old rivalries that had led to two world
wars. In the western part of the European continent,
economic integration and political cooperation have attained
a level that is unmatched in the world.
Since the iron curtain ceased to exist, we have been
primarily concerned with expanding to all parts of Europe
the zone of peace and prosperity resulting from that
process. This explains our desire to speed up the
integration of the Central and Eastern European
democracies into the European Union. It also accounts for
our efforts to organize a partnership with Russia and the
States of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS).
The European Union, the Western European Union (WEU),
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE)
are all coooperating in the efforts towards this end.
Furthermore, it explains France’s initiative, taken up in turn
by the European Union, to establish a stability pact. This
is an ambitious exercise in preventive diplomacy, aimed at
resolving issues of relations between neighbours and of
minority groups, where such issues persist in the European
theatre.
Today Europe is a world power, as it demonstrated
during the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(GATT) negotiations, at which its efforts led, notably, to
the establishment of a World Trade Organization (WTO).
This is a major success that will benefit all its member
countries by putting an end to unilateral practices and
guaranteeing fair and free trade. Europe is thus assuming
its international responsibilities. It is actively supporting
the peace processes in the Middle East, in southern Africa
and elsewhere. It has long been involved in the struggle to
achieve development, particularly through the Lomé
Conventions. It provides substantial financing everywhere -
the most in the world - for peoples mired in humanitarian
crises. Its actions prove that a genuine regional power can
benefit the entire international community.
New regional groups of solidarity are gradually
taking shape in all parts of the world. In Africa, France
supports the principle of an OAU mechanism for
preventing, handling and settling conflicts. We are ready
to help set up a military mechanism to enable the OAU
to intervene more quickly, under United Nations control,
in the framework of peace-keeping operations.
In South-East Asia, the countries of the Association
of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) are working to
strengthen their economic ties and to establish confidence-
building measures to reinforce the stability of the region.
France, which through the European Union was present
at ASEAN’s regional forum on security, held recently in
Bangkok, takes a special interest in the beneficial effects
this process should have on the countries of the Indo-
Chinese peninsula.
On the American continent, the entry into force of
the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)
adds to the dynamism of existing regional organizations,
old and new.
Thus, perhaps, there may be such a group in the
Middle East as well, where progress in the peace process
allows us to envision the development of intensive
regional cooperation. The organization of all kinds of ties
among the countries concerned will help to establish
peace in the region, as will the search for solutions to the
political problems that are still pending. France can
therefore only repeat that we hope to see the boycotts
finally ended. Our financial support for the peace
process, as well as our active participation in the
multilateral negotiations, including participation in such
ultra-sensitive areas as regional security, reflect this very
same conviction.
Above and beyond that, France would like to see
Europe organize a forum for cooperation involving all the
Mediterranean States. We have, on the initiative of
Egypt, already made a contribution to the coming into
being of the Mediterranean Forum, which recently held its
first meeting in Alexandria. We will make this one of the
main goals of the French presidency of the European
Union in the first semester of the coming year.
Everywhere, then, the progress being made in
processes leading to integration and the establishment of
regional frameworks for cooperation reflects positive
trends. These organizations, however, have neither the
right nor the capability to do everything. It is the United
Nations that is and must remain the sole forum for
13


organizing peace and solidarity throughout the world. It is
up to the United Nations and to that Organization alone to
ensure international equilibrium since, in the last resort, it
alone has the power to decide on enforcement measures or
on the use of force. Regional organizations do contribute
to peace and international stability. They may indeed fulfil
missions in preventive diplomacy, but they must then be
inspired by the principles enshrined in the United Nations.
As regards peace-keeping, Chapter VIII of our Charter
expressly provides that the United Nations may, in certain
circumstances, employ the means at the disposal of the
regional organizations.
But when conflicts become exacerbated, when a crisis
calls for a mandatory solution, the Charter requires us to
turn to the Security Council, the sole authority having
power to decide on enforcement measures or on the use of
force other than for legitimate self-defence. The
justification for such measures may come only from the
will of the international community, and that is why the
Security Council, in our view, must exert its authority and
control at all stages of operations it may decide upon:
conception and approval of the mandate, the major phases
of implementation and the monitoring of implementation.
The adoption of a system of mandatory sanctions
against States that breach international legality is also a
prerogative of the Security Council. But, and we are very
keenly aware of this, this concerns serious, exceptional
measures whose purpose must be precisely defined to bring
pressure to bear on a Government to change its attitude.
That is the objective in such instances. France therefore
proposes that in future, when a resolution imposing
sanctions upon a Member State is to be voted upon, three
conditions must be met. These are, that all other
diplomatic avenues have been explored without success;
that the Council resolution state explicitly what actions the
targeted State should take in order for the sanctions to be
lifted; and that the maintenance of the sanctions should be
subject to regular review in good faith.
In the realm of disarmament, our Organization is once
again the sole forum where international commitments may
be entered into. Given this perspective, France ascribes
especial importance to the speedy ratification of the
Convention banning chemical weapons - the first
multilateral disarmament treaty - and thereby its entry into
force in 1995. France hopes to see our Organization make
progress towards strengthening the Convention banning
biological weapons and to see new efforts made to ban
anti-personnel mines. I was particularly pleased to hear
President Clinton endorse this very concept in his recent
statement to the Assembly. Finally, the requirement for
non-proliferation, which North Korea’s attitude compels
us to take especially seriously, must lead, at the 1995
Conference, to the unconditional and indefinite renewal of
the non-proliferation Treaty. In this same vein, France
reaffirms its support for the decision taken by the General
Assembly last year to begin negotiations on a
comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty that would be
internationally and effectively verifiable.
Over recent years, crisis prevention and crisis
management have absorbed the greater part of our efforts.
We have thus imperceptibly strayed somewhat from what
was a major chapter in the history of the United Nations:
the North-South dialogue, the major conferences on trade
and development. France thus proposes that the United
Nations restore development and the struggle to achieve
it to their central place in its work.
It is not a question of repeating what was done in
past decades. Our approach to development has changed.
The work pursued under the auspices of the United
Nations and its agencies has helped to call attention to the
interdependence of the economic, demographic, cultural
and social ramifications of the development question.
That is why the main theme conferences devoted to the
environment, to population, to social development and to
the status of women are now once again the instruments
to be used to mobilize for development. Given this
perspective, France will organize in Paris before the end
of this year the signing of the Convention on the struggle
against desertification, as well as the Aids Summit.
The United Nations alone is capable of ensuring that
all these efforts be pursued consistently. It has the
necessary legitimacy and authority, inasmuch as all the
main institutions concerned, including what are known as
the Bretton Woods institutions, are part and parcel of the
United Nations system. We therefore consider it
necessary to strengthen the links that unite all these
separate bodies. In particular, we should ensure that the
policies of adjustment carried out under World Bank or
International Monetary Fund auspices take due account of
the social requirements of development. France is
committed to doing so in working with its partners, and
has recently agreed to a substantial effort to help the franc
zone countries overcome the short-term effects of the
devaluation of the CFA franc.
The Economic and Social Council should be the
place for ensuring coherence and consistency within these
organizations. France therefore proposes that the next
14


annual meeting of the Council in Geneva should be an
opportunity for the ministers of Member States personally
to undertake a complete examination of the policies
followed by these various institutions with regard to
development, and especially to study specific ways by
which they might work together better.
The Secretary-General’s efforts for renewal and
clarification through the "Agenda for Development"
naturally form part of this global approach. The European
Union, for its part, has presented recommendations in its
aide-mémoire that it believes would enhance that draft.
France intends to take an active part in General Assembly
discussions on this subject.
The role of our Organization is no less critical where
humanitarian action is involved. France intervenes
regularly on the ground alongside United Nations agencies,
and we should like to pay a tribute to the outstanding work
done by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the World Food Programme and UNICEF,
working under tragically difficult circumstances. We were
able to appreciate in full measure their usefulness as the
Rwandan crisis unfolded. We have had confirmation that
the United Nations alone is able to coordinate such difficult
operations. Naturally, there is need for further progress:
in shortening the Organization’s reaction time, and in better
allocating tasks among agencies. But the reform that began
three years ago with the establishment of the Department
for Humanitarian Affairs is beginning to bear fruit. We are
indeed on the right track.
Lastly, France would like to stress the underlying
principle of international law: the universality of human
rights, a principle which may not be challenged in the name
of any religious, cultural or national specificities. I am all
the more ready to say that because France is itself keen on
preserving its identity and intent on defending it. However
different people may be, they share the same rights. The
very existence of our Organization rests on this principle.
France has consistently urged the acceleration of
progress in the field of human rights, by seeking
recognition that certain principles must be applied to States’
actions. I welcome the steps taken by the High
Commissioner for Human Rights since his designation and
express the hope that the resources made available to him
will be commensurate with his mission.
The establishment of the International Tribunal for war
crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia is a significant
event. Until very recently there had been some scepticism
about this initiative. Today, thanks to the resolve of the
Tribunal’s judges and prosecutor, it is in place and
beginning to examine actual cases being submitted to it.
France supports these efforts and hopes that comparable
crimes of genocide that may have been committed in
Rwanda will also lead to the establishment of an
international legal body.
The juridical work of the United Nations extends to
other areas as well. It is designed to address matters of
international trade with a view to making it both freer and
fairer. In this regard, I have already expressed our
satisfaction at the establishment of the World Trade
Organization. The signing a few weeks ago of an act that
completes the monumental work done by the United
Nations on the law of the sea is also a historic event.
If our Organization is to be able to carry out the
many difficult tasks which I have just described, we must
constantly work to reform it and adjust the means
available to it - in the first place, by strengthening the
means available to the Secretary-General. On behalf of
France, I should like to pay a tribute here to the
Secretary-General - and this is not a mere formality. We
have the good fortune to have at the helm of our
Organization a man who, thanks to his ceaseless efforts
over the past two years, has made progress possible in all
areas: preventive diplomacy, crisis management,
development, the running of the institution. We must
therefore give him the means to continue his work.
This is true, too, of peace-keeping missions. Recent
experience has shown the need to make military forces
available to the Secretary-General on very short notice in
the implementation of Security Council resolutions. To
that end, France wishes to develop a network of stand-by
forces. On the initiative of the President of the Republic,
we have offered to make a standing unit of several
thousand men available to the United Nations. It is also
essential for the Secretary-General to be able to control
the evolution of peace-keeping missions. To that end,
France recommends systematic recourse to the designation
of a special representative.
The Secretary-General must be able to rely on the
assistance of prominent and particularly competent
persons. With regard to management, last year’s
establishment of the post of Inspector General marked an
important step forward. We expect further progress to be
made this year with the establishment of a committee on
budgetary discipline, as I proposed last year from this
very rostrum. Lastly, as our Prime Minister has
15


suggested, France proposes that someone be appointed on
a permanent basis to the Secretary-General’s Office who
would deal with the question of the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.
Our Assembly is the most universal of international
institutions. Its prestige and authority must therefore be
strengthened. To that end, France is making three
proposals.
First, sessions of the Fifth Committee must be held
more closely together in order to ensure better control over
our finances, particularly with regard to peace-keeping
operations.
Secondly, there must be more frequent missions of the
Assembly to deal with certain crisis situations, as was done
in the cases of Haiti and South Africa. The financial
reform of the United Nations, which has been discussed for
several years now, must be set in motion. Following the
work of the high-level Working Group established last year
to consider the question of enlarging the Security Council,
France proposes that a group, led by the President of the
General Assembly, be set up this year to make proposals
that could lead to the financial reform of our Organization.
Thirdly, we must work to achieve the enlargement of
the Security Council. This question has already been the
focus of in-depth discussions that have clarified the
positions at issue. For its part, France has no panacea to
offer, but it believes that the solution must answer the dual
imperative of efficacy and representativeness.
On the one hand, if the Security Council is to function
efficiently, given its tasks and the circumstances in which
it intervenes, its capacity to take important decisions
quickly must clearly be maintained. But the Council must
also allow for full public debate in reaching its decisions.
Hence, we are in favour of the Council’s holding official
meetings - without of course giving up its informal
consultations - to hear Members of the Organization and
talk with them before taking positions on the important
questions before it. We believe that this is the appropriate
response to the demand for transparency made by many
delegations.
On the other hand, the Council’s authority and thus its
efficacy also depend on its representativeness. We
therefore favour the enlargement of the Council to include
new permanent and non-permanent members. France
confirms its support for the desires of Germany and Japan
to accede to permanent membership. It also considers that
the representatives of the developing world should in no
case find themselves marginalized by any future reform.
The United Nations exists and acts only through the
will of its Member States. Though that is obvious it
bears repeating. Any failure of our Organization is in
fact the failure of those same States - that is, as my
colleague from the United Kingdom stated earlier today,
our own failure. Its efficacy depends above all on the
degree of commitment each of us brings to it.
Without the commitment of States there can be no
solution to the financial crisis of the United Nations.
Each of us is aware of the gravity of our Organization’s
financial situation. Each of us also knows that this
critical situation is not the result solely of the sum total of
expenditures. The real source of our crisis is well known:
it is the negligence of States which do not pay their
contributions or do not pay them in full.
Of course, we welcome the fact that one of the main
contributor countries has decided to pay a substantial part
of its arrears, thereby bringing temporary relief to the
Organization’s financial situation. We can understand
why some Member States are requesting that the scale of
contributions be adjusted in order better to reflect real
abilities to pay. France hopes that at the present session
the General Assembly will address the revision of this
scale in accordance with the principle of fairness and in
a spirit of consensus.
But fairness also requires swifter and more
substantial reimbursement to States that provide the troops
necessary to peace-keeping operations and are therefore
the primary victims of late payments. The situation in
which some in fact pay twice while others do not pay at
all must come to an end. France therefore asks once
again that a working group be established and mandated
to propose all the measures that can encourage tardy
States to pay their arrears.
And without the commitment of States there cannot
be any solution to international instability. France has
made considerable efforts to help resolve crises that have
threatened the international order over the past few years.
It has been the first and is now the second largest troop
contributor to the United Nations. It has well-known
experience in the three areas of preventive diplomacy,
peace-keeping and humanitarian action. Obviously,
France does not wish to lecture anyone, but its own
commitment does permit it to say that the readiness of
16


States does not meet the demands made today upon our
Organization.
Need we cite all the circumstances in which the non-
participation or temporizing of States has compromised
action mandated by the Security Council? How many
weeks did we have to wait last year for the military
arrangements provided for under Security Council
resolution 824 (1993) on safe areas in Bosnia were finally
in place? We all remember that, during the Rwandan
crisis, the decision taken by the Security Council in mid-
May to strengthen the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Rwanda had yet to be implemented two months later.
Rather than dwelling on these disappointments,
however, France wishes to pay tribute to all those States
that have shown, by their commitment and sense of
international solidarity, that the United Nations can prove
that it is effective. The African countries that chose to
share with us the risks involved in the operation in Rwanda;
the United States, which is working in Haiti to effect the
implementation of Security Council resolution 940 (1994);
the States whose soldiers stand with ours in the United
Nations Protection Force: it is thanks to them that there
remains a chance for peace in the former Yugoslavia,
delayed only by the stubbornness of the Bosnian Serb
leaders. France expects that the greatest of firmness will be
used in dealing with these most recent warmongers. But
the change in position of the other parties, and in particular
the authorities in Belgrade, makes it incumbent upon us to
continue to seek a negotiated settlement. In this spirit, we
appeal to Presidents Izetbegovic, Tudjman and Milosevic,
who have all accepted the peace plan for Bosnia, to resume
the direct dialogue necessary for a comprehensive
settlement. Otherwise, the international community must be
prepared to propose the terms of a comprehensive, just and
lasting settlement, taking into account the legitimate
interests of the various communities that made up the
former Yugoslavia and must enjoy equal rights.
Bringing to trial those responsible for war crimes is a
moral imperative to which France is committed. We must
above all make the people in the former Yugoslavia
understand that there are prospects for the future other than
endless violence and vengeance. That is France’s message.
That is the reason for the commitment of our soldiers in
Bosnia and, sadly, the sacrifice of several dozen of them.
There is nothing pre-ordained about failure to get involved,
or inertia. There is a strong will at the heart of our
Organization. Therefore France appeals to all Member
States to mark the fiftieth anniversary with a genuine
renewal of commitment.
Voices are being raised today urging our
Organization to show greater realism in defining the
missions that it has to carry out. In appealing to Member
States to mobilize, France wishes to reaffirm its
unwavering conviction that, in the face of the challenges
to the international community, realism consists not in
being less ambitious but in ensuring that we have the
means fully to achieve our ambitions. They must not be
limited to what seems possible; they must be to make
possible what is obviously necessary. It is in this spirit
that France will continue actively to play its role within
the United Nations.
I should like first to
congratulate you most warmly, Sir, on your election as
President. The Assembly could not have made a wiser
choice. I wish you all good fortune and success in your
mission.
In a few months we shall commemorate the fiftieth
anniversary of the birth of the United Nations. The United
Nations is the fullest expression man has yet achieved of
the age-old desire to escape from war and establish an
enduring peace.
When the United Nations was founded in San
Francisco 50 years ago the threat of nuclear war between
the super-Powers had already begun to cast a shadow
across the world. That shadow has now lifted, and we all
live and sleep more safely as a result. Yet as we approach
the anniversary we are all more conscious of the suffering
and destruction that still disfigure parts of almost every
continent in the world. The threats to international peace
and security are more diffuse and perhaps less serious than
they were, but not less real and not less tragic for those
caught up in them.
To some extent, disappointment comes out of
exaggerated expectation. There is still a tendency to think
of the United Nations as if it were some great palace of
world order which descended splendidly from heaven 50
years ago. If that were our view, then every broken pane
of glass in that palace, every door, every pillar fouled or
damaged would be a disgrace and a scandal.
But, of course, in reality world order does not descend
from heaven at the moment when a Charter is signed. It is
not like that at all. World order is built painfully,
gradually, brick by brick. Sometimes the wind and the
weather destroy what has already been built. But the
builders cannot afford to be discouraged - and we are all
builders. They have to repair; they have to rebuild; they
have to hope that gradually in what they build the
advances will outnumber the retreats.
There have been recent advances that have been
dramatic - beyond expectation. No one who was present
at the Union Buildings in Pretoria this May could fail to
be moved at the birth of the new South Africa. The
goodwill and the cheerful determination of all South
Africans on that occasion were a marvelous refutation, it
seemed to me, of the cynicism that so often weakens our
work.
And we have seen the same as the peace process
gathers strength in the Middle East.
In part of my own country, we may - and I fervently
hope we shall - see killings cease, see fears slowly
dissolve, as a result of the process started by the British
and Irish Governments in the Downing Street Declaration
on Northern Ireland.
In Europe - in Cyprus, in the former Yugoslavia, in
Georgia -the United Nations has helped at least to contain
if not yet to resolve deep-rooted conflicts. The world’s
most intractable problems continue to be laid at your
door, Mr. Secretary-General, like infants laid at the door
of some medieval monastery. It is not surprising that, for
all the efforts of 77,000 men and women serving in
United Nations peace-keeping operations in the field, our
Organization has had failures as well as successes to its
name.
As is common in our society of mass media, the
headlines have been dominated by the reversals, and some
of them have indeed been tragic. In Rwanda the efforts
of the United Nations failed to avert genocide. In
Somalia it looks as if our efforts have been effectively
spurned by a people whose need for help seemed, and
seems, self-evident.
A word about Bosnia. There has in recent months,
mercifully, been more peace in Bosnia. It is a fragile,
uncertain, inconclusive, often interrupted peace, but it is
still better than what went before. We necessarily discuss
Bosnia all the time. The debate in particular in this
building about the United Nations arms embargo has at
times seemed to rage more fiercely than the fighting on
the ground. Certainly the diplomatic efforts have been
frustrating. And I can understand those who believe that
reverting to a fight, even a fight to the death, would be
5


preferable to the tangle of negotiations and compromise that
sometimes seems to stretch ahead for ever.
Nevertheless, I do not agree with that opinion. We
should value, we should build on, the advances that have
been made, we should value the lives that have been saved
by the reduction in fighting on the ground. We can now
see perhaps more clearly that the United Nations Protection
Force (UNPROFOR) has been essential in protecting
civilians and in preventing the Bosnian Serb army from
making further advances. Who here can believe that
Gorazde, or Srebrenica or Zepa would still be in the hands
of the Bosnian Government if it were not for the bravery
and commitment of UNPROFOR troops?
UNPROFOR can operate only if it is able to keep
lines open to all the parties to the fighting. It could not
continue if leading members of the United Nations were
rearming one side; UNPROFOR would then be identified
as a party to the war. It is not mandated or equipped for
that purpose. Our Secretary-General has endorsed that
view, and the Commander of United Nations forces in
Bosnia has rightly said "We have not come here to fight a
war from inside white painted vehicles".
So I welcome the decision of which we heard
yesterday from the Bosnian President, the decision to accept
that now is not the moment to lift the arms embargo. And
that Bosnian decision allows UNPROFOR to continue its
mission. We have said before that if the Bosnian Serbs do
not join the peace process and agree the map presented by
the Contact Group, then our present approach may become
exhausted. Lifting the arms embargo may become
unavoidable, as we said at Geneva in July, and in those
circumstances UNPROFOR would have to withdraw. But
it would not be a good policy. Indeed, it would be a policy
of despair, a policy that, as in Shakespeare’s King Lear,
"Bids the wind blow the earth into the sea,
"...
"That things might change or cease". (King Lear, Act
III, scene i, l. 5)
A real solution to the conflict, as always, lies with
those who are doing the fighting. We from outside must
continue to show all the parties that the way forward is
political agreement and not more military action. There is
a settlement plan, the settlement plan of the Contact Group,
on the table. Those who refuse it, those who continue the
warfare, must be isolated, must be put under sustained -
indeed, increased - pressure. Those who cooperate with the
international peace plan effectively, in deeds and not just
in words, should have that cooperation recognized.
I need to say a few words in response to the remarks
made yesterday by the distinguished President of
Argentina concerning the dispute over the Falkland
Islands. President Menem was right - and I am glad that
he mentioned it - when he referred to the increasing
cooperation between the United Kingdom and Argentina
in several areas. Indeed, this cooperation nowadays
characterizes our bilateral relationship. And we certainly
hope, sincerely hope, that the progress that we have
achieved together will not be reversed.
We are quite clear about British sovereignty over the
Falkland Islands and the other British dependencies in the
South Atlantic, so we were concerned at the recent
incorporation into the constitution of Argentina of the
new clause to which President Menem referred. It seems
to us that in these Falkland Islands, as in Northern
Ireland, we must heed the wishes of the people
concerned. Indeed, any other course for us or for the
United Nations would be inconceivable. This body has
heard those wishes of the Islanders expressed, most
recently by their elected representatives who visited the
United Nations for the debate in the Committee of 24 last
July.
So we have a difference. But despite this difference,
we have joined a dialogue with the Argentine
Government on fisheries and petroleum development. We
look forward to resuming discussions in the near future
with the Argentine authorities on a new agreement on
fishing and on the development of possible hydrocarbon
resources in the South Atlantic continental shelf. We are
also discussing the welcome Argentine offer to remove
mines from the Falklands. It seems to me that that is the
rational and logical path to the wider progress of which
the President of Argentina spoke.
I return to this Organization. It is often the target of
criticism because it cannot solve every problem laid at its
door. We all know that there is scope for improving the
performance of the United Nations here in New York
and, more critically, where the United Nations and its
agencies are in action on the ground. The steps taken so
far are a beginning, but only a beginning.
Machinery cannot run on thin air. The United
Nations can only run on the fuel that we, its Member
States, supply to it. So where it has failed, we must not
pretend that the failure lies with the system. It lies with
6


us. The failure of the United Nations is our failure, and so
it is for us to take action. For example, the sufferings of
the Rwandan refugees will not be helped by Member
States’ holding their heads in their hands. Their hands
should be ready to provide from their pockets what is
needed to remedy such suffering.
Preventive diplomacy is the ideal. But it often will
not be enough. We have to be prepared for the demand for
peace-keepers to continue. There are practical ways in
which we can respond better to that demand: first, by
ensuring that we learn the lessons from our experiences in
peace-keeping; secondly, by taking practical steps to
improve our capacity to keep the peace, especially in
Africa; and, thirdly, by reforming our financing system.
I should like to say a brief word about peace-keeping.
It is often impossible to predict at the outset of a mission
what demands or dangers United Nations troops will
encounter. Within limits, they must be ready to improvise.
But allowing their role to drift from peace-keeping to taking
sides in a war carries high risks to the troops themselves,
to the political process they support, and to the ability of
the United Nations to put in peace-keepers elsewhere. It
undermines the willingness of Member States to contribute
troops. So in making their decision to contribute to a
United Nations operation countries need to be confident that
their troops will be supporting peace and not becoming a
party to war.
Rwanda put this to the test, and we were found
wanting for a response for the time being. The issue was
not really whether the United Nations should have sent an
intervention force to stop the fighting - which it clearly
could not - but whether it could find the means, the men
and the equipment, for a force to protect the civilian
population. That, tragically, took far too long.
That is the latest lesson we need to learn from. It is
not now, it seems to me, a question of will, because there
is a far greater readiness than there used to be to
contemplate intervention on the ground to mitigate or
prevent humanitarian disaster. It is not so much the will,
the intellectual willingness; it is the resources, the know-
how, the ability to respond swiftly, which are still not
enough.
You, Mr. Secretary-General, have pointed this out over
and over again, and I should like to pay tribute to the
patience and persistence with which you have rammed
home this lesson and sought not merely to tell us the truths
about it but to persuade us into practical action and remedy.
I agree with what you have said on many occasions. We
need to work hard and fast to overcome obstacles which
are essentially practical.
We British will continue to contribute practically.
We have 4,000 British men and women in blue berets,
from Georgia to Rwanda, something which would have
been thought inconceivable even 10 years ago. We have
the seconded British experts at United Nations
Headquarters. The speed with which the Department of
Peace-keeping Operations has adapted to cope with ever-
increasing demand has been impressive. The
development of the professional military staff at United
Nations Headquarters has been particularly welcome. So
has the trend to bring more seconded staff in alongside
United Nations personnel. But it will be vital also to help
to strengthen our ability to respond quickly in areas where
it remains weak. Africa, in the light of experience,
should be a priority.
Africa’s need for peace-keepers is plain to see:
nearly 40 per cent of all United Nations peace-keepers are
deployed in Africa. Africa needs peace. There can be no
doubt of that, because it is only in peace that Africans
will succeed in finding their own solutions to their
problems. The remarkable events in South Africa earlier
this year showed that.
The efforts of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) to develop a coherent approach to the prevention
of conflict are welcome. They deserve our full support.
But the OAU has warned that its resources are not
enough. I believe that the United Nations must respond.
By setting up a coherent structure of support systems,
running from early warning and preventive diplomacy
right through to humanitarian and peace-keeping
deployment on the ground, we can make sure that the
skills and resources can be put into action as soon as the
need arises, and not months later.
What does that mean? It means, first, an early
warning system. Not all conflicts can be foreseen. Some
are triggered by assassination or a coup d’état or other
sudden events. More often, surely, we can see trouble
brewing: competition for land and resources, ethnic or
religious rivalry, the gradual breakdown of law and order,
ill-judged responses by central governments. We need a
mechanism to pull together information and analysis of
events like these, to take a regular forward look at
potential troublespots and decide whether preventive
diplomacy needs to be triggered.
7


Then, secondly, it means a capacity to react, that is to
say, to intervene diplomatically before warfare breaks out.
We do not have that capacity now. Britain and France - we
announced this last year - have offered help, making
available experienced diplomats and offering equipment and
support. There needs to be an institutional framework. In
Europe we have the Conference on Security and
Cooperation in Europe (CSCE), which operates to agreed
principles and has intervened, for example, in Ukraine,
Moldova and the Baltic States to try to help parties to
resolve disputes before there is recourse to fighting. The
OAU has its own experience of pre-emptive action, and it
would clearly need to be the focal point of an enhanced
effort in Africa. I am proposing that the United Nations
should help the OAU and African countries to share this
expertise and establish agreed mechanisms for preventive
diplomacy in Africa.
But, thirdly, that will not always be enough. Peace-
keeping skills will continue to be in demand. We must
build up the necessary capabilities in Africa. Many African
countries already make a major contribution to peace-
keeping - Ghana, Egypt, Botswana, Zimbabwe and Zambia,
to mention just some. But we all know the United Nations
has not been able to deploy in Africa with the necessary
speed and effectiveness.
I therefore propose that, under the auspices of the
United Nations, a number of military staff colleges existing
in Africa should become peace-keeping skills centres; that
is to say, they should give training in doctrines and
disciplines of peace-keeping, and in mediation and conflict
resolution.
The physical capacity also needs to be strengthened if
intervention is to be rapid when it is needed. That requires
United Nations logistics basing centres, like those already
existing in Europe, to store equipment and ensure that it is
quickly available, with rapid mobile logistics teams,
earmarked by Member States, to help to maintain that
equipment in good running order and to give training and
on-the-spot maintenance support. Again, the lesson of
Rwanda is clear. These centres will also need headquarters
staff to identify and remedy logistic weaknesses, give
advice on maps or communications and advise existing and
potential troop contributors.
These are not proposals for enormous new machinery.
We need a framework within which existing resources,
capability and know-how can be mobilized. We will
strongly support such an effort. It needs further
discussion - above all, among and with African countries.
We would welcome such discussion soon, here in New
York, to develop these ideas, other people’s ideas and
take some practical decisions quickly.
Finally, money. As you, Mr. Secretary-General,
remind us, as you are bound to remind us, the United
Nations at the moment works miracles with what we do
not pay it. It simply cannot keep running on exhausted
credit. It must be able to pay its peace-keepers, for
example. We will not be able to build up the operations
of the United Nations unless we act now to put the
finances of the United Nations on a sound and sustainable
footing for the long term.
No radical change in principles is needed, but we do
need a sensible updating of the way in which assessments
are calculated. The existing system was adopted in 1973.
Much has changed. No one now would propose that
States with above average per capita incomes should
enjoy an 80 per cent discount on their peace-keeping
contributions. No one now would suggest that discounts
for all the newly independent Member States should be
absorbed by five countries in an open-ended arrangement.
But that is the system. It means that some countries are
paying too much and others too little. It means that we
now need to put these anomalies right. Moving to a
system based on relative capacity to pay, with automatic
adjustment for changing circumstances, would not mean
very much change for most countries, but it would mean
a fair, equitable basis on which the long-term viability
and therefore vitality of the United Nations could be
assured.
A word about the Security Council. Reform is on
the agenda - that is quite right - and I believe it is in the
interests of the United Nations to sort out the question of
enlargement in good time. We would like the momentum
of discussion to be maintained.
Next year’s fiftieth anniversary is a good milestone
for the debate. We will work hard for a good outcome,
both on enlargement and on transparency, where recent
informal arrangements to improve consultation on peace-
keeping between the Secretariat, the Security Council and
troop contributors should be further developed.
We should ensure that the Council is representative,
while avoiding an enlargement so great that it puts at risk
the effectiveness of the Council. If consensus can be
reached, then clearly there are countries that, by virtue of
their global interests and their contribution to international
8


security and United Nations operations, should be invited to
accept the responsibilities of permanent membership.
I have concentrated today on how we deal with crises
and defuse tensions. But, of course, those are only some of
the challenges that our Organization faces. Drug trafficking
and associated international crime are other threats to our
security and well-being. We need to give new energy and
encouragement to all those who are involved in developing
cooperation against those threats. I mention this because I
feel that we must give particular support to the United
Nations International Drug Control Programme. This is the
programme that has the responsibility for leading all the
world’s efforts in this field. Once again, the United
Nations is the best resource we have for tackling a menace
that threatens the whole world.
In conclusion, we can say confidently that the United
Nations is indispensable. It is not a perfect glass palace,
but it is the best building we have, even though the winds
still blow cruelly through its gaps and its defects. We all,
therefore, have a duty to repair, make good, build afresh.
Next year we will look back rightly on the
achievements, and the list of achievements is long. But it
will remind us, and we will remind ourselves, of what has
not yet been achieved. And I hope that will stir us to show
the same vision, the same strength of purpose as the
founders of the United Nations, with, I hope, results of
equal value for the next 50 years.
I congratulate Mr.
Amara Essy on his election as President of the General
Assembly at the forty-ninth session. We are particularly
gratified that an eminent son of Africa is leading the
Assembly’s deliberations this year.
We offer our thanks to his predecessor, Ambassador
Insanally, who presided over a year of considerable
activity in the General Assembly with great aplomb and
finesse. The Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros
Boutros-Ghali, will be completing three years in office.
We wish him well as he continues to lead the United
Nations.
We have already welcomed the new South Africa to
the United Nations. South Africa today is a reminder of
the triumph of the principle of equality of man - a
triumph in which the United Nations played a major role.
The world community must commit itself to ensuring that
this principle is implemented for all time to come. All
efforts should be made for the development of South
Africa.
Forty-nine years ago a world tired of war declared
that at this foundry of the United Nations it would beat its
swords into ploughshares. Instead, we have only
produced words, while the swords have not disappeared.
The words may be important, but unfortunately they have
remained mere words. We seem to be stepping into a
new world order in a gaping moral void, with no credible
promise of peace nor of a nonviolent world. And we are
approaching 1995: the fiftieth anniversary of the United
Nations; the fortieth anniversary of Panchsheel - the Five
Principles of Peaceful Coexistence; the Year of Tolerance,
which is being celebrated by the United Nations; and the
one hundred and twenty-fifth birthday of the apostle of
13


peace and moral force, Mahatma Gandhi, whose message
only gains in relevance year after year.
Global security today demands a holistic approach
involving the promotion of economic and social
development; the protection of human rights; the promotion
of harmony and social cohesion in multi-racial and
multi-ethnic societies; the combating of terrorism,
drug-trafficking and clandestine traffic in armaments; and
the enhancing of the capacity of the United Nations, within
the framework of its Charter, to prevent conflicts, preserve
peace and alleviate suffering. The new agenda of the
United Nations must be shaped on the basis of this
approach, giving peace and development equal priority and
treatment. The General Assembly, with its universal
participation and comprehensive mandate, should project
such a holistic vision and revitalize that vision into action.
The Secretary-General’s Agendas have reminded us
of what we should focus on, namely, disarmament,
development and peace. I put them in that order because
true peace can only follow disarmament and development.
The cold war was not war, yet certainly not peace. In its
wake, we have seen how, most frighteningly, poverty,
disease and a host of miseries affect the cause of peace.
They had been there all the time, but were not seen by the
jaundiced eye of the cold war. In the new post-cold-war
context, therefore, the nexus of disarmament and
development with peace becomes crystal clear - indeed
inescapably clear.
We have to start with disarmament. The slaughter in
Rwanda has taken place during the forty-ninth anniversary
of the devastation of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. For almost
50 years, we have lived in fear of general and complete
extinction instead of global and complete disarmament.
Those who had biological and chemical weapons have
given them up under universally binding commitments. We
must now go one logical step further and exorcise the
greatest evil of all, namely, the weapons of mass
destruction.
We have had global discussions on nuclear
disarmament before, but now that the cold war, which
spawned these weapons, is over, and the previous
adversaries have been drawn into a partnership for peace,
this is surely the time to agree - in regimes which are
global, comprehensive, verifiable and non-discriminatory -
on steps to make the world a safer place. Another
opportunity will arise when the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) comes up for
review next April. We hope that States Parties will use that
occasion to refashion the Treaty into a real instrument for
global disarmament. Quite apart from the NPT, it is
essential that we examine a detailed implementation
process of total and global disarmament, which has been
accepted in principle, though in words only thus far.
Last June in Cairo, the Foreign Ministers of the non-
aligned countries, at India’s suggestion, proposed that a
fourth special session on disarmament be convened. We
think the time and the circumstances are right for the
General Assembly to plan for this special session for next
year, or as soon as possible.
But disarmament alone will be inadequate. We are
rushing towards another precipice, where the disparities
in wealth between nations would trigger violent revolution
within States. A global convulsion will come if we
continue to disregard the development imperative. The
problems of development are global problems and must
be addressed by all of us. We must set a substantive
agenda for development, commit ourselves to it and
implement it.
The World Trade Organization, which should soon
come into being, must promote what we expected but did
not quite achieve so far in the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade (GATT) - non-discrimination,
consensus and transparency in the international trade
regime. We hope that the multilateral trade negotiations
will stimulate economic growth in our countries and in
the world economy. It will not if the carefully negotiated
consensus, to which we committed ourselves at
Marrakesh, is destroyed by the introduction of new
conditionalities. Faith in the multilateral system will be
shaken if countries use their trading strength and bilateral
pressures to weaken and distort agreements to which they
have just become parties.
The themes of the World Summit for Social
Development focus on the critical issues of poverty
eradication together with social integration and the need
to increase avenues for productive employment, without
which we will not have the broad-based, self-sustaining
social and economic development that is the only
guarantor of peace and security. If the Summit is to
succeed, we must agree upon the commitments for
additional resources dedicated to national programmes
around the world. We should not be sidetracked from
this goal by new concepts which do not command
consensus, and do not address the fundamental needs of
development.
14


The United Nations must also re-order its priorities so
as to counter several disturbing centrifugal trends which we
see emerging. What the world needs is support for the
nation-State system on which the United Nations was built.
In June this year, Prime Minister Narasimha Rao and
President Yeltsin, representing two of the largest pluralistic
nations in the world, issued the Moscow Declaration on the
Protection of the Interests of Pluralistic States. In this
Declaration, which has been circulated as a document of the
General Assembly, Russia and India have put forward
principles which, if acted upon, will, we think, promote
greater harmony in the world.
Against this background, there are a few questions for
the Assembly to consider. For the 45 years of the cold
war, the Security Council was forced into immobility, but
when the cold war ended, it found itself shouldering a
stupendous task. As if to make up for years of inactivity,
it has rushed into many areas. We must ponder the
consequences of the decisions taken over the last few years,
which have on occasion sent United Nations peace-keepers
in pursuit of objectives whose nexus with peace is rather
tenuous.
New doctrines justify armed United Nations
intervention under circumstances that are not quite defined -
not yet at any rate. These initiatives are well meaning but
they do not seem to address the problems from the right
end. The ultimate human right is the right to live - the
right to food and shelter without which life is impossible.
The poverty of many nations makes this a problem to
which there are no easy answers. If there are
circumstances which justify armed multilateral intervention,
by the same logic should not the United Nations have the
right to enforce the equitable sharing of resources among
nations?
The Non-aligned Movement, at the meeting of its
Foreign Ministers in Cairo this year, suggested some
guiding principles for peace-keeping operations of enduring
significance. All means for the peaceful settlement of
disputes chosen by the conflicting parties should be
exhausted before coercive measures are considered.
Peace-keeping operations should strictly adhere to the
principles of the Charter, in particular the principles of full
respect for the sovereignty of States, their territorial
integrity and non-intervention in their internal affairs.
Peace-keeping operations should be considered only at the
request of the Member States involved. The resources for
peace-keeping activities should not be at the expense of
resources for development activities of the United Nations.
There should be no hesitation in ending those operations
which have been overtaken by events or become
inconsistent with their mandates. It is also important to
ensure that the distinction between peace-keeping
operations and other activities of the United Nations,
including humanitarian assistance, is maintained at all
times. While coordination between these activities at the
field level is important, their integration could irreversibly
alter the basic purposes of these distinct activities and
detract from their effectiveness.
Prudence must be exercised in the use of regional
organizations in peace-keeping operations. It is the
capacity of the United Nations for peace-keeping that
must be strengthened.
We have responded positively to the Secretary-
General’s appeal for the strengthening of the United
Nations capacity for peace-keeping by designating a
brigade for the stand-by arrangements that are being put
in place.
It is true that the work of the Security Council and
its role in the United Nations are of the greatest
importance. There is therefore all the more reason that
the Council should be representative of the international
community and have maximum legitimacy. The United
Nations needs a Council that is effective, but it cannot be
effective if the impression grows that it represents
entrenched privileges and that its agenda could vary from
those of the general membership. The democracy and
good governance which are urged upon all States cannot
stop at the gates of the United Nations.
The present-day composition of the Security Council
reflects the power balance of the immediate post-war
period. Since then, the membership of the world body
has increased many times over. There is also a greater
diffusion of power. To give the Council’s actions greater
legitimacy, moral authority and political effectiveness, it
is imperative to expand the membership of the Council.
Developing countries must be included in the category of
permanent members to reflect the universal character of
the world body. The number of non-permanent seats
must also be increased to give Member States greater
opportunity for participation in the work of the Council.
A selective, piecemeal expansion of the number of
permanent members would not be prudent. The Security
Council is not a corporate board, where equity shares
determine the voting power, nor can it be likened to the
Bretton Woods institutions, which reflect the wealth of
nations. The United Nations is based on the principle of
15


the sovereign equality of nations. Its primary objective
remains the maintenance of international peace and security.
These elements must find expression in the composition of
the Council, which must be able to address the challenges
of the twenty-first century.
Durability and resilience, rather than expediency,
should determine the time frame of any expansion. On the
basis of any criteria - population, size of economy,
contribution to the maintenance of international peace and
security and to peace-keeping or future potential - India
deserves to be a permanent member of the Security
Council.
The working methods of the Security Council must be
reformed to enhance transparency and to express the
democratic aspirations of the vast majority of Member
States. We hope that the Open-ended Working Group on
the question of increase in the membership of the Security
Council will duly reflect on these issues in its deliberations
next year.
Human rights are the new vogue. The profoundly
humanistic traditions of the Indian civilization, with its
emphasis on tolerance, harmony, non-violence and the
inviolability of the individual, are in-built in our ethos.
Several centuries back, an Indian thinker wrote:
"Man is above everything else. Man is the highest
truth. There is nothing above man."
All human rights are sacrosanct in India, guaranteed
by a secular Constitution, an independent judiciary, a free
press, and public opinion vigorously expressed. India’s
commitment to the promotion and protection of human
rights has now received another institutional impetus with
the establishment of our National Human Rights
Commission, which has begun to function effectively, with
its findings published in its annual report. In keeping with
our policy of transparency we maintain a sustained dialogue
with important non-governmental organizations, which
includes affording greater access to them. We have also
invited the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to visit India.
It is true that much remains to be done on a
worldwide basis to further international cooperation to
promote and protect human rights. But the problem must
be seen in perspective. In India, for instance, we grapple
with the problems of development for 900 million people;
in the north-west and in the north-east we face brutal
terrorist movements, often supported from abroad, which
have killed thousands of innocents, made refugees of
hundreds of thousands within India, and threatened our
sovereignty and territorial integrity. We will face these
problems and defeat them. We welcome the support and
advice of friends abroad, but we cannot accept the
position that all human rights are a privilege of the
terrorists. The rights of innocent and unarmed citizens
must be protected. We urge that the question of human
rights should not be made into a politically motivated
slogan insensitive to the rights of those citizens.
Since the toxin of terrorism is deliberately being
spread by some countries - and none of us is immune -
the international community must come together to defend
itself. Terrorism is fast becoming a means, if not a
weapon, of mass destruction. Many countries have
suffered and many more could be affected. Terrorists
have killed far more people in the last decades than the
chemical and biological weapons which we have agreed
to ban and destroy. Just as the international community
decided that a convention was needed to outlaw those
weapons, so it must urgently negotiate a convention to
counter and eradicate terrorism. We urge the General
Assembly to initiate serious thinking on this subject. The
international community must also provide the necessary
succour to the victims of terrorism, whose numbers are
swelling by the day.
The closing years of the twentieth century will see
human society poised at a critical juncture as regards the
future. Will the end of the cold war mark the beginnings
of a new, more stable global order, of freedom and
well-being growing on the soil of cooperation, consensus
and mutual respect, or will the world instead revert bit by
bit to the mind-set which breeds anarchy and a return to
centrifugalism and destruction, to end up once again in
the tyranny of imposition and domination? Should we
regress to the system of spheres of influence which has
led to so many wars over the last two hundred years?
These questions have still not been adequately answered.
Many years ago the father of our nation, Mahatma
Gandhi, had asked what test should guide human
endeavour. His conclusion, after long years of struggling
on behalf of India’s many dispossessed millions, was as
follows:
"I will give you a talisman. Whenever you are in
doubt, or when the self becomes too much with you,
apply the following test: Recall the face of the
poorest and the weakest man whom you may have
seen, and ask yourself if the step you contemplate is
16


going to be of any use to him. Will he gain anything
by it? Will it restore him to a control over his own
life and destiny?"
If the protection afforded to its weak, its most
dispossessed, people is the measure of community’s worth,
as indeed it must be, then the millions of refugees, and the
conflict, poverty, hunger and deprivation that afflict so
many regions of the world today bear stark testimony to the
loss of some vital ethical underpinning. If the world today
is to redeem a future that seems increasingly mortgaged to
greed and hatred, we must recall once again that it is the
nobility of our means, and the ends we pursue, that
determine our rewards. Our welfare will be determined
only in accordance with the values and principles we abide
by.
As Mahatma Gandhi and sages before have taught and
practised, truthfulness, charity, compassion, non-violence
and treating others as we would wish ourselves to be
treated are the values that really stand the test of time.
These are the values to be inculcated in our great global
Organization, the United Nations, to which we are all
committed.
I should like to congratulate
you, Sir, on your election to the presidency of the General
Assembly. We are pleased that the representative of Côte
d’Ivoire - a nation for which Israel has high regard - has
been elected to this distinguished post. I should like to
express to the Secretary General our deepest appreciation
13


for his contribution to world peace in general, and to peace
in the Middle East in particular.
A year ago, I offered a concept for a new Middle
East. Many applauded; more remained sceptical. What at
that time seemed lofty is today a reality. I feel I can
submit today an invitation to a further journey in the new
Middle East.
Last year was a year of remarkable events. The
Palestinian people, as a result of our agreement, gained
authority in Gaza and Jericho; Jordan and Israel agreed, in
the Washington Declaration, to end the state of war and
move towards an agreement of full peace; voices of
promise are exchanged between Damascus and Jerusalem;
multilateral meetings produced a network of regional
cooperation; Morocco and Israel established formal
relations; and an agenda for a new Middle East will emerge
from an unprecedented economic conference in Casablanca
next month.
The desire for peace is rooted in the millenniums of
Jewish existence. Generations prayed for it, and now a
young generation in Israel is today engaged in making it.
The search for peace is shared by young people all over the
Middle East, Arabs and Israelis alike. We have to fulfil
their hope.
I am addressing this Assembly for the first time, not
as a party to a controversy, but as a representative of a
country that has shown a capacity to solve conflicts that
seemed insoluble.
The United Nations should play an increasing role
facing the changing times. It can define new destinies. It
can adopt new means.
As the United Nations celebrates its fiftieth
anniversary, it may adopt models for new endeavours by
mobilizing builders to construct peace, not just by
deploying troops to keep it. Economic structures will offer
more than military deployment.
Gaza, as an example, has a new authority. It needs a
new economy. The United Nations can provide an answer.
The 7,000 years of Gaza are mainly a history of suffering.
Its population density today is among the highest in the
world.
There is a role for the United Nations in Gaza, and it
has played one. It began by stationing troops - which were
recalled, unfortunately, on the eve of the Six-Day War.
Then UNRWA came and supplied food, health and
education to the refugees. Then UNDP contributed
greatly to the construction of an infrastructure in the Gaza
Strip.
The United Nations can help Gaza today become
free from want. It can introduce there the necessary
economic and proper social institutions. An enlarged
allocation for Gaza, with the existing United Nations
administration, will produce immediate results and may
make Gaza a new model of United Nations endeavours.
The world is moving from military might to social
priorities. It is time to turn from political confrontation
to economic cooperation. In the Middle East, economic
growth can compensate for political compromises.
We no longer live in a closed world. The intensive
flow of information has opened the eyes of many people.
No longer can tyranny blind their perceptions. Iron
curtains can no longer bar the spread of the true story.
Knowledge has finally overcome propaganda.
This current is profound and lasting. The sources of
strength and wealth are today universal rather than
national, intellectual rather than material. The size of the
territory, the number of its people, the wealth of its raw
materials, no longer decide the fate of a nation. It is the
scope of education, the level of science, applied
technology and up-to-date information that make all the
difference.
Intellectual sources are no longer partitioned by
traditional divides. Science has no territorial limits.
Technology has no national flags. Information can travel
without visas. Armies cannot conquer wisdom. Borders
cannot protect knowledge. The talent of creation is
replacing the strategies of destruction. Computers, not
rifles, mark the difference. The hunting season in history
is disappearing.

This does not mean an end to agonies. Starvation,
disease, terrorism, desertification, nuclear weapons,
ecological damage and dangerous drugs overflow the
boundaries of land and the boundaries of reason.
Violence employs new tactics: it has not
disappeared. Confrontations in the future may not
necessarily be wars of conquest, but bloodshed of protest.
14


The strong know that they will not be strengthened by
dominating the poor, or by owning their deserts. The poor
cannot, and will not, comply with their conditions, tolerated
by the indifference of the well-off.
Existing institutions were initiated in a different time.
They are based today on memories rather than on needs.
Ministries of foreign affairs and defence were structured to
confront enemies. Now we face dangers more than
enemies, but without our being organized to handle them.
We are not answering the need. Diplomacy and strategy
should be mobilized to face the undefined dangers. Disease
will not be overcome by traditional diplomatic démarches.
Starvation cannot be eliminated by guns. Deserts will not
bloom beneath air raids. Remedies will not arrive of their
own accord: they should be invented and introduced.
Israel is on the side of this tendency. We are
committed to ending the conflicts. We are determined to
uproot their causes. We do not intend to stop this
momentum or allow its interruption.
For the last five decades the mere existence of Israel
has served as a temptation to try and destroy it. For half a
century we had to give security top priority. To this very
day, we shed tears on the tombs of our children, who paid
with their young lives to overcome the menace. When
wars became futile, suspicion succeeded fighting. The
allegation was that Israel was trying to expand territorially
and was unwilling to compromise geographically. Reality
ended this allegation as well.
Egypt, first to negotiate peace, found an Israel willing
to exchange land for peace. The Palestinians, next in line,
gained jurisdiction over territories they had never controlled
before. With Jordan, we agreed to delineate a permanent
border without one side encroaching on the land of the
other. Syria was told at the outset of negotiations that the
nature of peace would affect the depth of the withdrawal.
Lebanon was told that Israel had no demands on its
territory and no intention of compromising its integrity.
Negotiations have not been easy. With the
Palestinians, we negotiated on uncharted ground. Never
had the Palestinian people experienced self-rule. Today
they possess a territorial address and an administrative
authority. For the first time in their history, their children’s
education is solely in Palestinian hands. In the coming days
Israel will hand over additional responsibilities to the
Palestinian Authority. The Declaration of Principles will be
fully implemented in the spirit and letter. We shall support
a Palestinian readiness to hold democratic elections.
Israel, as well as the Palestinians, may discover that
Palestinian democracy and Israeli security are
complementary. We have demonstrated that we are true
in our moral choice not to govern the destiny of another
people.
We shall continue to negotiate with Syria. We are
negotiating out of conviction, not weakness, and we hope
to conclude the negotiations with a settlement that will
respect the interests of both sides, without harming Syrian
dignity or compromising Israeli security. Syria insists on
a narrow path for the negotiations, postponing meetings
between the leaders and thus slowing the pace of
negotiations. Israel is ready for accelerated negotiations.
We address the Syrians by saying: "Let us talk face to
face. Let us negotiate, as proclaimed in Damascus, with
courage to attain a peace of honour. By ending suspicion,
introducing creativity and allowing flexibility, we can
transform a promising climate into a solid terrain." Syria
declared its strategy for peace. We appreciate it.
Military threats and territorial positions should be
transformed by security arrangements, diplomatic rapport,
full peace and economic endeavours. That will erode the
motivation for conflict. Without peaceful relations,
balances of power are meaningless. The range of
understanding can serve as the only answer to the range
of ballistic missiles.
President Clinton and Secretary of State Christopher
are relentlessly pushing for peace. European, Russian and
many other leaders are genuinely supportive. Important
Middle Eastern leaders are actively engaged in the same
direction. Still, much depends on direct negotiations.
Yesterday’s enemies, tomorrow’s partners, should become
today’s interlocutors.
A peace treaty between Israel and Syria may
produce a historic result greater than just an agreement
between two countries. It may well become the crowning
of a comprehensive peace. It may become an opportunity
for the leaders of the region - Kings, Presidents, Prime
Ministers, supported by the most prominent leaders of our
time - to gather and announce the end of the conflict and
to proclaim full peace throughout the region.
Peace can hardly emerge from stinginess. By
definition, it calls for generosity. Peace is more than a
mere ceremony. It requires ongoing maintenance; it
awaits a passionate cultivation of new relations. We hope
that our neighbours, from Saudi Arabia to Lebanon, from
Djibouti to Algeria, will become constructive partners in
15


it. Dark clouds are still hanging over the horizon - the
shadows of missed opportunities.
We have to build a coalition to prevent subversive
turbulence from undermining legitimate Governments and
harassing the stability needed for the inflow of investment.
All countries of the Middle East face a choice: to remain
politically divided and economically stagnant or to become
economically advanced and politically just.
A high standard of living for the people - all people -
is the best promise for stability in our midst. Israel is
willing to participate in achieving it. There are sceptics, we
know, who do not believe that the Middle East is ripe for
a common market similar to the European one. They forget
that Europe did not do it in one leap. It started with a
Community of coal and steel. We can start with a
community of water and tourism.
Nor do they believe that the Middle East is ready for
a free trade zone like the one in North America. Yet the
North American Free Trade Agreement emerged in a short
while as a success by linking geographic proximity with
economic growth. Those sceptics claim that generations are
needed to cement a new market in the Middle East. Well,
they can see what in 10 short years happened to Asian
countries, which attained unpredicted prosperity. They
achieved it by adopting a market economy.
The profile of a market economy is clear. It is made
of comprehensive education, open borders, free movement,
science-based industries and competitive trade. A market
economy is a fabric woven from political silk and durable
threads of welfare. The time is ripe for its rendezvous with
the Middle East.
At the end of October, under the presidency of King
Hassan II, we shall take the first step to implement a
regional design. We shall try to establish instruments for
development: a regional bank, channels for private
investment and a framework for regional planning. The
wealth of the Middle East should be convinced to remain
at home. Over the last decade it has invested the better
part of its fortunes abroad. Homebound wealth will attract
foreign investment as well.
We should cut the enormous expense - $70 billion
annually - of the arms race. The savings can be directed to
development. The arms race can be reduced only by
regional consent. No single country will do it alone.
To transform the region and make it a stable and
attractive place we need the emergence of the region as
a whole, committed to a new future. Nature, and not
only politics, calls for it. The waters, the winds, the
environment call for regional responsibility and
cooperation, for desalinization plants, energy stations,
highways, railways, runways, piers, telecommunication
networks, high-tech industries, tourism infrastructure,
banking systems, computer terminals and ecological
considerations - a landscape that will meet the future will
create a state of prosperity, and it is a regional challenge.
The Middle East was the cradle of civilization and
has a capacity to contribute. It experienced golden ages,
economically and culturally. It should be our collective
ambition to make it happen again and to make it happen
soon. Today, shortages can be bridged rapidly.
Computers can carry children not only from grade to
grade but from age to age. The software of knowledge
will better replace the hardware of weapons.
I have served my country since its birth. I have
learned that complex problems call for unconventional
solutions. I feel that over the past year we have won a
licence to build a new Middle East, to make it part of the
globe in its new age, free of wars, free of enemies, free
of terrorism; a Middle East which will be nuclear-free,
missile-free, hunger-free, discrimination-free, tyranny-free;
a constituency of peace, a domain of freedom, a land of
prosperity. There is a morning awaiting us after a long
night, calling us to direct our energies and our aims and
our prayers towards that great opportunity.
I should like, first,
to congratulate Mr. Amara Essy of Côte d’Ivoire on his
well-deserved election as President of the General
24


Assembly at its forty-ninth session and to convey to him
our good wishes for every success in his work.
The general debate is our chance, as Members of the
United Nations, to undertake together an annual review of
the Organization’s work - its successes and its failures -
and to identify collectively the issues we want to focus on.
With the fiftieth anniversary next year, there is a pressing
need to do so. That will be the occasion to chart our new
priorities for the twenty-first century.
Our responses to some of today’s challenges and
tragedies have ranged from excellent but often
under-reported to woefully inadequate and, consequently,
defiantly reported.
The peoples of the world want to believe in the United
Nations and what it should achieve. If, however, within
some parts of the Organization we are bereft of purpose
and intentions this golden anniversary threatens to be less
joyous and more muted than many of us anticipated.
New Zealand has a strong vested interest in the United
Nations success, as do most small States. The New
Zealand people have always believed in the United Nations,
in a collective approach to the resolution of global and
regional problems. This has been demonstrated by strong
support for the United Nations by successive Governments.
From our experience of - and I do not hesitate to say
this - a turbulent two years on the Security Council and as
a committed founder Member of the Organization, I would
like to take this opportunity to offer some observations
about the problems we see as players in the collective
decision-making process.
When New Zealand took part in the founding of the
United Nations we and many others saw our primary
purpose as providing for a system of collective security.
Until very recently that was little more than a vision. With
the end of the confrontation between two super-Power
blocs, the goal of "the organized common peace", of which
President Woodrow Wilson spoke so eloquently three
generations ago, presents itself. We must not let it slip
from our grasp this time. It will, however, take real effort
and real determination.
Collective security, or working together, is the
cornerstone of the security of small States. Today they are
the overwhelming majority of the membership of this
Organization. New Zealanders recognize that peace is
indivisible, that remoteness is certainly no safeguard: a
problem in any part of the world can ripple to the Earth’s
farthest corners. While we are the country probably most
distant from the Balkans conflict, we have sent an
enhanced company of soldiers to help in efforts to ease
suffering and, I earnestly hope with the will of the parties
involved, one day bring peace throughout the former
Yugoslavia.
For the same reasons, our defence personnel can be
found engaged in peace-support operations in Africa, the
Middle East, Asia and most recently Haiti. And there are
New Zealand nurses, firefighters and aid workers spread
around the globe in support.
Against this backdrop, however, New Zealanders are
puzzled at times by the way in which the United Nations
carries out some of its important tasks. In Bosnia, despite
the employment of what is by any standards a large, well-
armed and well-trained force, people see on their
television screens nightly the frustration of the United
Nations Protection Force by small groups of irregulars, a
single policeman or even small groups of non-combatants.
In Haiti they witnessed a boat full of Blue Berets turned
away by a small group of pistol-toting thugs
unconvincingly called "attachés".
And what can one say about the appalling tragedy in
Rwanda? How can so much hatred have been unleashed
so viciously, killing hundreds of thousands? What we
watched with horror on our television screens was
destruction on a scale we thought only megaton bombs
were capable of. The systematic slaughter of men,
women and children simply because of their ethnic origin
leaves us all outraged.
There are no easy answers. But the first key to
unlocking the possibilities for a genuine collective
security must be the proper application of the United
Nations Charter. We have to decide at exactly what point
the United Nations should get involved in the
peacemaking operation. Do we recognize a problem, and,
if we do, is the preventive diplomacy that we so firmly
believe in occurring?
In my view, we have to follow the intention of the
Charter. First, at the outset of a crisis, or even the signs
of a crisis, we have to make more serious efforts through
that preventive diplomacy to resolve problems and
conflicts by negotiation. Efforts must be made at an early
25


stage to address the root causes of conflicts by the Security
Council’s exercising all its responsibilities under Chapter VI
of the Charter.
However, on some occasions, in these days of modern
media technology, we face the dilemma caused by the
divergence between what the public perceives as happening
and what is the reality. Extensive media coverage puts
pressure on for immediate response. In the case of
Rwanda, that was appropriate. In other circumstances, the
media oversimplify and ignore the fact that conditions on
the ground are chaotic and United Nations resources are
over-stretched.
A second area where the Charter could be more
carefully applied is when disputes are first placed before
the Council. I believe it should give affected States an
adequate hearing before addressing the problem behind
closed doors. Our experience on the Security Council
suggests the investment in openness that would be achieved
by developing a practice of collectively hearing directly
from the parties involved would be worthwhile, even if it
were done only informally.
In the same vein, the Charter specifically contemplates
the involvement, without vote, of troop-contributing
countries in significant decisions. New Zealand has pressed
this issue for some time, but so far with limited success.
The time is coming, in fact, when the General Assembly
will have to address the question if the Security Council
does not respond adequately to the concerns that have been
raised.
Under the Charter, much is expected of the Council’s
permanent members. There is no doubt that they can and
do contribute greatly to the work of the United Nations.
Leadership and sacrifices by the large Powers were, for
example, instrumental in successfully challenging
aggression against the small State of Kuwait three-and-a-
half years ago.
I emphasize again, however, the importance of the
collective nature of decision-making in the Security
Council. Making distinctions between the views of the
"P5" and the rest is not really healthy. The Council is a
team of 15. It must work together, and by that I mean
giving full weight to the views of all its members. The
strength of the Security Council is enhanced each year by
the vigorous enthusiasm brought by new members on 1
January, testing what may have become an accepted
second-best.
I would remind the Assembly that the Charter
clearly envisages that the norm for operations to maintain
international peace and security will be United Nations
operations. National operations are not ruled out, of
course. I wish therefore to highlight and question recent
trends toward coalitions under national command, and the
implications for the collective security needs of small and
distant countries where no strategic interest is involved.
However, the Security Council will be judged on its
effectiveness. Successes, hopefully, will outweigh
failures, but we all have an obligation to improve the
success rate. I am an enthusiastic supporter of improving
our success rate, but much of that will come down to the
way in which issues are managed. And it is that question
of the management of issues that I wish to address.
In our experience, the key is to use management
tools based on proven modern public- and private-sector
experience. This is very valuable. What are these tools?
And how do we apply them to the conduct of peace-
keeping operations?
I would suggest that there are six critical elements:
first, a sustainable financial system; secondly, a
transparent political accountability; thirdly, clear
objectives that incorporate regular reviews; fourthly, a
clear, unambiguous command and control structure;
fifthly, a credible legal regime that guarantees the security
of United Nations personnel; and, sixthly, the availability
of resources so that objectives can be met quickly and
efficiently.
Let me go back to that first point, a sustainable
financial system. There is no doubt that the Organization
is facing a financial crisis that cannot be ignored. We
have had serious problems with reserves and we have
significant debt to contributing countries. The largest
contributor has indicated that it will unilaterally reduce its
share of funding from October next year. The situation
is not sustainable. It requires urgent action.
Why do we have this crisis? There are some simple
answers. Some members cannot pay; others will not pay;
and some are arguing the legitimacy of their assessment.
The General Assembly, this body, must confront this
issue. The United Nations must stop extending credit to
non-payers. There is enough evidence emerging to
suggest that there may be serious inequities in the present
system.
26


Some countries with extraordinarily strong growth
over the past 5 to 10 years appear in the revised scale
issued by the Committee on Contributions with a constant
or even reduced contribution level. That is not acceptable.
It must be remedied.
We do not want a hollow celebration on the fiftieth
anniversary with a cash crisis hanging over the
Organization. We must make a commitment to resolve this
crisis before the conclusion of the forty-ninth session.
The next point is the need for political accountability.
There is in my view a parallel priority to develop and
improve the Organization’s capacity for undertaking its
collective security responsibilities. To do that we need to
put in place more transparent procedures throughout the
Organization. The management of peace-keeping
operations is allocated to the Secretariat. This is necessary
and appropriate in the same way any Government delegates
responsibility for a complex operation to its public service.
However, and I speak as a politician and as a Minister
responsible for the management and oversight of
Government departments, the days are long gone when a
public service mandarin could run a department or major
operation without detailed political oversight. This is not
a promotion of micro-management, nor am I implying any
criticism of the Secretariat staff. But as any politician
holding executive office in today’s democracies knows, the
classic recipe for a failed project is for those who are
politically accountable to lose track of implementation or to
lose the game plan.
We saw that all too clearly in the past year in
Somalia. Ironically, the Security Council had, in resolution
814 (1993), already foreseen the need in the case of the
United Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM II) for a
detailed political accountability and provided for a
committee to follow the operation closely. But the
committee was never established.
New Zealand has proposed in the Security Council
that a committee or an ad hoc working group should be
established to fill this gap and enhance the accountability of
the Organization to its politically responsible
representatives. I certainly remain hopeful that progress
can be made in this area.
The third point I draw to the attention of members is
the need for clear objectives with regular reviews. Clearer
mission objectives must be developed and kept under
review. I am delighted that some progress has in fact been
made. The Council is now identifying more closely the
terms of mandates for United Nations operations, and it
is becoming usual to build a specific review cycle into its
mandates. But there are still two areas of weakness.
First, there is a great deal of mythology about and
very little sound analysis of the circumstances in which
force should be used by United Nations operations. Many
believe this is governed by the use or non-use of the
words "Chapter VII". This could well be a false
conclusion. The rules of engagement rather than abstract
reference to the Charter are much more likely to
determine actual behaviour in the field.
I am not alone in believing that there is a need to
develop greater commonality in military doctrine for
United Nations peace-keeping operations. This is
especially relevant when so many peace-keeping
contributors are regularly placed side by side in the field.
It is, however, particularly urgent in the face of new-style
operations of the intra-country type where the use of force
by factions, not necessarily Governments, is the challenge
for this body to overcome.
It is clear that common principles are necessary to
guide peace-keepers on the appropriate use of force when
they take part in operations in pursuit of an agreed United
Nations strategic objective. As for the review, while
there are plenty of mid-term reviews there is, as yet, no
systematic process of review at the end of an operation.
The budget of every peace-keeping operation should
include provision, as a principal line item, for the
preparation of a comprehensive review of the operation’s
achievements relative to the mandate set.
Such reviews should be separate from the financial
performance review and should address the substance of
the operation and seek to identify all relevant lessons for
the conduct of future operations.
I address now the question of command and control.
There is a weakness in the command and control
structures and they do need attention. It is true the
personnel of national defence forces which contribute
forces to the United Nations legally remain in their
country’s national service. But as I see it, parallel to the
allocation of responsibility to the United Nations Force
Commander must be a recognition that the national
command structure will not seek to direct their forces in
operational matters. If the national command authority
has serious difficulties, then the appropriate course of
action in all cases - except an emergency - is for the issue
27


to be resolved with United Nations Headquarters. If
resolution is not possible the unit should be withdrawn.
I come to the question of the safety of peace-keeping
personnel. A major requirement for effective collective
security is that countries contributing troops and civilian
personnel should have confidence that their personnel in the
field will have the best possible support to ensure their
safety and security. That is an issue which, as many
members know, New Zealand has pursued relentlessly
during its time on the Council. It bears on the level of
equipment with which the forces are outfitted and there is
plenty of room for improvement.
In addition, the legal regime under which peace-
keeping operations are conducted needs to reflect the
extraordinary personal risk which United Nations personnel
are undertaking on behalf of us all in carrying out collective
security operations. It is right that such personnel should
be differentiated from soldiers in an armed conflict and that
there should be a higher standard of legal responsibility for
anybody who attacks them. I urge all members of the
Assembly to support New Zealand’s initiative on this issue
currently in the Sixth Committee, that the necessary
flexibility be shown on outstanding issues and that we make
a really determined effort to complete work on the draft
convention this year.
The question of resources is always before us. In my
sixth point I would say that a critical tool for effective
collective security is a strategy for resource availability.
The situation we all saw recently in Rwanda is a classic
case. Human resources were available but they lacked
training and they lacked equipment. But there is also the
need for a capacity in all peace-keeping operations for a
forceful response in self-defence. There are important
lessons to be learned from the troop losses in Rwanda last
April and again I draw attention to the linkage between
mandates, rules of engagement, doctrine and planning.
The United Nations will have to go beyond the current
work being done on stand-by forces to address this
problem.
We believe that there is a case for redirecting a
substantial portion of bilateral military assistance into forms
of training that would better assist defence forces with the
requirements of peace-keeping operations.
There is also a role for the United Nations maintaining
the physical equivalent of the peace-keeping reserve fund
that it is supposed to have on the financial side now. A
quick start-up capability, with owned or leased equipment
immediately available to the United Nations, would have
made a significant difference in the Rwanda situation.
This is a practical and feasible step that can be taken to
ensure that future collective security can in fact rise to the
challenge.
I have spoken about the factors that need to be taken
into account in managing peace-keeping operations. I
now wish to address the terms of their engagements.
The United Nations should not be expected to take
responsibility for a situation of up to 30 years because the
parties to a conflict are unable or unwilling to summon up
the necessary political will to reach a settlement. There
comes a point when the parties must take their fate in
their own hands rather than the Council avoiding the hard
decisions just by rolling over the mandates.
At the same time, a range of different considerations
should prevail when the United Nations reaches the end
of a successful peace-keeping process. The United
Nations cannot simply walk away when a perceived end
point - such as an election - has been achieved, because
there may still be outstanding issues that need the
ongoing support of the operation, such as humanitarian
operations or local capability-building programmes to help
provide the required sound administration.
The United Nations deserves congratulations on its
achievements in Cambodia, for example, but the future
there is still not certain, and the United Nations must
maintain its responsibilities. Rehabilitation in that country
must continue.
Another example of a situation in which
peacemaking and peace-building have to be seen as a
coherent whole is in the area of demining. This is a
critically important humanitarian function. New
Zealand’s military forces have had a lot of experience in
helping the United Nations with demining in Afghanistan,
Cambodia and, most recently, Mozambique.
The Security Council Mission that visited
Mozambique about two months ago reported its dismay
at the delays and at the state of the programme generally.
At the request of the United Nations, New Zealand
stepped in early in August and began the rescue effort for
the programme. The wheel should not have had to be
reinvented. It is a concern that lessons learned from
earlier operations such as Afghanistan and Cambodia do
not appear to be retained. Having seen firsthand the
28


effects of mines in Cambodia, I do believe we should move
more expeditiously than the speed of the present
performance.
New Zealand certainly looks forward to working with
other delegations to improve performance in this area, and
I would certainly add that my Government was most
interested in the comments President Clinton made here
yesterday about the proposal for the elimination of the
world’s 85 million anti-personnel land-mines. This is an
urgent task. No one who has seen firsthand the human cost
of mines can offer anything less than full cooperation to
this end.
Finally, when we look ahead to what would really
enhance proper use of the collective security powers, we
have to conclude that reform of the Security Council is a
major task waiting to be fulfilled. Many of the things I
have discussed today require reforms by the Security
Council, or at least in conjunction with it. But I cannot
escape the conclusion that even if all of these were
accomplished, the political legitimacy of the Security
Council could still erode over a period of time. Ultimately
it could lose the credibility vital to the role it carries out.
Collective security requires the Council to be
genuinely representative of the entire United Nations
membership. We have, of course, as many others have
done, followed the debate on Security Council reform in the
Open-ended Working Group set up last year. We hear the
case made for additional permanent members. We also
hear overwhelming support for expanding the number of
non-permanent members of the Council. There are shades
of difference on the numbers for the total membership, but
consensus does seem to be emerging around five or six new
members. We consider that a limited expansion of the
number of members, paying regard to an equitable
geographical participation, is still a priority for the health
of the Organization. It is time to do what is achievable and
what benefits most Members. Given the need for 122
ratifications, we are aware that even a simple expansion,
hopefully adopted next year, will take several years to come
into force. It would not be unrealistic, therefore, for the
year 2000 to see the first meeting of the expanded Council.
There is no worth in being critical of some aspects of
the United Nations without believing, as I do, that the
problems can be cured. We, all 184 of us, are its doctors,
and we need to act quickly. We need to apportion our
costs fairly and systematically. We need to share peace-
keeping tasks, peace-keeping funding and peace-keeping
supplies. We need to accept the democratic decisions of
this Organization. We also need to adjust to the more
complex and interrelated United Nations agendas of the
future.
I therefore leave with the Assembly New Zealand’s
assurance of a renewed commitment to this unique and
essential body and of our willingness to work in that
spirit to ensure the continued relevance of the United
Nations for the next half-century.
At the
very outset I would like to congratulate you, Mr. Amara
Essy, on your election to the high post of President of the
General Assembly at its current session. I view this as a
sign of recognition of your country’s authority in the
international community.
The United Nations is approaching its fiftieth
anniversary, and the entire world has grown older along
with it. What is the world like nowadays? Has it become
better? Has it become wiser? And, most important, what
will the present generation leave behind to its successors?
No State, no people can be indifferent to these
questions. Here in the United Nations we must find
answers to them. This is particularly important for
Russia. We are trying to understand what kind of world
we want to live in, and exactly what kind of world we
should spare no effort to build.
The new Russia was born in 1991 as a democratic
State. Its birth was witnessed by the entire world.
For several years now we have been engaged in a
tremendous, and painstaking task, the essence of which is
to remove the legacy of totalitarianism and the cold war.
Freedom has come to Russia. The people have
obtained fundamental civil rights long denied them.
Profound economic reform is in progress in Russia. A
free market economy is being put into effect. Thus, each
of our new success stories reinforces Russian democracy.
Russia has decisively drawn a final line under the
Second World War. Our forces have been withdrawn
from Germany, Central Europe and the Baltic States. Of
its own accord, and at great effort, Russia has removed
any threat to the security of other States.
Furthermore, our country, through its own efforts,
has promoted the end of confrontation in Europe, setting
up new security structures there, not only for a select
number, the chosen but for all. The Conference on
Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) should
become a powerful driving force in that process.
1


We expect there to be more understanding on the part
of our partners with regard to the problems of security in
Russia. We count on their ability to overcome the old
suspicion inherent in a world divided into blocs, suspicion
that is now unjustified.
Russia is undergoing changes and regaining its
identity, but in every respect it remains a great Power.
Russia is ready for equal cooperation within the framework
of the international community, which should in turn accept
an active, open Russia.
We would like nuclear weapons and other kinds of
weapons of mass destruction to cease to exist. Efficient
control over the non-proliferation of the technologies for
their production is imperative.
Russia needs a world without wars and armed conflicts
and without environmental calamities. We favour the
development of international economic ties without
discrimination. Russia stands for a world capable of
combating terrorism, drug-trafficking and other types of
international crime.
To make such gigantic changes possible, efforts by all
the Members of the United Nations will be required. There
is no room for either soloists or supernumeraries.
Naturally, we cannot do without new relations between
the two major nuclear Powers. I am convinced that the
entire world has a vital stake in the establishment of a
strategic partnership between Russia and the United States.
I am ready for a serious and fruitful dialogue with President
Bill Clinton, who today gave an optimistic forecast of our
interaction.
Russia’s economic and foreign-policy priorities lie in
the countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS), the former Republics of the Soviet Union. Russia’s
ties with them are closer than the traditional relations of
good-neighbourliness; we have, rather, an extraordinary
blood relationship. In virtually all the CIS countries today
there is a growing desire for closer cooperation and a
genuine, rather than merely proclaimed, integration. Its
foundation will be good will and mutual benefit.
Attempts to use the contradictions between the CIS
States for selfish ends are extremely short-sighted.
Conflicts in a number of CIS countries threaten not only
the security of our State, but also security at the regional
and global levels.
We are acutely interested in the active participation
of the world community in settling these difficult
problems. However, the main peace-keeping burden in
the territory of the former Soviet Union sits is being
borne by the Russian Federation.
Our efforts have not been fruitless. A solid truce
has already been established in Moldova. The peace
process in Georgia is developing; hope of stopping the
bloodshed in Nagorny Karabakh is already emerging and
initial agreements on Tajikistan have also been reached.
Everybody knows how difficult life is for millions of
Russians in newly independent States; it is not a time for
complacency. Once they were in their own home, but
now they are guests - and not always welcome ones.
We cannot remain indifferent to the fate of our
countrymen. I an not referring to special rights or
privileges. But the people in Russia will not understand
if I do not state here and now that the democratic States
have to prove through their actions that guaranteeing
human rights is indeed the cornerstone of their foreign
policy. And in this area neither a selective approach nor
double standards are permissible.
Two years ago the General Assembly adopted the
Declaration on the rights of national minorities. At this
session we propose to come to an agreement on the
principles of that Declaration being embodied in the
legislation of all United Nations Member States.
Russia makes no distinction between settling its
problems and the problems of others. That is why we
particularly highly value what is done within the United
Nations.
The world is now at a crossroads. The tragedy of
the struggle of two opposing blocs is finally over. The
delicate balance based on power, fear and mutual
intimidation has disappeared for ever.
But the world is still not stable. The changes that
are taking place entail not only hopes for a better future,
but also profound anxieties.
It is not only Russia that is trying to respond to the
emerging challenges. To a certain degree, the united
Germany, Japan, the United States and other countries of
the West face the same problem. The same applies
equally to many countries in Asia, Africa and Latin
America.
2


The fundamental changes in international relations are
accompanied by the emergence of new problems. More
and more countries see strengthening the effectiveness of
inter-State structures as the solution. At the same time, this
does not always prevent an increase in the activity of those
who hold separatist and nationalist aspirations.
A veritable floodgate of regional and local conflicts,
national, tribal and religious enmity and economic, social
and political confrontations has been opened wide. The
bleeding wound in Bosnia has not healed. It is a tragic
paradox that in the wake of the cold war in Europe hotbeds
of war have flared up there anew.
The unprecedented tragedy in Rwanda resounds
painfully in the hearts of all people. This has proved to be
a defeat for us all.
But let us look around. Are there not other parts of
the world where more refined and civilized unlawful actions
are being taken against national and cultural minorities?
Are their rights and their security not threatened? Have
racism and anti-Semitism disappeared? Is there no longer
any discrimination against those who are categorized as
non-indigenous?
When aggressive nationalism is made into State policy
it is a grave danger for all mankind.
These problems are all the more urgent today because
the threat of local conflicts has not waned.
Each of these conflicts could cause a veritable
avalanche of geopolitical changes all over the world.
The cold war is over, but its material infrastructure -
the mountains of arms and the military-industrial complexes
of the developed countries - still remain. The spread of
nuclear weapons could make them into instruments of
terror. Huge amounts of weapons have been dumped onto
international markets. Unfortunately, vested interests
frequently prevail over the awareness of the danger implicit
in this process. In fact, this is nothing but an arms race
that has simply been transferred to the developing countries
through the market.
The worsening ecological crisis and the proliferation
of AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome) and other
dangerous diseases are also realities at the close of this
twentieth century.
The lessons of history can be learned only with great
difficulty. Obsession with the idea of supremacy is
extremely dangerous. The pathological failure to accept
something different has time and again resulted in
numerous ethnic and religious problems and conflicts.
The fear of open political territory wind up once again
with a "cordon sanitaire" or "iron curtain".
Let us be honest: equality, partnership, mutual
benefit and cooperation still remain, to a large extent,
words used to cover State egotism. Such a situation
indicates an urgent need to develop a solid system of
security on the basis of principles and mechanisms of
cooperation on the part of everyone, and a need for the
reform of international institutions. Such a system should
be in keeping with the new conditions that now prevail
and should function under the auspices of the United
Nations.
As a specific contribution towards the establishment
of such a system, I would propose the following
measures.
First, we must speed up the negotiations on the
conclusion of a comprehensive nuclear test-ban treaty.
Russia advocates the signing of this treaty next year,
when we celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the United
Nations. We should also give thought to further steps to
limit Russian and American strategic nuclear weapons in
order to make it possible eventually to renounce the
inherited "balance of terror" based on mutual nuclear
deterrence.
Secondly, we must extend non-proliferation measures
to cover weapons of mass destruction. Next spring, when
the Conference of the States Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons takes place, it is
essential to adopt a decision to the effect that the treaty
should be open-ended and of unlimited duration. No one
has the right to deny this. In this context, we believe that
the non-nuclear-weapon States will need to be given
additional and more precise security assurances. We
propose the holding in the near future of a special
meeting of the Security Council, at the Foreign Minister
level, to coordinate and adopt a new resolution on
so-called "positive" security assurances.
Thirdly, we should launch a multilateral debate on
the issues with regard to the regulation of the
international traffic in weaponry and military equipment.
Moreover, there is an urgent need for all nuclear-weapon
States to participate in the process of the control and
3


limitation of nuclear weapons. We propose that a treaty on
nuclear security and strategic stability be elaborated by the
five nuclear-weapon States. Such a treaty could provide for
cessation of the production of fissionable materials for
military purposes, for prohibition of the recycling of
fissionable materials for weapons purposes and for further
elimination of nuclear weapons and the reduction of their
means of delivery.
Fourthly, it would be advisable to open discussions on
regional programmes to strengthen peace and security.
Regional security systems are being formed even now: I
am thinking particularly of the treaty on collective security
between the members of the Commonwealth of Independent
States (CIS) of the former Soviet Union. We believe that
at the present stage that the United Nations could direct its
efforts towards coordinating the process of building up
regional security systems.
Finally, the experience of recent years demonstrates
that the renunciation of the arms race is a complicated and
highly expensive process. Conversion of the military
industry gives rise to extremely difficult economic and
social problems that have to be dealt with, particularly as
they relate to the elimination of chemical and
bacteriological weapons. In this context, it is important to
pool the efforts of the international community. Such
cooperation among States would help to enhance the level
of mutual trust. In 1996, it might be possible to hold a
conference, under the auspices of the United Nations, on
international cooperation in the field of conversion.
Implementation of these measures will enable us to
substantially stabilize the situation in the world. However,
from the long-term point of view, these measures will not
be sufficient.
The former purely military understanding of the
concept of "security" has today become obsolete. The
range of problems faced by mankind is much wider than it
was. The modern definition of security is inseparable from
the notion of stable development.
The world is urgently in need of a strategy for the
twenty-first century - a strategy of mutual responsibility.
The most important points of reference for such a strategy
could be defined as follows:
- Stable economic and social development, not
only for individual regions and States but,
indeed, for the entire planet as a single entity.
People themselves must assume the
responsibility of carrying out this immense task;
- The renunciation of diktat by the powerful
vis-à-vis the weak. Any country, whether large
or small, should be aware of its responsibility
for the maintenance of order based on law and
morality;
- The unconditional recognition of human rights,
including the rights of national minorities. In
view of the great diversity of cultures,
traditions and the historical experience of
countries and peoples, fundamental human
rights are a universal value and we cannot
permit them to be devalued;
- Strengthening the ecological security of
mankind. The world is now facing a most
serious crisis because of the deficit of
resources, deterioration of the natural
environment, and many other negative trends.
Common sense and the instinct for survival tell
us to stop exploiting our depleting resources to
the detriment of nature, society and mankind.
Russia supports the programme on Global
education and observation to preserve the
environment. Moreover, this programme is
entirely consistent with the strategy of shared
responsibility. We intend to participate
actively in its implementation.
At the same time, I should like to emphasize that
only a profound understanding, on the part of each
participant in international cooperation, of his or her
individual responsibility can engender a common sense of
responsibility for the world situation.
To paraphrase a well known expression we could
say that the United Nations is a good idea whose time has
finally come. I should like in particular to note the great
personal contribution of the United Nations Secretary-
General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, to the cause of
advocating peace and settling regional conflicts.
If the United Nations is to achieve maximum
effectiveness in the twenty-first century, it must undergo
a well-thought-out reform.
Obviously, changes will be required both at
Headquarters and in the functioning of the specialized
agencies. Also, it will be impossible to avoid changes in
4


the Security Council, which should remain sufficiently
compact and an effective functioning body. This is
especially important because, according to the Charter, the
Security Council bears primary responsibility for supporting
and maintaining world peace and security.
We have to strike a new balance of law, morality and
force in world politics. The United Nations could play a
decisive role in these efforts in accordance with the Charter.
Russia stands ready, as provided in Article 43 of the
Charter, to enter into an agreement with the Security
Council to make available national military contingents for
United Nations operations. If a sufficient number of other
States follows this lead, then it could be possible to go
ahead with the realization of the concept of United Nations
stand-by forces.
The Military Staff Committee has already been
formally in existence for several decades. According to the
Charter its function is "to advise and assist the Security
Council on all questions relating to the Security Council’s
military requirements". Let them finally do just that.
The pertinent task now will be to work out a strategy
of peace-keeping, conflict and crisis prevention and, if
necessary, operations on peace enforcement.
Through specific actions, Russia has shown support
for United Nations efforts aimed at setting up efficient
mechanisms of response to humanitarian emergencies. We
stand ready to cooperate with all countries anxious to
reinforce the capability of the world community to produce
a rapid humanitarian response.
Because the problems we are increasingly
encountering are multifaceted, they require adequate
solutions. The question is not about who should enjoy
more rights - the United Nations, the regional structures or
States. The future world system can be truly durable only
if it is possible to find efficient and effective mechanisms
to address problems at all levels - national, regional and
global. Sharing responsibility will make it possible for the
United Nations to remain flexible and a pragmatic and
effective structure and enable it to focus its efforts on the
solution of the genuinely key problems faced by mankind.
Russia believes that these are all fundamental issues
that have a direct bearing on the fate of the world
community. Both the authority of the United Nations and
the future of world politics as a whole will depend on the
way these issues are dealt with.
People have always sought stability, happiness and
prosperity. But history provides evidence of the fact that
these goals cannot be achieved with the help of brute
force alone. Once again we become acutely aware of this
fact now that we are approaching a sacred date for
mankind: the fiftieth anniversary of the end of the
Second World War and the restoration of peace.
Let us remember with gratitude those who gave their
lives for this great victory. Let 1995 become the
universal year of commemoration of the victims of the
Second World War.
For the sake of those living and those who have not
yet been born, we must preserve peace and establish
stability on our planet. Mankind should finally feel that
it is at home, a home which is both kind and reliable.
Our civilization has always been varied. It is
precisely in the variety of cultures, traditions and values
that the possibility of development is basically found.
At this time, we have reached a stage when different
interests and aspirations of peoples can be achieved only
through cooperation among them.
The world community should make every possible
effort to ensure that its policies are embodied in the new
thinking about the influence of States, national pride and
patriotism.
The United Nations is a child of the world. Fifty
years ago when the Second World War was in progress,
it became abundantly clear that the future of mankind is
to be found in the realm of cooperation and tolerance
rather than aggression and hatred.
Cooperation and tolerance are prerequisites for the
next century.
This is the most important condition for there to be
a worthy future for our planet.
This is a unique opportunity that has been given to
the human race.
I believe that the United Nations, in fulfilment of its
general responsibility, will not allow us to pass it up, and
I hope that the great dream of peace to which all peoples
and States aspire to will take its due place in the life of
our planet.
Let me first congratulate you, Mr.
President, on your election as President of the General
Assembly for its forty-ninth session. The American people
look forward to working with you to celebrate the United
Nations fiftieth anniversary.
We meet today at a time of great hope and change.
The end of the cold war, the explosion of technology and
trade and enterprise have given people the world over new
opportunities to live up to their dreams and their God-given
potential. This is an age of hope -yet in this new world,
we face a contest as old as history.
It is a struggle between freedom and tyranny; between
tolerance and bigotry; between knowledge and ignorance;
between openness and isolation. It is a fight between those
who would build free societies governed by laws and
those who would impose their will by force.
Our struggle today - in a world more high-tech,
more fast-moving, more chaotically diverse than ever - is
the age-old fight between hope and fear.
Three times in this century - from the trenches of the
Somme to the island of Iwo Jima to the shattered Wall in
Berlin - the forces of hope were victorious. But the
victors of the First World War squandered their triumph
when they turned inward, bringing on a global depression,
and allowing fascism to rise and reignite global war.
After the Second World War, the Allies learned the
lesson of the past. In the face of a new totalitarian threat
and the nuclear menace, great nations did not walk away
from the challenge of the moment. Instead they chose to
reach out, to rebuild and to lead. They chose to create the
United Nations and they left us a world stronger, safer
and freer.
Our generation has a difficult task: the cold war is
over. We must secure the peace. It falls to us to avoid
the complacency that followed the First World War -
without the spur of the imminent threat to our security
that followed the Second World War.
We must ensure that those who fought and found the
courage to end the cold war - those from both East and
West who loved freedom - did not labour in vain. Our
sacred mission is to build a new world for our children -
more democratic, more prosperous, more free of ancient
hatreds and modern means of destruction.
That is no easy challenge; but we accept it with
confidence. After all, the walls that once divided nations
in this very Hall have come down. More nations have
chosen democracy than ever before. More have chosen
free markets and economic justice. More have embraced
the values of tolerance and liberty and civil society that
allow us all to make the most of our lives.
But while the ideals of democracy and free markets
are ascendant, they are surely not the whole story.
Terrible examples of chaos, repression and tyranny also
mark our times. The twentieth century has proved that
the forces of freedom and democracy can endure against
great odds; our job is to see that in the twenty-first
century these forces triumph.
6


The dangers we face are less stark and more diffuse
than those of the cold war, but they are still formidable:
the ethnic conflicts that drive millions from their homes;
the despots ready to repress their own people or conquer
their neighbours; the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction; the terrorists wielding their deadly arms; the
criminal syndicates selling those arms, or drugs, infiltrating
the very institutions of fragile democracies; a global
economy that offers great promise but also deep insecurity,
and in many places declining opportunity; diseases like
AIDS that threaten to decimate nations; the combined
dangers of population explosion and economic decline,
which prompted the world community to reach the
remarkable consensus at the Cairo Conference; global and
local environmental threats that demand that sustainable
development become a part of the lives of people all
around the world; and, finally, within many of our nations,
high rates of drug abuse and crime and family breakdown,
with all their terrible consequences. These are the dangers
we face today.
We must address these threats to our future.
Thankfully, the end of the cold war gives us a chance to
address them together. In our efforts, different nations may
be active in different situations in different ways, but their
purposes must be consistent with freedom and their
practices consistent with international law. Each nation will
bring to our common task its own particular strengths -
economic, political or military.
Of course, the first duty of every Member of the
United Nations is to its own citizens, to their security, their
welfare and their interests. As President of the United
States, my first duty is to the citizens of my country.
When our national security interests are threatened, we will
act with others when we can, but alone if we must. We
will use diplomacy when we can, but force if we must.
The United States recognizes that we also have a
special responsibility in these common endeavours that we
are undertaking, the responsibility that goes along with
great power and also with our long history of democracy
and freedom. But we seek to fulfil that responsibility in
cooperation with other nations. Working together increases
the impact and the legitimacy of each of our actions, and
sharing the burdens lessens everyone’s load. We have no
desire to be the world’s policeman, but we will do what we
can to help civil societies emerge from the ashes of
repression, to sustain fragile democracies, to add more free
markets to the world, and of course to restrain the
destructive forces that threaten us all.
In every corner of the globe, from South Africa to
Asia, to Central and Eastern Europe, to the Middle East
and Latin America, and now to a small island in the
Caribbean, ordinary citizens are striving to build their
own future. Promoting their cause is our generation’s
great opportunity, and we must do it together. A
coalition for democracy is good for America.
Democracies, after all, are more likely to be stable, less
likely to wage war; they strengthen civil society and can
provide people with the economic and political
opportunities to build their futures in their own homes -
not to flee their borders.
Our efforts to help build more democracies will
make us all more secure, more prosperous and more
successful as we try to make this era of terrific change
our friend, and not our enemy. In my nation, as in all of
your nations, there are many people who are
understandably reluctant to undertake these efforts
because often the distances are great or the cultures are
different. There are good reasons for the caution that
people feel. Often, the chances of success or its costs are
unclear. And, of course, in every common endeavour
there is always the potential for failure and often the risk
of loss of life.
And yet our people - as we have seen in the
remarkable global response to the terrible crisis in
Rwanda - genuinely want to help their neighbours around
the world and to make some effort in our common cause.
We have seen that progress can be made as well. The
problem is deciding when we must respond and how we
shall overcome our reluctance. This will never be easy.
There are no simple formulas. All of us will make these
decisions in part based on the distance of the problem
from our shores, the interests of our nation, the difference
we think we can make, the costs required, or the threat to
our own citizens in the endeavour.
Hard questions will remain, and cannot be erased by
some simple formula. But we should have the confidence
that these efforts can succeed, whether they are efforts to
keep people alive in the face of terrible tragedy, as in
Rwanda, or our efforts to avert a tragedy, as in the Horn
of Africa, or our efforts to support processes that are
literally changing the future of millions. History is on
our side. We should have confidence about this. Look
at the march of freedom we have seen in the last year
alone. Who, a decade ago, would have dared predict the
startling changes in South Africa, in the Middle East and
in Ireland; the stunning triumph of democracy and
majority rule and the redemption of the purpose of Nelson
7


Mandela’s life; the brave efforts of Israel and its Arab
neighbours to build bridges of peace between their peoples;
the earnest search by the people of Northern Ireland and
Great Britain and Ireland to end centuries of division and
decades of terror? In each case, credit belongs to those
nations’ leaders and their courageous people. But in each
instance the United States and other nations were privileged
to help in these causes.
The growth of cooperation between the United States
and the Russian Federation also should give us all great
cause for confidence. This is a partnership that is rooted in
democracy, a partnership that is working, a partnership of,
not complete agreement, but genuine mutual respect. After
so many years of nuclear terror, our two nations are taking
dramatic steps to ease tensions around the world. For the
first time since the Second World War, foreign troops do
not occupy the nations of Central and Eastern Europe. The
Baltic nations are free. Russian and American missiles no
longer target each other’s people. Three of the four nuclear
members of the former Soviet Union have agreed to
remove all nuclear weapons from their soil. And we are
working on agreements to halt production of fissile
materials for nuclear explosives; to make dismantling of
nuclear warheads transparent and irreversible; and further
to reduce our nuclear weapons and delivery vehicles.
The United States and Russia also recognize that we
must cooperate to control the emerging danger of terrorists
who traffic in nuclear materials. To secure nuclear
materials at their sources, we have agreed with Russia to
stop plutonium production by the year 2000; to construct a
storage facility for fissile materials and buy up stocks of
weapons-grade fuel; and to combat the criminals who are
trying to smuggle materials for nuclear explosives. Our
two nations and Germany have increased cooperation and
engaged in joint anti-terrorist training. Soon, under the
leadership of our Federal Bureau of Investigation, we will
open a law enforcement training academy in Europe, where
police will learn how to combat more effectively trafficking
of nuclear weapons components, as well as the drug trade,
organized crime and money laundering.
The United States will also advance a wide-ranging
non-proliferation agenda: a global convention to halt
production of fissile materials; efforts to curb North
Korea’s nuclear ambitions; transparent procedures for
dismantling nuclear warheads; and our work to ban testing
and to extend the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. And today I am proposing a first step
toward the eventual elimination of a less visible but still
deadly threat: the world’s 85 million anti-personnel land-
mines - one for every 50 persons on the face of the earth.
I ask all nations concerned to join with us and conclude
an agreement to reduce the number and availability of
those mines. Ridding the world of those often hidden
weapons will help to save the lives of tens of thousands
of men, women and innocent children in the years to
come.
Our progress in the last year also provides
confidence that in the post-cold-war years we can adapt
and construct global institutions that will help to provide
security and increase economic growth throughout the
world. Since I spoke here last year, 22 nations have
joined the Partnership for Peace of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO). The first joint exercises
have been conducted, helping to give Europe the chance
to become a more unified continent in which democratic
nations live within secure borders. In Asia, security talks
and economic cooperation will lead to further stability.
By reducing nations’ fears about their borders and
allowing them to spend less on military defences, our
coalition for democracy can give nations in transition a
better chance to offer new freedoms and opportunities to
their own people. It is time that we think anew about the
structures of this global economy as well, tearing down
walls that separate nations instead of hiding behind them.
At the Group of Seven meeting at Naples this year
we committed ourselves to this task of renewal, to re-
examining the economic institutions that have served us
so well in the past. In the interests of shared prosperity,
the United States actively promotes open markets.
Though still in its infancy, the North American Free
Trade Agreement has dramatically increased trade
between the United States and Mexico and has produced
in the United States alone an estimated 200,000 new jobs.
It offers a model to nations throughout the Americas
which we hope to build on. And this week I will send
legislation to the Congress to implement the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), the largest
trade agreement in all of history. GATT - and its
successor, the World Trade Organization - holds the
promise for all of us of increased exports, higher wages
and improved living standards. In the months and years
to come we will work no less to extend the reach of open
markets, starting with the Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation Council and the Summit of the Americas
later this year.
Here at the United Nations we must develop a
concrete plan to meet the challenges of the next 50 years
even as we celebrate the last 50 years. I believe we
8


should declare next year’s fiftieth anniversary not just a
year of celebration but a year of renewal. We call on the
Secretary-General to name a working group so that by the
time we meet next year we will have a concrete action plan
to revitalize the obligations of the United Nations to address
the security, economic and political challenges ahead -
obligations we must all be willing to assume.
Our objectives should include ready, efficient and
capable United Nations peace-keeping forces, and I am
happy to report that, as I pledged last year and thanks to
support in the United States Congress, $1.2 billion is now
available from the United States for this critical account.
We must also pledge to keep United Nations reform
moving forward so that we do more with less, and we must
improve our ability to respond to urgent needs. Let me
suggest that it is time for the members of the Assembly to
consider seriously President Menem’s suggestion for the
creation of a civilian rapid-response capability for
humanitarian crises.
And let us not lose sight of the special role that
development and democracy can play in preventing
conflicts once peace has been established. Never before
has the United Nations been in a better position to achieve
the democratic goals of our founders. The end of the cold
war has freed us from decades of paralysing divisions. And
we all know that multilateral cooperation is not only
necessary to address the new threats we face but possible
to succeed.
The efforts we have undertaken together in Haiti are
a prime example. Under the sponsorship of the United
Nations, American troops, now being joined by the
personnel of an ever-growing international coalition of over
two dozen nations, are giving the people of Haiti their
chance at freedom. Creative diplomacy, the influence of
economic power and the credible threat of military force -
all have contributed to this moment of opportunity.
Essential civil order will be restored. Human rights
violations will be curbed. The first refugees will be
returning within hours, on this day. The military leaders
will step down. The democratic Government will be
restored. President Aristide will return. The multinational
mission will turn its responsibilities over to the United
Nations mission, which will remain in Haiti throughout
1995, until a new president is elected. During this time a
multinational development effort will make available more
than $1 billion to begin helping the Haitians rebuild their
country. In the spirit of reconciliation and reconstruction,
President Aristide yesterday called for the immediate easing
of sanctions so that the work of rebuilding can begin
immediately. Accordingly, I intend to act expeditiously,
within Security Council resolutions 917 (1994) and 940
(1994) to enable us to restore health care, water and
electrical services, construction materials for humanitarian
efforts, and communications, agricultural and educational
materials.
Today I am also announcing that the United States
will suspend all unilateral sanctions against Haiti except
those that affect the military leaders and their immediate
supporters. This will include regularly scheduled air
flights when the airport becomes available, financial
transactions and travel restrictions. I urge all other
nations to do the same.
In Haiti, the United States has demonstrated that it
would lead a multinational force when our interests are
plain, when the cause is right, when the mission is
achievable and the nations of the world stand with us.
But Haiti’s people will have to muster the strength and
the patience to travel the road of freedom. They have to
do this for themselves. Every new democratic nation is
fragile. But we will see the day when the people of Haiti
fulfil their aspirations to liberty and when they are once
again making genuine economic progress.
United Nations actions in Bosnia, like those in Haiti,
demonstrate that progress can be made when a coalition
backs up diplomacy with military power. For the first
time ever, NATO has taken, since we met last year,
military actions beyond the territory of its members. The
threat of NATO air power helped to establish the
exclusion zone around Sarajevo and to end the Bosnian
Serbs’ spring offensive against Gorazde. NATO’s
February ultimatum boosted our mediation efforts, which
helped to end the war between the Bosnian Government
and the Bosnian Croats and forged a federation between
those two communities. To that extent the situation in
Bosnia has improved, but in recent weeks the situation
around Sarajevo has deteriorated substantially, and
Sarajevo once again faces the prospect of strangulation.
A new resolve by the United Nations to enforce its
resolutions is now necessary to save Sarajevo, and NATO
stands ready to act.
The situation in Bosnia is yet another reminder of
the greatest irony of this century we are leaving. This
century, so full of hope and opportunity and achievement,
has also been an age of deep destruction and despair. We
cannot help but remember the millions who gave their
lives during two world wars and the half century of
9


struggle by men and women in the East and West who
ultimately prevailed in the name of freedom.
But we must also think of our children and the world
we will leave them in the twenty-first century. History has
given us a very rare opportunity - the chance to build on
the greatest legacy of this century without reliving its
darkest moments. And we have shown that we can carry
forward humanity’s ancient quest for freedom to build a
world where democracy knows no borders but where
nations know their borders will always be secure, a world
that gives all people the chance to realize their potential and
to live out their dreams.
It surely must be one of the
great ironies of our age that this Assembly is being
addressed, for the first time in its 49 years’ history, by a
South African Head of State drawn from among the
African majority of what is an African country.
Future generations will find it strange in the extreme
that it was only so late in the twentieth century that it was
possible for our delegation to take its seat in the
Assembly, recognized both by our people and by the
nations of the world as the legitimate representative of the
people of our country.
It is indeed most welcome that the Organization will
mark its fiftieth anniversary next year with the apartheid
system vanquished and consigned to the past. That
historic change has come about not least because of the
great efforts in which the United Nations engaged to
ensure the suppression of the apartheid crime against
humanity. Even as it was still in the process of
establishing its institutions, the United Nations was
confronted by the challenge of the accession to power of
the party of apartheid domination in our country.
Everything that that system stood for represented the very
opposite of all the noble purposes for which the
Organization was established. Because apartheid reduced
and undermined the credibility of the United Nations as
an effective international instrument to end racism and
secure the fundamental human rights of all peoples, the
establishment and consolidation of apartheid constituted
a brazen challenge to the very existence of the
Organization.
6
General Assembly 14th meeting
Forty-ninth session 3 October 1994
The United Nations was born out of the titanic
struggle against nazism and fascism, with their pernicious
doctrines and practices of racial superiority and genocide.
It therefore could not stand by while, in South Africa, a
similar system was being established by a Government
which also had the temerity to claim representation within
the United Nations.
We believe that it was indeed of great importance to
the universal efficacy of, and respect for, the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and the United Nations
Charter that the United Nations should have spurned the
pleas of the apartheid regime that the gross violation of
human rights in South Africa was a domestic matter of no
legal or legitimate concern to the world body.
We stand here today to salute the United Nations and
its Member States, both singly and collectively, for joining
forces with the masses of our people in a common struggle
that has brought about our emancipation and pushed back
the frontiers of racism.
The millions of our people say "Thank you" and
"Thank you again, because the respect for your own dignity
as human beings inspired you to act to ensure the
restoration of our dignity as well".
We have together traversed a course which we are
convinced has strengthened human solidarity in general and
reinforced the bonds of friendship between our peoples and
the nations of the world. This dates back to the early days
when India put the question of racism in South Africa on
the Assembly’s agenda, to the moment when the world
community, as represented here, could adopt consensus
resolutions against apartheid with none dissenting.
It was therefore with great joy that at our inauguration
as President of our Republic we received, among others,
such high and distinguished officials of the Organization as
the Secretary-General, the President of the General
Assembly and the Chairman of the Special Committee
against Apartheid. Their presence reaffirmed the
incontrovertible truth that the victory over apartheid, the
success of the cause of democracy, non-racialism and non-
sexism in our country belongs as much to our people as it
does the United Nations.
And so we have embarked on the road to the remaking
of our country, basing ourselves both on the democratic
Constitution, which came into force on 27 April this year,
and on the Reconstruction and Development Programme,
which has become the property of all our people.
Clearly, these documents would have no life unless
the people gave them life. The words printed in them
must inspire common ownership by all our people and
their common allegiance to the process and the results
which these documents intend. For this to happen, as we
propagate the vision these documents contain we must at
the same time engage in a historic effort of redefinition
of ourselves as a new nation.
Our watchwords must be justice, peace,
reconciliation and nation-building in the pursuit of a
democratic, non-racial and non-sexist country. In all that
we do we have to ensure the healing of the wounds
inflicted on all our people across the great dividing line
imposed on our society by centuries of colonialism and
apartheid.
We must ensure that colour, race and gender become
only a God-given gift to each one of us, and not an
indelible mark or attribute that accords a special status to
any.
We must work for the day when we as South
Africans see one another and interact with one another as
equal human beings and as part of one nation united,
rather than torn asunder, by its diversity.
The road we shall have to travel to reach this
destination will by no means be easy. All of us know
how stubbornly racism can cling to the mind and how
deeply it can infect the human soul. Where it is sustained
by the racial ordering of the material world, as is the case
in our country, that stubbornness can multiply a
hundredfold.
And yet, however hard this battle may be, we will
not surrender. Whatever the time it may take, we will not
tire. The very fact that racism degrades both the
perpetrator and the victim commands that, if we are true
to our commitment to protect human dignity, we fight on
until victory is achieved.
We firmly believe that we who have particular
experience of the destructive and anti-human force of
racism owe it to ourselves to centre our transformation on
the creation of a truly non-racial society. Because we
know racism so intimately, we must stand a good chance
of developing and nurturing its opposite.
It will perhaps come to be that we who have
harboured in our country the worst example of racism
since the defeat of nazism will make a contribution to
7
General Assembly 14th meeting
Forty-ninth session 3 October 1994
human civilization by ordering our affairs in such a manner
that we strike an effective and lasting blow against racism
everywhere.
Some of the steps that we have already taken -
including the establishment of a Government of National
Unity, the orderly transformation of the institutions of State
and the cultivation of a national consensus on the major
issues of the day - have started us off on a correct footing
with regard to continuing the processes leading to the
creation of the just society we have been speaking of.
Our political emancipation has also brought into sharp
focus the urgent need to engage in the struggle to secure
our people’s freedom from want, from hunger and from
ignorance. We have written this on our banners: that the
society we seek to create must be a people-centred society;
all its institutions and its resources must be dedicated to the
pursuit of a better life for all our citizens. That better life
must mean an end to poverty, joblessness, homelessness
and the despair that comes of deprivation. This is an end
in itself because the happiness of the human being must, in
any society, be an end in itself.
At the same time, we are intensely conscious of the
fact that the stability of the democratic settlement itself and
the possibility actually to create a non-racial and non-sexist
society depend on our ability to change the material
conditions of life of our people so that they not only have
the vote but have bread and work as well.
We therefore return to the United Nations to make the
commitment that, as we undertook never to rest until the
system of apartheid was defeated, so do we now undertake
that we cannot rest while millions of our people suffer the
pain and indignity of poverty in all its forms.
At the same time, we turn once more to this world
body to say "We are going to need your continued support
to achieve the goal of the betterment of the conditions of
life of our people." We are pleased and inspired that both
the Secretary-General and the specialized agencies of the
United Nations have taken up the development challenge in
South Africa with the enthusiasm that they have shown.
We believe that it is in the common interest that we
sustain the common victory that we have scored in South
Africa, and take it further by achieving success not only in
politics but also in the socio-economic sphere.
It is perhaps common cause among us that everywhere
on our globe there is an unmistakable process leading to the
entrenchment of democratic systems of government. The
empowerment of the ordinary people of our world freely
to determine their destiny, unhindered by tyrants and
dictators, is at the very heart of the reason for the
existence of this Organization.
But it is equally true that hundreds of millions of
these politically empowered masses are caught in the
deathly trap of poverty, unable to live life in its fullness.
Out of all this are born social conflicts which
produce insecurity and instability, civil and other wars
that claim many lives, millions of desperate refugees and
the destruction of the little wealth that poor countries are
able to accumulate. Out of this cauldron are also born
tyrants, dictators and demagogues who not only take away
or restrict the rights of the people but also make it
impossible to do the things that must be done to bring
lasting prosperity to the people.
At the same time, the reality can no longer be
ignored that we live in an interdependent world which is
bound together to a common destiny. The very response
of the international community to the challenge of
apartheid confirmed this very point that we all
understood - that so long as apartheid existed in South
Africa, so long would the whole of humanity feel
demeaned and degraded.
The United Nations understood very well that racism
in our country could not but feed racism in other parts of
the world as well. The universal struggle against
apartheid was therefore not an act of charity arising out
of pity for our people, but an affirmation of our common
humanity. We believe that that act of affirmation requires
that this Organization should once more turn its focused
and sustained attention to the basics of everything that
makes for a better world for all humanity.
The elaboration of a new world order must, of
necessity, centre on this world body. In it we should find
the appropriate forum in which we can all participate to
help determine the shape of the new world.
The four elements that will need to be knit together
in fashioning that new universal reality are the issues of
democracy, peace, prosperity and interdependence.
The great challenge of our age to the United Nations
is to answer the question "Given the interdependence of
the nations of the world, what is it that we can and must
8
General Assembly 14th meeting
Forty-ninth session 3 October 1994
do to ensure that democracy, peace and prosperity prevail
everywhere?"
We are aware of the fact that the United Nations is
addressing these questions in many ways; yet there can be
no gainsaying the fact that such progress as we have made
has been made more by stealth than in the bold and
determined fashion that the world crisis demands today.
Perhaps a new and forceful initiative is required. Such
an initiative should inspire all of humanity because of the
seriousness of its intent. It should also have a chance to
succeed because it will have been underwritten by the
commitment of the masses of the people in each member
country to join hands with other nations, to address together
the related issues of democracy, peace and prosperity in an
interdependent world.
We are aware of the fact that the dictates of realpolitik
militate against the speedy realization of such an initiative.
But we do believe that the reality of life and the realism of
policy will, at some point, bring to the fore the fact that the
delay we impose on ourselves today will serve only to
increase the pressure on all of us to incorporate, within
what we consider possible, a sustainable vision of a
common world that will rise or fall together.
Undoubtedly, to inspire greater confidence in itself
among all the member nations and to reflect better the
impulse towards the democratization of international
relations, the United Nations will have to continue looking
at itself to determine what restructuring of itself it should
effect. This process must naturally affect, among others,
the structure and functioning of the Security Council and
the peacemaking and peace-keeping issues raised by the
Secretary-General in "An Agenda for Peace".
Democratic South Africa rejoins the world community
of nations determined to play its role in helping to
strengthen the United Nations and to contribute what it can
to the furtherance of its purposes. Among other things, we
have this morning acceded to the covenants and
conventions adopted by this Organization, which address
various matters such as economic, social and cultural rights,
civil and political rights, and the elimination of all forms of
racial discrimination, to say nothing of our irrevocable
commitment to the realization of the objectives contained
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
We are determined to play our full part in all
processes that address the important question of the
non-proliferation and elimination of weapons of mass
destruction. Our Government has also decided to become
a signatory to the Convention on prohibition and
restrictions on the use of certain conventional weapons.
In a similar vein, we shall not be found wanting in
the quest for sustainable development that is in keeping
with the Rio de Janeiro Declaration on Environment and
Development as well as with Agenda 21.
Equally, our own national interest dictates that we
join forces with the United Nations and all its Member
States in the common struggle to contain and end the
traffic in narcotics.
Even in constitutional terms, we are committed to
the advancement of the objective of the emancipation of
women through the creation of a non-sexist society.
Apart from anything else, we are therefore actively
engaged in the preparations for what we are convinced
will be a successful Beijing Conference.
We are part of the region of southern Africa and the
continent of Africa. As members of the Southern African
Development Community and the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), and an equal partner with other Member
States, we will play our role in the struggles of these
organizations to build a continent and a region that will
help to create for themselves and all humanity a common
world of peace and prosperity.
Ours must become a continent free of such tragedies
as those that have afflicted our own country as well as
Rwanda, Somalia, Angola, Mozambique, the Sudan and
Liberia. Happily, the OAU is actively addressing the
issues of peace and stability on our continent.
We are greatly encouraged that the countries of our
region, faced with a crisis in Lesotho, acted together
speedily and, with the cooperation of the Government and
the people of that country, succeeded in demonstrating
that together we have the will to defend democracy, peace
and national reconciliation.
Furthermore, as members of the Non-Aligned
Movement and the Group of 77, we are committed
especially to the promotion of South-South cooperation
and to the strengthening of the voice of the poor and
disadvantaged in the ordering of world affairs.
We would like to take this opportunity to express
our appreciation to the members of the General Assembly
for the speed and readiness with which they accepted the
9
General Assembly 14th meeting
Forty-ninth session 3 October 1994
credentials of democratic South Africa, enabling us to
participate in the work of the last General Assembly. We
are pleased to note that this same spirit characterized the
approach of other international organizations towards our
new democracy, including the Commonwealth and the
European Union.
We would like to close by congratulating you, Mr.
President, on your election to your high post, and we
express our confidence that you will guide the work of the
Assembly with the wisdom and sense of purpose for which
we admire you.
The millions across our globe who stand expectant at
the gates of hope look to this Organization to bring them
peace, to bring them life, to bring them a life worth living.
We pray that the new South Africa, which the General
Assembly helped bring into being and so warmly welcomed
among the community of nations, will, in its own and in the
wider interest, make its own contribution, however small,
to the realization of those hopes.
Our common humanity and the urgency of the knock
on the door of this great edifice demand that we must
attempt even the impossible.
At the outset, I should like warmly to
congratulate you, Sir, on your election to the presidency of
the current session of the General Assembly. I am
convinced that given your outstanding talent and
consummate experience, you will fulfil this lofty mission
with distinction. At the same time, I should like to express
my appreciation and thanks to Mr. Samuel Insanally for the
positive contribution he made during his presidency at the
last session.
I wish to avail myself of this opportunity to extend a
hearty welcome and congratulations to the delegation of
South Africa, which is taking part in the work of the
current session. We are convinced that a united,
democratic and non-racial new South Africa led by
President Nelson Mandela will contribute positively to the
peace and development of Africa and of the world as a
whole.
The world is still undergoing profound changes, and
the transition toward multipolarity has accelerated.
Economic factors are playing a greater role in
international relations. Relaxation of tensions has become
the main trend of the world today. However,
hegemonism and power politics continue to hold out.
Regional hot spots flare up intermittently. Destabilizing
factors tend to multiply, thus compounding the volatility
of the international scene. The maintenance of peace,
strengthening of cooperation and promotion of
development remain the major challenges of our era.
To eliminate regional hot spots and settle
international disputes are the world’s priorities and the
common concern with which the international community
has been trying to deal in one way or another.
Experience has shown that such practices as interfering in
other countries’ internal affairs and resorting to pressure,
sanctions or even force at will cannot help; they can only
increase the complications and difficulties that stand in
the way of a final solution. In the interest of maintaining
regional peace and stability, the international community
and regional organizations should take an appropriate and
effective approach, that is, to promote dialogue and
negotiations between parties directly concerned so as to
reach a solution acceptable to all sides. This has been
best illustrated by the breakthrough achieved in the
Middle East peace process and by the progress made on
the Korean nuclear issue.
United Nations peace-keeping operations can play a
positive role, but not all of them have been successful.
Experience and lessons learned in this regard should be
summed up. It is our consistent view that peace-keeping
operations should strictly conform to the principles of the
United Nations Charter and the norms of international
relations. Such operations should be undertaken with the
consent and cooperation of the parties concerned, and an
impartial and unbiased attitude should be maintained. No
peace-keeping operations or humanitarian aid programmes
should be permitted to interfere in the internal affairs of
any country, still less to use force or become embroiled
in a conflict between the parties. A lesson should be
drawn from what befell the United Nations peace-keeping
forces in Somalia.
Here I wish to underline the importance of strict
adherence to the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence
as the basic means to prevent international conflicts.
9


These principles, namely, mutual respect for sovereignty
and territorial integrity, mutual non-aggression,
non-interference in each other’s internal affairs, equality
and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence, were jointly
initiated four decades ago by China, India and Myanmar -
called "Burma" at the time - and were subsequently
embodied in the 10 principles formulated by Asian and
African countries at the Bandung Conference and in the
purposes and principles espoused by the Association of
South-East Asian Nations and other regional organizations
of the developing countries.
The history of the past four decades has testified to
the immense vitality of the Five Principles. All nations,
notwithstanding their differences in social systems,
ideologies, values or religious faiths, can live in amity and
carry out mutually beneficial cooperation as long as they
abide by these principles. Failure to do so will lead to
friction, confrontation or even military conflicts. In a world
as diversified as ours, nations have no alternative but to
adhere to the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence and
to find common ground while shelving their differences in
order to live together amicably and pursue common
development.
The peoples of the world have long lived in the
shadow of a nuclear holocaust, due to the all-out nuclear
arms race between the two super-Powers during the cold
war, which resulted in a massive stockpiling of nuclear
weapons. Now the international situation has drastically
changed. Not only can we avert another world war, but the
chances have increased for the complete prohibition and
thorough elimination of nuclear weapons and for mankind
ultimately to eliminate the threat of a nuclear war.
China has always stood for the complete prohibition
and thorough elimination of all weapons of mass
destruction. The Chinese Government holds that a
convention on the complete prohibition of nuclear weapons
should be concluded in the same way as the conventions
banning all biological and chemical weapons, respectively.
As a signatory to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, China is in favour of its extension. Yet
a mere extension of the Treaty is obviously not sufficient.
With a view to ultimately ridding mankind of the threat of
a nuclear war and ushering in a nuclear-weapon-free world,
the Chinese Government proposes the following.
All countries that possess nuclear weapons should
pledge unconditionally not to be the first to use them and
should immediately start negotiations to conclude a treaty
on non-first-use of nuclear weapons against each other;
efforts for the establishment of nuclear-free zones should
be supported and all nuclear Powers should undertake not
to use or to threaten to use nuclear weapons against any
non-nuclear-weapon State or nuclear-free zone;
negotiations should be undertaken with a view to
concluding a comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty not
later than 1996; the principal nuclear Powers should
implement their existing nuclear disarmament treaties as
scheduled and go on to drastically cut back their nuclear
stockpiles; negotiations should be undertaken to conclude
a convention banning the production of weapon-grade
fissile materials; a convention on the complete prohibition
of nuclear weapons should be signed under which all
nuclear Powers should undertake the obligation to destroy
all their nuclear weapons under effective international
supervision; and international cooperation in the peaceful
use of nuclear energy should be vigorously promoted
simultaneously with the efforts to prevent the proliferation
of nuclear weapons and step up the nuclear disarmament
process.
The above points make up an integrated and
interrelated nuclear disarmament process. We hold that
all States, whether they possess nuclear weapons or not,
are entitled to participate fully in this process.
Since mankind has been able to make nuclear
weapons and tap nuclear energy for peaceful purposes in
the twentieth century, we are confident that in the twenty-
first century it will be able to completely ban and destroy
nuclear weapons and fully harness nuclear energy to
enhance its own welfare. Before the advent of the new
century, we stand ready to join the other nuclear as well
as non-nuclear States to blaze the way towards this lofty
goal and make our due contribution to its ultimate
realization.
It is now an international trend to give priority to
economic problems. Hence all countries are devoting
themselves to economic development and the expansion
of international cooperation. This year the world
economy has started a recovery and East Asia continues
to maintain a high growth rate. But there is unevenness
in the world as a whole. It is disturbing to note that the
impoverishment of some developing countries has
worsened. In the interest of common development, we
call for the abolition of protectionism and of
discrimination in international economic relations and
trade. Neither global multilateral trade arrangements nor
regional economic and trade cooperation should be
exclusive. The principles of openness, equality and
mutual benefit should be upheld. The World Trade
10


Organization, to be founded next year, should from the
outset be a broadly representative and open trade institution
based on equality and mutual benefit.
The world economy is an interdependent whole.
Developed countries should make more tangible
contributions to global economic development and the
expansion of international economic cooperation. Primarily
they should take effective measures to open their markets,
provide development funds, transfer technology and
increase assistance to the developing countries to reduce
their debt burden, thereby contributing to their economic
growth, social stability and relief from poverty. Such
actions will in turn bolster the economic growth of the
developed countries themselves.
The international community and the United Nations
should be more concerned with development matters and in
particular should actively help the developing countries to
achieve prosperity. We appreciate the Secretary-General’s
efforts in submitting the Agenda for Development pursuant
to General Assembly resolutions. We hope that our
deliberations thereon will serve to reinvigorate world
economic development and international cooperation.
The Chinese Government considers economic
development the central task of the whole nation and makes
reform and opening its basic state policy. This year we
have taken a new series of major steps to intensify the
reform and opening which have the effect of ensuring
sustained, rapid and healthy economic growth. Gross
domestic product, foreign trade volume and overseas
investments registered increases in the first six months of
11.6 per cent, 25.5 per cent and 54.9 per cent respectively,
compared with the corresponding period last year. We will
step up our all-directional opening-up and continue to work
for world prosperity. We have been striving for an early
resumption of our contracting party status in the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. A solution to this matter
will be in the interest of both China and the world as a
whole. China needs to cooperate with the rest of the world
which in turn needs such an important trading partner as
China. A World Trade Organization without China would
be inconceivable.
Human society continues to move forward and make
progress. But social ills still stand out starkly such as
poverty, unemployment, the deteriorating environment, the
population explosion, refugees, illegal immigration, drug
trafficking, crime and injurious and unfair treatment of
social groups such as women, children and the disabled.
Some of these problems have become even more acute, and
have cried out for a remedy by the world community
through international cooperation. We consider that it is
necessary to step up such cooperation. Because
conditions vary, different countries face different social
problems. Each country has to draw up social
development policies adaptable to its own conditions.
International cooperation in this field should adhere to the
principles of mutual respect, equality and mutual benefit
without political strings or interference in domestic
affairs. Developing countries account for the majority of
the world’s population and are in a disadvantaged position
socially. This is where the emphasis of the United
Nations social programmes should be placed.
In recent years we have actively supported and
participated in important international conferences on the
environment, human rights and population under the
auspices of the United Nations. We will actively take
part in the World Summit for Social Development, to be
held in Copenhagen next March. The Chinese
Government attaches great importance to the Fourth
World Conference on Women, to be held in Beijing in
September 1995. The Chinese people, our women folk in
particular, are preparing for and looking forward to this
grand event with tremendous enthusiasm.
In response to the call in the documents of the 1992
United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, the Chinese Government has analysed the
actual conditions in the country and drawn up "Agenda 21
- White Paper on China’s Population, Environment and
Development in the 21st Century", which will be an
important guide in the formulation of our medium- and
long-term national, economic and social development
plans.
To ensure and protect human rights is an essential
part of a nation’s social policy. My Government makes
it a basic policy to constantly enhance the people’s
enjoyment of human rights commensurate with our
economic and social development. We always hold that
the principle of universality of human rights must be
viewed in the context of the actual conditions of a given
country. Conditions vary from country to country. It is
inevitable and normal that there is divergence of views on
human rights issues. We are in favour of dialogue on the
basis of equality and mutual respect so as to increase
mutual understanding. We are against using human rights
as a pretext to interfere in the internal affairs of other
countries.
11


Next year will mark the fiftieth anniversary of the
founding of the United Nations. Both the world and the
United Nations have undergone drastic changes in that half
century. The United Nations is the most representative
intergovernmental Organization of sovereign States.
Members of the Organization are equal, irrespective of size,
strength or wealth.
Notwithstanding its shortcomings, the status and role
of the United Nations in global international affairs remain
irreplaceable by any other international organizations or
groupings. It is the hope of the people of the world that
the Organization will better fulfil the mission conferred on
it by the Charter and and that it will make even greater
contributions to the maintenance of peace and the
promotion of development.
To cope with the greatly changed international
situation and grim challenges ahead, United Nations
institutions should undergo relevant and necessary reforms.
In our view, any such reforms should serve to maintain and
enhance the positive role of the United Nations in
international affairs and improve its efficiency. At the
same time, the reforms should take full account of the
concerns and interests of the developing countries, which
make up the majority of the membership, so that their role
may be enhanced. The function and role of the General
Assembly should be strengthened. Reform of the Security
Council must be aimed at facilitating a better performance
of its functions under the Charter. Any enlargement of the
Council’s membership must fully conform to the principle
of equitable geographical distribution to ensure broader
representation. Actions by the Council should better reflect
the collective will and common aspirations of the entire
United Nations membership.
To prepare for the commemoration of the fiftieth
anniversary of the United Nations, China has set up a
national committee, in accordance with the relevant United
Nations resolution. We hope that the commemoration in
various countries in the coming year will be used to review
the experience of the past and look to the future so that we
may carry forward the purposes and principles of the
Charter and enable the Organization to do a better job in
maintaining peace and promoting development.
It was sad that the first half of our century witnessed
two world wars with disastrous consequences for mankind.
The ensuing cold war cast a dark and menacing shadow of
war over the world for the greater part of the second half
of the century. It is gratifying, none the less, that we have
been able to fulfil the historic mission of eliminating the
centuries-old colonial system from the Earth within this
century. This is unquestionably one of the greatest
achievements of contemporary human society.
Looking ahead to the twenty-first century, we are
fully confident of the future of humanity. The Chinese
people will make common efforts with all other peoples
of the world to usher in a new century of peace and
prosperity.
First, I should like to
offer you, Sir, my personal congratulations on your election
as President of the General Assembly at its forty-ninth
session, and also those of the European Union, on whose
behalf I am addressing the Assembly today. We wish you
luck and success in your high office.
We thank Ambassador Insanally for the wise
leadership with which he guided the forty-eighth session
of the General Assembly to a successful conclusion.
I am addressing the Assembly on behalf of a Europe
that has become more closely integrated as a result of the
Maastricht Treaty, a Europe which in a few weeks’ time
will admit four new members, and which intends to
broaden its cooperation based on partnership with the
world’s other regions as well. I am speaking for a
Europe that is committed to world peace and development
and whose political actions are determined by its belief in
individual freedom, democracy and the rule of law, a
Europe which sees in the realization of justice a crucial
precondition for avoiding war and the use of force and
which is prepared to play its part in promoting the
economic development of all regions, the struggle against
hunger, and measures to protect the Earth’s natural
sources of life. But I am speaking above all on behalf of
a Europe that wishes to place the United Nations in a
better position to meet its foremost obligation as
guarantor of peace and security in the world.
Next year’s fiftieth anniversary of the United
Nations coincides with that marking the end of the
Second World War. The founding of the United Nations
was the response to that catastrophe, which had its origins
in Europe. Today we can look back on impressive
achievements by the United Nations. The 51 members in
1945 have grown into a membership of 184. The United
Nations has thus developed into a truly universal
Organization.
By recently concluding the negotiations on the Law
of the Sea Convention, the United Nations has made
outstanding progress in promoting the reconciliation of
interests and the peaceful settlement of disputes around
the world. The choice of Hamburg as seat of the
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea is a token
of confidence in Germany and an obligation for my
country.
The achievements of the United Nations are
considerable, yet it is often the object of unfair criticism.
The United Nations can be only as good as its Members
allow it to be. It needs their active support. Many of its
personnel, both soldiers and civilians, have done their
utmost to help alleviate distress and save lives. No small
number of them have lost their own lives in the process.
We pay tribute to them and honour their memory.
15


Many of us believed that the ending of the cold war
would usher in an era of peace. Today we know,
unfortunately, that that hope was premature. Day in and
day out, hundreds of people are falling victim to hostilities
and thousands more are dying of starvation or disease.
What has happened and is still happening in Bosnia,
Somalia and Rwanda is appalling.
The European Union sees a response to these global
challenges in a strengthening of the United Nations and of
the multilateral system for the safeguarding of peace world
wide, in more intensive preventive diplomacy and conflict
prevention within the United Nations and regional
institutions, in respect for human rights in the world and for
the rule of law, and in closer development cooperation in
and among the regions.
We Europeans therefore welcome the report of the
Secretary-General on an Agenda for Development. An
Agenda for Development must soon find its place alongside
the Agenda for Peace. With his report, Mr. Boutros-Ghali
has again pointed the way for our Organization’s future
development and work. I wish to convey to him the
appreciation of the European Union. We pledge a
constructive contribution to the debate on this document.
Following the disaster of the Second World War,
Europe had the opportunity for political renewal and it took
that opportunity. We Europeans derive courage and
strength from that renewal. No other region in the world
has such a dense network of regional, intergovernmental
and supranational institutions, and no region in the world
has such close relations with other nations and their
organizations. In the field of security, therefore, it is our
aim to create a network of mutually supporting institutions
which will include, together with the European Union (EU),
the Western European Union (WEU), the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) and the Conference on
Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE). All must
work closely with the United Nations. NATO and the
WEU are already helping the United Nations to carry out
its difficult mission in the former Yugoslavia.
Because our interests are interwoven as they have
always been, we will not allow ourselves to be discouraged
by set-backs and will therefore do our utmost to bring
about a peaceful settlement in the former Yugoslavia. The
United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) has our
unreserved support. The terrible war of destruction in
Bosnia and Herzegovina must be brought to an end.
Federation is, we believe, a first and indispensable step
towards a peace settlement. Winter will be here soon and
the people will once again have cold and hunger to
contend with. But the precondition for lasting progress
and for peace is the will for reconciliation among all
ethnic groups. The European Union is trying to help, and
we shall continue to do so. For that reason we have
established an administrative office in Mostar, which
began its work in July under the courageous leadership of
Hans Koschnick.
The entire international community must constantly
make it unmistakably clear to the Bosnian Serbs that in
rejecting the peace plan they cannot reckon with tacit
approval. There must be no toleration of a policy of war
and expulsion. We seek a solution for the Croatian
territories under UNPROFOR protection which will be
acceptable to both sides. The territorial integrity of
Croatia must be respected. Autonomy arrangements will
have to be found for the Krajina Serbs. We Europeans
believe that an extension of the mandate of UNPROFOR
is absolutely essential for this purpose.
The United Nations envisages a world in which it is
not the law of the strongest but rather international law
that prevails. We Europeans share that vision. We are
even more convinced by what has happened in the former
Yugoslavia that a relapse into divisive nationalism must
be prevented.
We, the Members of the United Nations, must
summon the strength to make a great joint effort to
provide the United Nations and its Secretary-General with
the means to meet their global responsibility. The United
Nations must become what its founding fathers aspired to
in their noble vision nearly 50 years ago: mankind’s
principal guardian of the peace.
But we, the Members of the United Nations, must
above all be prepared to stand up for the cause of peace.
The members of the European Union have played, and
are continuing to play, a major role in helping maintain
or restore peace in many of the world’s trouble spots on
behalf of the United Nations. We Europeans are guided
by the following basic principles.
First, for its peace-keeping measures the United
Nations should be able to rely on the broadest possible
support and involvement of its Members. Such
operations ought to foster peace and unity among them
but not divide the community of nations.
16


Secondly, we Europeans will always be in favour of
giving priority to non-military means of safeguarding peace
wherever possible. But aggressors must also realize that
the United Nations is capable of military intervention where
other means of achieving the aims of the Charter have
failed, and that it has the will to take such action.
Thirdly, the use of military force cannot be an end in
itself. Successful peace-keeping presupposes an
unequivocal mandate based on international law, a
convincing political plan for settling the conflict, and the
equitable participation of the Member States.
Fourthly, we Europeans welcome the idea of stand-by
arrangements developed by Secretary-General
Boutros-Ghali. It can effectively help reduce the length of
time between the decision to mount a peace-keeping
operation and its actual implementation. Many members of
the European Union, including Germany, are willing to
contribute to stand-by arrangements.
Fifthly, in many countries military training is geared
solely to the traditional duties of the army. The specific
tasks of peace-keeping require a completely different kind
of training. The national preparation of Blue Helmets
needs to be coordinated to a greater degree by the United
Nations. What is needed for this are common training
guidelines and the training capacity of the United Nations.
Joint training and exercises are, at the same time, important
steps in confidence-building.
Speaking as the Foreign Minister of Germany, I would
add that last year I stated in the Assembly that my country
was willing to shoulder more responsibilities with regard to
United Nations peace-keeping operations. Today I can
confirm that Germany will be able to join fully in
peace-keeping operations of the United Nations, the
German Federal Constitutional Court having cleared the
way a few months ago.
The European Union looks for the revitalization of the
United Nations and its various organizations. In the course
of the forty-eighth session of the General Assembly a
working group considered all aspects of the question of
increasing the membership of the Security Council and
other matters related to the Security Council. The working
group had a substantive and constructive discussion. Its
report states that
"... while there was convergence of views that the
membership of the Security Council should be
enlarged, there was also agreement that the scope and
nature of such enlargement require further
discussion." (A/48/47, para. 8)
Security Council reform is an important issue which
requires a productive outcome. These days, the most
important decisions on security and peace are made in the
Security Council. We therefore look forward to a report
on enlargement of the Security Council membership and
related issues from the open-ended working group, and to
productive results.
Transparency in the Council’s decision-making
processes is important, particularly in peace-keeping,
where the interests of contributor nations are involved.
Indeed, the cost of establishing and consolidating peace
is enormous. The explosion of the peace-keeping budget
has almost brought the United Nations to a standstill. In
order to overcome the financial crisis, three tasks must be
accomplished.
The United Nations urgently requires more efficient
management and better organization. The creation of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services by the General
Assembly at its forty-eighth session was an important step
towards this objective, and the fact that a German has
been appointed as the first head of that Office is a mark
of confidence in my country. Members’ contributions
must be brought more into line with their actual capacity
to pay. The aim of comprehensive financial reform must
be to establish a scale that is transparent and reliable,
reflects Members’ financial situations, is automatically
adapted to changed national circumstances, and gives
consideration to the needs of countries with low per
capita incomes. But it is crucial that all Members be
willing to meet their membership obligations. We cannot
have a situation in which the United Nations has
difficulty carrying out its responsibilities because
individual Members feel exempted from their duties.
It is always better to prevent a fire than to have to
put it out. The European experience is that conflicts must
be prevented -but this is not a purely European
experience. We bank on the power of preventive
diplomacy, confidence-building and the early detection of
conflicts. The United Nations must further enlarge and
strengthen its instruments of preventive diplomacy. This
includes helping countries along the road to democracy
and observing elections. The establishment of and respect
for human and minority rights, as well as measures to
bring about economic and social stability, are other basic
elements of prevention.
17


The Declaration and Programme of Action of the
World Conference on Human Rights held in Vienna calls
for more active implementation. Our priority must be to
support the High Commissioner for Human Rights. In
addition, we must substantially increase the resources
available in the United Nations for human rights activities.
It is, I believe, inadequate for the United Nations to provide
only 1 per cent of its funds for this task.
Work on the establishment of an international criminal
court must proceed apace. Human rights and the protection
of minorities are indivisibly linked. Ethnic or cultural
arrogance and the curtailing of minority rights are one
cause of the ever-swelling refugee flows in our world
today. That is why minorities need the protection of the
United Nations. We Europeans are striving to implement
this objective. In Europe, the Pact on Stability is designed
to promote political stability and the protection of
minorities.
We do not want to close our eyes to our own
shortcomings. There must be no room for racism and
xenophobia in Europe. That is why we have made it our
goal to develop a Union-wide strategy against racism and
xenophobia in the course of the coming year. We need
more efficient management of humanitarian relief actions.
The need for resources and measures to alleviate emergency
situations through disaster relief operations is likely to
increase rather than decrease.
We expect the United Nations Disaster Relief
Coordinator to ensure more effective coordination of
measures within the United Nations system. He must be
able to intervene before it is too late for the people
affected. I should like to stress that point. Work on the
drafting of a convention for the protection of the work of
humanitarian organizations must be brought to a speedy
conclusion.
One task of preventive policy as we understand it is to
combat terrorism. There is no justification for terrorism.
Drugs and organized crime are an ever-increasing danger
not only to our young people, but also to the social and
political stability of whole societies. To combat these
dangers we need international alliances, and we need them
urgently. The European Union offers comprehensive
cooperation and the experience it has gained in this field.
Disarmament policy, too, is preventive policy. Over
the past few years, major successes have been attained in
this field. These must now be made irreversible. The
START Treaties must be implemented quickly. In Europe,
the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces has proved to
be a milestone.
Uncleared mines are amongst the worst legacies of
war and civil war. We Europeans are in favour of the
establishment of a United Nations fund for mine-clearing
and of more stringent provisions under international law
to protect civilian populations.
The increasing proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, the continuing operation of unsafe nuclear
plants and the smuggling of plutonium and other nuclear
materials are among the new global dangers of our age.
We must counter them at the national and global levels.
We Europeans urgently appeal to North Korea to fulfil its
international obligations. We in the European Union are
committed to the indefinite, unconditional extension of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. In
Geneva, we want to arrive at a universal and universally
verifiable comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty. I
believe that it is also high time that consensus was
reached there on negotiations to bring about a ban on the
manufacture of weapons-grade fissile material.
The European Union, together with its partners, is
providing considerable funds for improving the safety of
nuclear plants in the neighbouring countries to our east.
What happened at Chernobyl must never, ever be
repeated. That would indeed be terrible.
I appeal to all signatory States to ensure speedy
ratification and implementation of the chemical weapons
Convention at the national level in order for it quickly to
become fully effective.
The dangers I have just mentioned affect us all. As
those dangers have a global dimension, action by the
United Nations, too, is called for. At its summit meeting
on 31 January 1992, the Security Council rightly stated
that the proliferation of all weapons of mass destruction
constitutes a threat to international peace and security.
The United Nations, the Security Council and all of us
must resolutely shoulder our responsibility to overcome
these new threats.
A fair balancing of interests through the ever-closer
regional integration of States and ever-increasing
cooperation between regions of our planet in the spirit of
Article 1 of the Charter of the United Nations are the
necessary response to the huge economic, ecological and
social challenges and the manifold ethnic conflicts we are
facing today - unfortunately, I might add. No one region
18


alone can master the global tasks confronting us. Nor can
the United Nations accomplish everything itself. The
burden on the United Nations can be substantially reduced
with the help of regional associations and cooperation. We
should strive to achieve that objective.
For Europe, the post-war era has finally reached an
end. A few weeks ago, the last Russian soldiers left
Germany. Russian troops have also withdrawn from the
Baltic States and other Eastern European countries. Now
the aim must be to prevent new divides from emerging in
Europe. The European Union will become not a "Fortress
Europe" but a Europe based on partnership and solidarity.
The European Union is supporting the countries of
Central and Eastern Europe on their way to democracy and
the establishment of market economies. The peoples in the
reformist States fought for their freedom. We encouraged
them in their struggle and we will not now abandon them.
We will gradually smooth their path towards the
Euro-Atlantic institutions. It is important to mention that
there will be no pan-European order of peace without or
against Russia. The European Union has concluded
partnership and cooperation agreements with Russia and
Ukraine. The North Atlantic Alliance’s "Partnership for
Peace" enhances Europe’s security.
The CSCE, as a new instrument of conflict-prevention,
confidence-building and conflict resolution, can set an
example for other regions of the world. And it can, as a
regional arrangement under Chapter VIII of the Charter,
relieve the United Nations as the guardian of peace. At the
CSCE Summit in December the European Union will urge,
on the basis of a German-Dutch initiative, that the CSCE be
given priority in conflict settlement and prevention within
its area and that it be equipped accordingly.
The European Union wants to further extend and
tighten its network of regional cooperation. Transatlantic
relations with the United States and Canada remain the
cornerstone of European policy. The Summit meeting
between the European Union and the United States in
Berlin in July this year confirmed our resolve to further
strengthen transatlantic relations.
We are seeking closer relations with the countries of
Asia. In Germany a few days ago we discussed with the
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) the
possibilities for even more intensive political and economic
cooperation. We are following with interest ASEAN’s
initiative to launch a policy dialogue on security in
South-East and East Asia, and I wish to emphasize the
European Union’s interest in and willingness to cooperate
more closely with the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
Council (APEC).
The European Council meeting in Corfu reaffirmed
that it attaches great importance to relations with the
countries of Latin America and with their regional
associations. The institutionalized dialogue with the Rio
Group has become for us an important element for the
consolidation of democracy and peace. We intend to
broaden the cooperation agreement with the States of the
Southern Cone Common Market (MERCOSUR).
Through its policy on the Mediterranean, the
European Union will have made available a total of
roughly $9.6 billion between 1975 and 1996. Europe
attaches great importance to security in the
Mediterranean.
From the outset the European Union actively
supported the Middle East peace process, playing a
leading role in international assistance for the
development of the Palestinian economy and society.
With the roughly $600 million earmarked for direct aid
from 1994 to 1998, the European Union is the
Palestinians’ largest international donor.
Cooperation in southern Africa has made great
strides. The course South Africa has embarked upon
under Nelson Mandela shows that it is possible for former
adversaries to be reconciled and to shape a common
future, given the necessary political will and wise
leadership. At the Berlin conference with the States of
the Southern African Development Community (SADC)
early this month the European Union initiated a new
phase of cooperation with southern Africa.
We in Europe want closer dialogue with the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) on conflict
prevention and security cooperation because we want
partnership with the countries of Africa and thereby a
greater United Nations peace-keeping capacity.
Agreement on an agenda for development is
becoming ever more urgent. One billion people in this
world are still living in absolute poverty. Global
expenditure on arms still amounts to as much as the
income of half of the five and a half billion people on our
planet.
Poverty, increasing demographic pressure and
irresponsible harming of the environment have made the
19


dangers to peace and stability greater, not smaller. The
Conference on Environment and Development in Rio and
the International Conference on Population and
Development, which ended in Cairo a few days ago,
confirmed that there are no simple answers to global
problems. The two conferences none the less sent out an
encouraging signal: there is growing recognition that we
must tackle such problems together, and this I believe is a
very important basis for the World Social Summit, which
will be held next year in Denmark.
In many countries women are still excluded from
active participation in public life. We expect the World
Conference on Women, to be held in Beijing next year, to
heighten awareness of this.
In the Maastricht Treaty we Europeans for the first
time made development policy an integral part of a treaty
system for Europe. We undertook to seek the sustainable
economic and social development of the South, to promote
its integration into the global economy and to combat
poverty.
Despite the huge budget difficulties facing its member
States, the European Union has increased its development
assistance from over $1 billion in 1988 to almost $3 billion
today. Funds for emergency disaster relief and food aid
were increased to $1 billion this year. Even more
important than such financial transfers, however, is the task
of integrating the countries of the South into the world
economy. Without doubt, the conclusion of the Uruguay
Round improved the chances of growth for all States
participating in world trade. The aim now must be for the
Treaty to enter into force on 1 January 1995, as planned,
and for the newly-established World Trade Organization to
commence work.
The treaty-based cooperation between the European
Union and the other regions of the world is designed to
further liberalize world trade. Every region should be able
to participate in the European market. That is why we
want to complete the forthcoming review of Lomé IV,
including the new finance protocol, on time, and we are
working to achieve that end.
Speaking here last year I suggested the development
of an early detection capacity for environmental disasters in
developing countries, and for the European Union I can
today say this: World-wide energy consumption is
increasing, although the use of fossil fuels is already
endangering climatic stability. In particular, we, the
industrialized countries, therefore need a more
environment-friendly and resource-friendly attitude on the
part of producers and consumers and increased recycling
of raw materials. Reducing carbon dioxide emissions
must be tackled as a matter of urgency.
The destruction of the forests continues mercilessly.
Soil erosion, loss of bio-diversity and impaired
regeneration are the consequences. This destruction must
be halted. We Europeans will seek better international
cooperation in the United Nations for the sustainable
utilization and protection of the forests. The United
Nations is the guardian not only of peace, but also of the
environment.
The historian Arnold Toynbee was right when he
concluded that people are entirely capable of learning
from disasters and finding responses to historic
challenges. Today we Europeans know that only
integration and cooperation lead to the desired goal, and
the international community’s response to the global
problems is and has to be to strengthen the United
Nations. Our central tasks for the future are: first, to
secure peace world-wide; secondly, to respect human
rights and the rule of law; and, thirdly, to create the
conditions for lasting stability through economic and
social development.
Our common goal is to create a better world for all.
But the determination with which we implement this goal
in practice is the precondition for success against which
we will be measured.
France is especially pleased, Mr. President, to see the
General Assembly meeting under your authority. At the
end of a year marked by the passing of an extraordinary
statesman, President Houphouët-Boigny, your election has
given the international community another occasion to
stop and think about the situation in the African continent,
which in recent months has brought us both hope and
tragedy.
In South Africa, a decisive evolutionary process took
concrete form this year in the first elections there with
universal suffrage. We can now express our joy at seeing
that country take its rightful place in the concert of
nations. The choice of the South African people, inspired
by outstanding men to whom France wishes again to pay
a tribute, provides an example for all those who aspire to
democracy, reconciliation and peace and gives them hope.
In Rwanda, on the other hand, an unprecedented
tragedy has set the international community’s
responsibility squarely before it. The Assembly is
familiar with the efforts made by France to respond to
that tragedy and with the support it managed to find,
primarily among the African States. The operation that
was carried out enabled us to shelter more than 3 million
Rwandans from the fighting. None the less, we have
found it necessary once again to say the word "genocide",
which, almost 50 years after the birth of the United
Nations, amounts to saying that the worst is still possible.
During the darkest years of the Second World War,
General De Gaulle spoke of the need to establish a world
order that could guarantee the security of all, to make
rational use of all the world’s riches and to bring together
all the people on the face of the Earth. The time has
come for us to rediscover the ideal that inspired the
12


generation of the founders and to ask ourselves with clarity
what means are necessary to implement it.
Almost everywhere in the world we are seeing the
positive movement of nation-States into groups. France
has made the building up of Europe one of the pillars of its
foreign policy. How could it not, then, encourage the
formation of new areas of solidarity?
The experience of building Europe, which began 40
years ago, is a case in point. It has done more than just do
away with the age-old rivalries that had led to two world
wars. In the western part of the European continent,
economic integration and political cooperation have attained
a level that is unmatched in the world.
Since the iron curtain ceased to exist, we have been
primarily concerned with expanding to all parts of Europe
the zone of peace and prosperity resulting from that
process. This explains our desire to speed up the
integration of the Central and Eastern European
democracies into the European Union. It also accounts for
our efforts to organize a partnership with Russia and the
States of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS).
The European Union, the Western European Union (WEU),
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE)
are all coooperating in the efforts towards this end.
Furthermore, it explains France’s initiative, taken up in turn
by the European Union, to establish a stability pact. This
is an ambitious exercise in preventive diplomacy, aimed at
resolving issues of relations between neighbours and of
minority groups, where such issues persist in the European
theatre.
Today Europe is a world power, as it demonstrated
during the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(GATT) negotiations, at which its efforts led, notably, to
the establishment of a World Trade Organization (WTO).
This is a major success that will benefit all its member
countries by putting an end to unilateral practices and
guaranteeing fair and free trade. Europe is thus assuming
its international responsibilities. It is actively supporting
the peace processes in the Middle East, in southern Africa
and elsewhere. It has long been involved in the struggle to
achieve development, particularly through the Lomé
Conventions. It provides substantial financing everywhere -
the most in the world - for peoples mired in humanitarian
crises. Its actions prove that a genuine regional power can
benefit the entire international community.
New regional groups of solidarity are gradually
taking shape in all parts of the world. In Africa, France
supports the principle of an OAU mechanism for
preventing, handling and settling conflicts. We are ready
to help set up a military mechanism to enable the OAU
to intervene more quickly, under United Nations control,
in the framework of peace-keeping operations.
In South-East Asia, the countries of the Association
of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) are working to
strengthen their economic ties and to establish confidence-
building measures to reinforce the stability of the region.
France, which through the European Union was present
at ASEAN’s regional forum on security, held recently in
Bangkok, takes a special interest in the beneficial effects
this process should have on the countries of the Indo-
Chinese peninsula.
On the American continent, the entry into force of
the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)
adds to the dynamism of existing regional organizations,
old and new.
Thus, perhaps, there may be such a group in the
Middle East as well, where progress in the peace process
allows us to envision the development of intensive
regional cooperation. The organization of all kinds of ties
among the countries concerned will help to establish
peace in the region, as will the search for solutions to the
political problems that are still pending. France can
therefore only repeat that we hope to see the boycotts
finally ended. Our financial support for the peace
process, as well as our active participation in the
multilateral negotiations, including participation in such
ultra-sensitive areas as regional security, reflect this very
same conviction.
Above and beyond that, France would like to see
Europe organize a forum for cooperation involving all the
Mediterranean States. We have, on the initiative of
Egypt, already made a contribution to the coming into
being of the Mediterranean Forum, which recently held its
first meeting in Alexandria. We will make this one of the
main goals of the French presidency of the European
Union in the first semester of the coming year.
Everywhere, then, the progress being made in
processes leading to integration and the establishment of
regional frameworks for cooperation reflects positive
trends. These organizations, however, have neither the
right nor the capability to do everything. It is the United
Nations that is and must remain the sole forum for
13


organizing peace and solidarity throughout the world. It is
up to the United Nations and to that Organization alone to
ensure international equilibrium since, in the last resort, it
alone has the power to decide on enforcement measures or
on the use of force. Regional organizations do contribute
to peace and international stability. They may indeed fulfil
missions in preventive diplomacy, but they must then be
inspired by the principles enshrined in the United Nations.
As regards peace-keeping, Chapter VIII of our Charter
expressly provides that the United Nations may, in certain
circumstances, employ the means at the disposal of the
regional organizations.
But when conflicts become exacerbated, when a crisis
calls for a mandatory solution, the Charter requires us to
turn to the Security Council, the sole authority having
power to decide on enforcement measures or on the use of
force other than for legitimate self-defence. The
justification for such measures may come only from the
will of the international community, and that is why the
Security Council, in our view, must exert its authority and
control at all stages of operations it may decide upon:
conception and approval of the mandate, the major phases
of implementation and the monitoring of implementation.
The adoption of a system of mandatory sanctions
against States that breach international legality is also a
prerogative of the Security Council. But, and we are very
keenly aware of this, this concerns serious, exceptional
measures whose purpose must be precisely defined to bring
pressure to bear on a Government to change its attitude.
That is the objective in such instances. France therefore
proposes that in future, when a resolution imposing
sanctions upon a Member State is to be voted upon, three
conditions must be met. These are, that all other
diplomatic avenues have been explored without success;
that the Council resolution state explicitly what actions the
targeted State should take in order for the sanctions to be
lifted; and that the maintenance of the sanctions should be
subject to regular review in good faith.
In the realm of disarmament, our Organization is once
again the sole forum where international commitments may
be entered into. Given this perspective, France ascribes
especial importance to the speedy ratification of the
Convention banning chemical weapons - the first
multilateral disarmament treaty - and thereby its entry into
force in 1995. France hopes to see our Organization make
progress towards strengthening the Convention banning
biological weapons and to see new efforts made to ban
anti-personnel mines. I was particularly pleased to hear
President Clinton endorse this very concept in his recent
statement to the Assembly. Finally, the requirement for
non-proliferation, which North Korea’s attitude compels
us to take especially seriously, must lead, at the 1995
Conference, to the unconditional and indefinite renewal of
the non-proliferation Treaty. In this same vein, France
reaffirms its support for the decision taken by the General
Assembly last year to begin negotiations on a
comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty that would be
internationally and effectively verifiable.
Over recent years, crisis prevention and crisis
management have absorbed the greater part of our efforts.
We have thus imperceptibly strayed somewhat from what
was a major chapter in the history of the United Nations:
the North-South dialogue, the major conferences on trade
and development. France thus proposes that the United
Nations restore development and the struggle to achieve
it to their central place in its work.
It is not a question of repeating what was done in
past decades. Our approach to development has changed.
The work pursued under the auspices of the United
Nations and its agencies has helped to call attention to the
interdependence of the economic, demographic, cultural
and social ramifications of the development question.
That is why the main theme conferences devoted to the
environment, to population, to social development and to
the status of women are now once again the instruments
to be used to mobilize for development. Given this
perspective, France will organize in Paris before the end
of this year the signing of the Convention on the struggle
against desertification, as well as the Aids Summit.
The United Nations alone is capable of ensuring that
all these efforts be pursued consistently. It has the
necessary legitimacy and authority, inasmuch as all the
main institutions concerned, including what are known as
the Bretton Woods institutions, are part and parcel of the
United Nations system. We therefore consider it
necessary to strengthen the links that unite all these
separate bodies. In particular, we should ensure that the
policies of adjustment carried out under World Bank or
International Monetary Fund auspices take due account of
the social requirements of development. France is
committed to doing so in working with its partners, and
has recently agreed to a substantial effort to help the franc
zone countries overcome the short-term effects of the
devaluation of the CFA franc.
The Economic and Social Council should be the
place for ensuring coherence and consistency within these
organizations. France therefore proposes that the next
14


annual meeting of the Council in Geneva should be an
opportunity for the ministers of Member States personally
to undertake a complete examination of the policies
followed by these various institutions with regard to
development, and especially to study specific ways by
which they might work together better.
The Secretary-General’s efforts for renewal and
clarification through the "Agenda for Development"
naturally form part of this global approach. The European
Union, for its part, has presented recommendations in its
aide-mémoire that it believes would enhance that draft.
France intends to take an active part in General Assembly
discussions on this subject.
The role of our Organization is no less critical where
humanitarian action is involved. France intervenes
regularly on the ground alongside United Nations agencies,
and we should like to pay a tribute to the outstanding work
done by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the World Food Programme and UNICEF,
working under tragically difficult circumstances. We were
able to appreciate in full measure their usefulness as the
Rwandan crisis unfolded. We have had confirmation that
the United Nations alone is able to coordinate such difficult
operations. Naturally, there is need for further progress:
in shortening the Organization’s reaction time, and in better
allocating tasks among agencies. But the reform that began
three years ago with the establishment of the Department
for Humanitarian Affairs is beginning to bear fruit. We are
indeed on the right track.
Lastly, France would like to stress the underlying
principle of international law: the universality of human
rights, a principle which may not be challenged in the name
of any religious, cultural or national specificities. I am all
the more ready to say that because France is itself keen on
preserving its identity and intent on defending it. However
different people may be, they share the same rights. The
very existence of our Organization rests on this principle.
France has consistently urged the acceleration of
progress in the field of human rights, by seeking
recognition that certain principles must be applied to States’
actions. I welcome the steps taken by the High
Commissioner for Human Rights since his designation and
express the hope that the resources made available to him
will be commensurate with his mission.
The establishment of the International Tribunal for war
crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia is a significant
event. Until very recently there had been some scepticism
about this initiative. Today, thanks to the resolve of the
Tribunal’s judges and prosecutor, it is in place and
beginning to examine actual cases being submitted to it.
France supports these efforts and hopes that comparable
crimes of genocide that may have been committed in
Rwanda will also lead to the establishment of an
international legal body.
The juridical work of the United Nations extends to
other areas as well. It is designed to address matters of
international trade with a view to making it both freer and
fairer. In this regard, I have already expressed our
satisfaction at the establishment of the World Trade
Organization. The signing a few weeks ago of an act that
completes the monumental work done by the United
Nations on the law of the sea is also a historic event.
If our Organization is to be able to carry out the
many difficult tasks which I have just described, we must
constantly work to reform it and adjust the means
available to it - in the first place, by strengthening the
means available to the Secretary-General. On behalf of
France, I should like to pay a tribute here to the
Secretary-General - and this is not a mere formality. We
have the good fortune to have at the helm of our
Organization a man who, thanks to his ceaseless efforts
over the past two years, has made progress possible in all
areas: preventive diplomacy, crisis management,
development, the running of the institution. We must
therefore give him the means to continue his work.
This is true, too, of peace-keeping missions. Recent
experience has shown the need to make military forces
available to the Secretary-General on very short notice in
the implementation of Security Council resolutions. To
that end, France wishes to develop a network of stand-by
forces. On the initiative of the President of the Republic,
we have offered to make a standing unit of several
thousand men available to the United Nations. It is also
essential for the Secretary-General to be able to control
the evolution of peace-keeping missions. To that end,
France recommends systematic recourse to the designation
of a special representative.
The Secretary-General must be able to rely on the
assistance of prominent and particularly competent
persons. With regard to management, last year’s
establishment of the post of Inspector General marked an
important step forward. We expect further progress to be
made this year with the establishment of a committee on
budgetary discipline, as I proposed last year from this
very rostrum. Lastly, as our Prime Minister has
15


suggested, France proposes that someone be appointed on
a permanent basis to the Secretary-General’s Office who
would deal with the question of the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.
Our Assembly is the most universal of international
institutions. Its prestige and authority must therefore be
strengthened. To that end, France is making three
proposals.
First, sessions of the Fifth Committee must be held
more closely together in order to ensure better control over
our finances, particularly with regard to peace-keeping
operations.
Secondly, there must be more frequent missions of the
Assembly to deal with certain crisis situations, as was done
in the cases of Haiti and South Africa. The financial
reform of the United Nations, which has been discussed for
several years now, must be set in motion. Following the
work of the high-level Working Group established last year
to consider the question of enlarging the Security Council,
France proposes that a group, led by the President of the
General Assembly, be set up this year to make proposals
that could lead to the financial reform of our Organization.
Thirdly, we must work to achieve the enlargement of
the Security Council. This question has already been the
focus of in-depth discussions that have clarified the
positions at issue. For its part, France has no panacea to
offer, but it believes that the solution must answer the dual
imperative of efficacy and representativeness.
On the one hand, if the Security Council is to function
efficiently, given its tasks and the circumstances in which
it intervenes, its capacity to take important decisions
quickly must clearly be maintained. But the Council must
also allow for full public debate in reaching its decisions.
Hence, we are in favour of the Council’s holding official
meetings - without of course giving up its informal
consultations - to hear Members of the Organization and
talk with them before taking positions on the important
questions before it. We believe that this is the appropriate
response to the demand for transparency made by many
delegations.
On the other hand, the Council’s authority and thus its
efficacy also depend on its representativeness. We
therefore favour the enlargement of the Council to include
new permanent and non-permanent members. France
confirms its support for the desires of Germany and Japan
to accede to permanent membership. It also considers that
the representatives of the developing world should in no
case find themselves marginalized by any future reform.
The United Nations exists and acts only through the
will of its Member States. Though that is obvious it
bears repeating. Any failure of our Organization is in
fact the failure of those same States - that is, as my
colleague from the United Kingdom stated earlier today,
our own failure. Its efficacy depends above all on the
degree of commitment each of us brings to it.
Without the commitment of States there can be no
solution to the financial crisis of the United Nations.
Each of us is aware of the gravity of our Organization’s
financial situation. Each of us also knows that this
critical situation is not the result solely of the sum total of
expenditures. The real source of our crisis is well known:
it is the negligence of States which do not pay their
contributions or do not pay them in full.
Of course, we welcome the fact that one of the main
contributor countries has decided to pay a substantial part
of its arrears, thereby bringing temporary relief to the
Organization’s financial situation. We can understand
why some Member States are requesting that the scale of
contributions be adjusted in order better to reflect real
abilities to pay. France hopes that at the present session
the General Assembly will address the revision of this
scale in accordance with the principle of fairness and in
a spirit of consensus.
But fairness also requires swifter and more
substantial reimbursement to States that provide the troops
necessary to peace-keeping operations and are therefore
the primary victims of late payments. The situation in
which some in fact pay twice while others do not pay at
all must come to an end. France therefore asks once
again that a working group be established and mandated
to propose all the measures that can encourage tardy
States to pay their arrears.
And without the commitment of States there cannot
be any solution to international instability. France has
made considerable efforts to help resolve crises that have
threatened the international order over the past few years.
It has been the first and is now the second largest troop
contributor to the United Nations. It has well-known
experience in the three areas of preventive diplomacy,
peace-keeping and humanitarian action. Obviously,
France does not wish to lecture anyone, but its own
commitment does permit it to say that the readiness of
16


States does not meet the demands made today upon our
Organization.
Need we cite all the circumstances in which the non-
participation or temporizing of States has compromised
action mandated by the Security Council? How many
weeks did we have to wait last year for the military
arrangements provided for under Security Council
resolution 824 (1993) on safe areas in Bosnia were finally
in place? We all remember that, during the Rwandan
crisis, the decision taken by the Security Council in mid-
May to strengthen the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Rwanda had yet to be implemented two months later.
Rather than dwelling on these disappointments,
however, France wishes to pay tribute to all those States
that have shown, by their commitment and sense of
international solidarity, that the United Nations can prove
that it is effective. The African countries that chose to
share with us the risks involved in the operation in Rwanda;
the United States, which is working in Haiti to effect the
implementation of Security Council resolution 940 (1994);
the States whose soldiers stand with ours in the United
Nations Protection Force: it is thanks to them that there
remains a chance for peace in the former Yugoslavia,
delayed only by the stubbornness of the Bosnian Serb
leaders. France expects that the greatest of firmness will be
used in dealing with these most recent warmongers. But
the change in position of the other parties, and in particular
the authorities in Belgrade, makes it incumbent upon us to
continue to seek a negotiated settlement. In this spirit, we
appeal to Presidents Izetbegovic, Tudjman and Milosevic,
who have all accepted the peace plan for Bosnia, to resume
the direct dialogue necessary for a comprehensive
settlement. Otherwise, the international community must be
prepared to propose the terms of a comprehensive, just and
lasting settlement, taking into account the legitimate
interests of the various communities that made up the
former Yugoslavia and must enjoy equal rights.
Bringing to trial those responsible for war crimes is a
moral imperative to which France is committed. We must
above all make the people in the former Yugoslavia
understand that there are prospects for the future other than
endless violence and vengeance. That is France’s message.
That is the reason for the commitment of our soldiers in
Bosnia and, sadly, the sacrifice of several dozen of them.
There is nothing pre-ordained about failure to get involved,
or inertia. There is a strong will at the heart of our
Organization. Therefore France appeals to all Member
States to mark the fiftieth anniversary with a genuine
renewal of commitment.
Voices are being raised today urging our
Organization to show greater realism in defining the
missions that it has to carry out. In appealing to Member
States to mobilize, France wishes to reaffirm its
unwavering conviction that, in the face of the challenges
to the international community, realism consists not in
being less ambitious but in ensuring that we have the
means fully to achieve our ambitions. They must not be
limited to what seems possible; they must be to make
possible what is obviously necessary. It is in this spirit
that France will continue actively to play its role within
the United Nations.
I should like first to
congratulate you most warmly, Sir, on your election as
President. The Assembly could not have made a wiser
choice. I wish you all good fortune and success in your
mission.
In a few months we shall commemorate the fiftieth
anniversary of the birth of the United Nations. The United
Nations is the fullest expression man has yet achieved of
the age-old desire to escape from war and establish an
enduring peace.
When the United Nations was founded in San
Francisco 50 years ago the threat of nuclear war between
the super-Powers had already begun to cast a shadow
across the world. That shadow has now lifted, and we all
live and sleep more safely as a result. Yet as we approach
the anniversary we are all more conscious of the suffering
and destruction that still disfigure parts of almost every
continent in the world. The threats to international peace
and security are more diffuse and perhaps less serious than
they were, but not less real and not less tragic for those
caught up in them.
To some extent, disappointment comes out of
exaggerated expectation. There is still a tendency to think
of the United Nations as if it were some great palace of
world order which descended splendidly from heaven 50
years ago. If that were our view, then every broken pane
of glass in that palace, every door, every pillar fouled or
damaged would be a disgrace and a scandal.
But, of course, in reality world order does not descend
from heaven at the moment when a Charter is signed. It is
not like that at all. World order is built painfully,
gradually, brick by brick. Sometimes the wind and the
weather destroy what has already been built. But the
builders cannot afford to be discouraged - and we are all
builders. They have to repair; they have to rebuild; they
have to hope that gradually in what they build the
advances will outnumber the retreats.
There have been recent advances that have been
dramatic - beyond expectation. No one who was present
at the Union Buildings in Pretoria this May could fail to
be moved at the birth of the new South Africa. The
goodwill and the cheerful determination of all South
Africans on that occasion were a marvelous refutation, it
seemed to me, of the cynicism that so often weakens our
work.
And we have seen the same as the peace process
gathers strength in the Middle East.
In part of my own country, we may - and I fervently
hope we shall - see killings cease, see fears slowly
dissolve, as a result of the process started by the British
and Irish Governments in the Downing Street Declaration
on Northern Ireland.
In Europe - in Cyprus, in the former Yugoslavia, in
Georgia -the United Nations has helped at least to contain
if not yet to resolve deep-rooted conflicts. The world’s
most intractable problems continue to be laid at your
door, Mr. Secretary-General, like infants laid at the door
of some medieval monastery. It is not surprising that, for
all the efforts of 77,000 men and women serving in
United Nations peace-keeping operations in the field, our
Organization has had failures as well as successes to its
name.
As is common in our society of mass media, the
headlines have been dominated by the reversals, and some
of them have indeed been tragic. In Rwanda the efforts
of the United Nations failed to avert genocide. In
Somalia it looks as if our efforts have been effectively
spurned by a people whose need for help seemed, and
seems, self-evident.
A word about Bosnia. There has in recent months,
mercifully, been more peace in Bosnia. It is a fragile,
uncertain, inconclusive, often interrupted peace, but it is
still better than what went before. We necessarily discuss
Bosnia all the time. The debate in particular in this
building about the United Nations arms embargo has at
times seemed to rage more fiercely than the fighting on
the ground. Certainly the diplomatic efforts have been
frustrating. And I can understand those who believe that
reverting to a fight, even a fight to the death, would be
5


preferable to the tangle of negotiations and compromise that
sometimes seems to stretch ahead for ever.
Nevertheless, I do not agree with that opinion. We
should value, we should build on, the advances that have
been made, we should value the lives that have been saved
by the reduction in fighting on the ground. We can now
see perhaps more clearly that the United Nations Protection
Force (UNPROFOR) has been essential in protecting
civilians and in preventing the Bosnian Serb army from
making further advances. Who here can believe that
Gorazde, or Srebrenica or Zepa would still be in the hands
of the Bosnian Government if it were not for the bravery
and commitment of UNPROFOR troops?
UNPROFOR can operate only if it is able to keep
lines open to all the parties to the fighting. It could not
continue if leading members of the United Nations were
rearming one side; UNPROFOR would then be identified
as a party to the war. It is not mandated or equipped for
that purpose. Our Secretary-General has endorsed that
view, and the Commander of United Nations forces in
Bosnia has rightly said "We have not come here to fight a
war from inside white painted vehicles".
So I welcome the decision of which we heard
yesterday from the Bosnian President, the decision to accept
that now is not the moment to lift the arms embargo. And
that Bosnian decision allows UNPROFOR to continue its
mission. We have said before that if the Bosnian Serbs do
not join the peace process and agree the map presented by
the Contact Group, then our present approach may become
exhausted. Lifting the arms embargo may become
unavoidable, as we said at Geneva in July, and in those
circumstances UNPROFOR would have to withdraw. But
it would not be a good policy. Indeed, it would be a policy
of despair, a policy that, as in Shakespeare’s King Lear,
"Bids the wind blow the earth into the sea,
"...
"That things might change or cease". (King Lear, Act
III, scene i, l. 5)
A real solution to the conflict, as always, lies with
those who are doing the fighting. We from outside must
continue to show all the parties that the way forward is
political agreement and not more military action. There is
a settlement plan, the settlement plan of the Contact Group,
on the table. Those who refuse it, those who continue the
warfare, must be isolated, must be put under sustained -
indeed, increased - pressure. Those who cooperate with the
international peace plan effectively, in deeds and not just
in words, should have that cooperation recognized.
I need to say a few words in response to the remarks
made yesterday by the distinguished President of
Argentina concerning the dispute over the Falkland
Islands. President Menem was right - and I am glad that
he mentioned it - when he referred to the increasing
cooperation between the United Kingdom and Argentina
in several areas. Indeed, this cooperation nowadays
characterizes our bilateral relationship. And we certainly
hope, sincerely hope, that the progress that we have
achieved together will not be reversed.
We are quite clear about British sovereignty over the
Falkland Islands and the other British dependencies in the
South Atlantic, so we were concerned at the recent
incorporation into the constitution of Argentina of the
new clause to which President Menem referred. It seems
to us that in these Falkland Islands, as in Northern
Ireland, we must heed the wishes of the people
concerned. Indeed, any other course for us or for the
United Nations would be inconceivable. This body has
heard those wishes of the Islanders expressed, most
recently by their elected representatives who visited the
United Nations for the debate in the Committee of 24 last
July.
So we have a difference. But despite this difference,
we have joined a dialogue with the Argentine
Government on fisheries and petroleum development. We
look forward to resuming discussions in the near future
with the Argentine authorities on a new agreement on
fishing and on the development of possible hydrocarbon
resources in the South Atlantic continental shelf. We are
also discussing the welcome Argentine offer to remove
mines from the Falklands. It seems to me that that is the
rational and logical path to the wider progress of which
the President of Argentina spoke.
I return to this Organization. It is often the target of
criticism because it cannot solve every problem laid at its
door. We all know that there is scope for improving the
performance of the United Nations here in New York
and, more critically, where the United Nations and its
agencies are in action on the ground. The steps taken so
far are a beginning, but only a beginning.
Machinery cannot run on thin air. The United
Nations can only run on the fuel that we, its Member
States, supply to it. So where it has failed, we must not
pretend that the failure lies with the system. It lies with
6


us. The failure of the United Nations is our failure, and so
it is for us to take action. For example, the sufferings of
the Rwandan refugees will not be helped by Member
States’ holding their heads in their hands. Their hands
should be ready to provide from their pockets what is
needed to remedy such suffering.
Preventive diplomacy is the ideal. But it often will
not be enough. We have to be prepared for the demand for
peace-keepers to continue. There are practical ways in
which we can respond better to that demand: first, by
ensuring that we learn the lessons from our experiences in
peace-keeping; secondly, by taking practical steps to
improve our capacity to keep the peace, especially in
Africa; and, thirdly, by reforming our financing system.
I should like to say a brief word about peace-keeping.
It is often impossible to predict at the outset of a mission
what demands or dangers United Nations troops will
encounter. Within limits, they must be ready to improvise.
But allowing their role to drift from peace-keeping to taking
sides in a war carries high risks to the troops themselves,
to the political process they support, and to the ability of
the United Nations to put in peace-keepers elsewhere. It
undermines the willingness of Member States to contribute
troops. So in making their decision to contribute to a
United Nations operation countries need to be confident that
their troops will be supporting peace and not becoming a
party to war.
Rwanda put this to the test, and we were found
wanting for a response for the time being. The issue was
not really whether the United Nations should have sent an
intervention force to stop the fighting - which it clearly
could not - but whether it could find the means, the men
and the equipment, for a force to protect the civilian
population. That, tragically, took far too long.
That is the latest lesson we need to learn from. It is
not now, it seems to me, a question of will, because there
is a far greater readiness than there used to be to
contemplate intervention on the ground to mitigate or
prevent humanitarian disaster. It is not so much the will,
the intellectual willingness; it is the resources, the know-
how, the ability to respond swiftly, which are still not
enough.
You, Mr. Secretary-General, have pointed this out over
and over again, and I should like to pay tribute to the
patience and persistence with which you have rammed
home this lesson and sought not merely to tell us the truths
about it but to persuade us into practical action and remedy.
I agree with what you have said on many occasions. We
need to work hard and fast to overcome obstacles which
are essentially practical.
We British will continue to contribute practically.
We have 4,000 British men and women in blue berets,
from Georgia to Rwanda, something which would have
been thought inconceivable even 10 years ago. We have
the seconded British experts at United Nations
Headquarters. The speed with which the Department of
Peace-keeping Operations has adapted to cope with ever-
increasing demand has been impressive. The
development of the professional military staff at United
Nations Headquarters has been particularly welcome. So
has the trend to bring more seconded staff in alongside
United Nations personnel. But it will be vital also to help
to strengthen our ability to respond quickly in areas where
it remains weak. Africa, in the light of experience,
should be a priority.
Africa’s need for peace-keepers is plain to see:
nearly 40 per cent of all United Nations peace-keepers are
deployed in Africa. Africa needs peace. There can be no
doubt of that, because it is only in peace that Africans
will succeed in finding their own solutions to their
problems. The remarkable events in South Africa earlier
this year showed that.
The efforts of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) to develop a coherent approach to the prevention
of conflict are welcome. They deserve our full support.
But the OAU has warned that its resources are not
enough. I believe that the United Nations must respond.
By setting up a coherent structure of support systems,
running from early warning and preventive diplomacy
right through to humanitarian and peace-keeping
deployment on the ground, we can make sure that the
skills and resources can be put into action as soon as the
need arises, and not months later.
What does that mean? It means, first, an early
warning system. Not all conflicts can be foreseen. Some
are triggered by assassination or a coup d’état or other
sudden events. More often, surely, we can see trouble
brewing: competition for land and resources, ethnic or
religious rivalry, the gradual breakdown of law and order,
ill-judged responses by central governments. We need a
mechanism to pull together information and analysis of
events like these, to take a regular forward look at
potential troublespots and decide whether preventive
diplomacy needs to be triggered.
7


Then, secondly, it means a capacity to react, that is to
say, to intervene diplomatically before warfare breaks out.
We do not have that capacity now. Britain and France - we
announced this last year - have offered help, making
available experienced diplomats and offering equipment and
support. There needs to be an institutional framework. In
Europe we have the Conference on Security and
Cooperation in Europe (CSCE), which operates to agreed
principles and has intervened, for example, in Ukraine,
Moldova and the Baltic States to try to help parties to
resolve disputes before there is recourse to fighting. The
OAU has its own experience of pre-emptive action, and it
would clearly need to be the focal point of an enhanced
effort in Africa. I am proposing that the United Nations
should help the OAU and African countries to share this
expertise and establish agreed mechanisms for preventive
diplomacy in Africa.
But, thirdly, that will not always be enough. Peace-
keeping skills will continue to be in demand. We must
build up the necessary capabilities in Africa. Many African
countries already make a major contribution to peace-
keeping - Ghana, Egypt, Botswana, Zimbabwe and Zambia,
to mention just some. But we all know the United Nations
has not been able to deploy in Africa with the necessary
speed and effectiveness.
I therefore propose that, under the auspices of the
United Nations, a number of military staff colleges existing
in Africa should become peace-keeping skills centres; that
is to say, they should give training in doctrines and
disciplines of peace-keeping, and in mediation and conflict
resolution.
The physical capacity also needs to be strengthened if
intervention is to be rapid when it is needed. That requires
United Nations logistics basing centres, like those already
existing in Europe, to store equipment and ensure that it is
quickly available, with rapid mobile logistics teams,
earmarked by Member States, to help to maintain that
equipment in good running order and to give training and
on-the-spot maintenance support. Again, the lesson of
Rwanda is clear. These centres will also need headquarters
staff to identify and remedy logistic weaknesses, give
advice on maps or communications and advise existing and
potential troop contributors.
These are not proposals for enormous new machinery.
We need a framework within which existing resources,
capability and know-how can be mobilized. We will
strongly support such an effort. It needs further
discussion - above all, among and with African countries.
We would welcome such discussion soon, here in New
York, to develop these ideas, other people’s ideas and
take some practical decisions quickly.
Finally, money. As you, Mr. Secretary-General,
remind us, as you are bound to remind us, the United
Nations at the moment works miracles with what we do
not pay it. It simply cannot keep running on exhausted
credit. It must be able to pay its peace-keepers, for
example. We will not be able to build up the operations
of the United Nations unless we act now to put the
finances of the United Nations on a sound and sustainable
footing for the long term.
No radical change in principles is needed, but we do
need a sensible updating of the way in which assessments
are calculated. The existing system was adopted in 1973.
Much has changed. No one now would propose that
States with above average per capita incomes should
enjoy an 80 per cent discount on their peace-keeping
contributions. No one now would suggest that discounts
for all the newly independent Member States should be
absorbed by five countries in an open-ended arrangement.
But that is the system. It means that some countries are
paying too much and others too little. It means that we
now need to put these anomalies right. Moving to a
system based on relative capacity to pay, with automatic
adjustment for changing circumstances, would not mean
very much change for most countries, but it would mean
a fair, equitable basis on which the long-term viability
and therefore vitality of the United Nations could be
assured.
A word about the Security Council. Reform is on
the agenda - that is quite right - and I believe it is in the
interests of the United Nations to sort out the question of
enlargement in good time. We would like the momentum
of discussion to be maintained.
Next year’s fiftieth anniversary is a good milestone
for the debate. We will work hard for a good outcome,
both on enlargement and on transparency, where recent
informal arrangements to improve consultation on peace-
keeping between the Secretariat, the Security Council and
troop contributors should be further developed.
We should ensure that the Council is representative,
while avoiding an enlargement so great that it puts at risk
the effectiveness of the Council. If consensus can be
reached, then clearly there are countries that, by virtue of
their global interests and their contribution to international
8


security and United Nations operations, should be invited to
accept the responsibilities of permanent membership.
I have concentrated today on how we deal with crises
and defuse tensions. But, of course, those are only some of
the challenges that our Organization faces. Drug trafficking
and associated international crime are other threats to our
security and well-being. We need to give new energy and
encouragement to all those who are involved in developing
cooperation against those threats. I mention this because I
feel that we must give particular support to the United
Nations International Drug Control Programme. This is the
programme that has the responsibility for leading all the
world’s efforts in this field. Once again, the United
Nations is the best resource we have for tackling a menace
that threatens the whole world.
In conclusion, we can say confidently that the United
Nations is indispensable. It is not a perfect glass palace,
but it is the best building we have, even though the winds
still blow cruelly through its gaps and its defects. We all,
therefore, have a duty to repair, make good, build afresh.
Next year we will look back rightly on the
achievements, and the list of achievements is long. But it
will remind us, and we will remind ourselves, of what has
not yet been achieved. And I hope that will stir us to show
the same vision, the same strength of purpose as the
founders of the United Nations, with, I hope, results of
equal value for the next 50 years.
I congratulate Mr.
Amara Essy on his election as President of the General
Assembly at the forty-ninth session. We are particularly
gratified that an eminent son of Africa is leading the
Assembly’s deliberations this year.
We offer our thanks to his predecessor, Ambassador
Insanally, who presided over a year of considerable
activity in the General Assembly with great aplomb and
finesse. The Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros
Boutros-Ghali, will be completing three years in office.
We wish him well as he continues to lead the United
Nations.
We have already welcomed the new South Africa to
the United Nations. South Africa today is a reminder of
the triumph of the principle of equality of man - a
triumph in which the United Nations played a major role.
The world community must commit itself to ensuring that
this principle is implemented for all time to come. All
efforts should be made for the development of South
Africa.
Forty-nine years ago a world tired of war declared
that at this foundry of the United Nations it would beat its
swords into ploughshares. Instead, we have only
produced words, while the swords have not disappeared.
The words may be important, but unfortunately they have
remained mere words. We seem to be stepping into a
new world order in a gaping moral void, with no credible
promise of peace nor of a nonviolent world. And we are
approaching 1995: the fiftieth anniversary of the United
Nations; the fortieth anniversary of Panchsheel - the Five
Principles of Peaceful Coexistence; the Year of Tolerance,
which is being celebrated by the United Nations; and the
one hundred and twenty-fifth birthday of the apostle of
13


peace and moral force, Mahatma Gandhi, whose message
only gains in relevance year after year.
Global security today demands a holistic approach
involving the promotion of economic and social
development; the protection of human rights; the promotion
of harmony and social cohesion in multi-racial and
multi-ethnic societies; the combating of terrorism,
drug-trafficking and clandestine traffic in armaments; and
the enhancing of the capacity of the United Nations, within
the framework of its Charter, to prevent conflicts, preserve
peace and alleviate suffering. The new agenda of the
United Nations must be shaped on the basis of this
approach, giving peace and development equal priority and
treatment. The General Assembly, with its universal
participation and comprehensive mandate, should project
such a holistic vision and revitalize that vision into action.
The Secretary-General’s Agendas have reminded us
of what we should focus on, namely, disarmament,
development and peace. I put them in that order because
true peace can only follow disarmament and development.
The cold war was not war, yet certainly not peace. In its
wake, we have seen how, most frighteningly, poverty,
disease and a host of miseries affect the cause of peace.
They had been there all the time, but were not seen by the
jaundiced eye of the cold war. In the new post-cold-war
context, therefore, the nexus of disarmament and
development with peace becomes crystal clear - indeed
inescapably clear.
We have to start with disarmament. The slaughter in
Rwanda has taken place during the forty-ninth anniversary
of the devastation of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. For almost
50 years, we have lived in fear of general and complete
extinction instead of global and complete disarmament.
Those who had biological and chemical weapons have
given them up under universally binding commitments. We
must now go one logical step further and exorcise the
greatest evil of all, namely, the weapons of mass
destruction.
We have had global discussions on nuclear
disarmament before, but now that the cold war, which
spawned these weapons, is over, and the previous
adversaries have been drawn into a partnership for peace,
this is surely the time to agree - in regimes which are
global, comprehensive, verifiable and non-discriminatory -
on steps to make the world a safer place. Another
opportunity will arise when the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) comes up for
review next April. We hope that States Parties will use that
occasion to refashion the Treaty into a real instrument for
global disarmament. Quite apart from the NPT, it is
essential that we examine a detailed implementation
process of total and global disarmament, which has been
accepted in principle, though in words only thus far.
Last June in Cairo, the Foreign Ministers of the non-
aligned countries, at India’s suggestion, proposed that a
fourth special session on disarmament be convened. We
think the time and the circumstances are right for the
General Assembly to plan for this special session for next
year, or as soon as possible.
But disarmament alone will be inadequate. We are
rushing towards another precipice, where the disparities
in wealth between nations would trigger violent revolution
within States. A global convulsion will come if we
continue to disregard the development imperative. The
problems of development are global problems and must
be addressed by all of us. We must set a substantive
agenda for development, commit ourselves to it and
implement it.
The World Trade Organization, which should soon
come into being, must promote what we expected but did
not quite achieve so far in the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade (GATT) - non-discrimination,
consensus and transparency in the international trade
regime. We hope that the multilateral trade negotiations
will stimulate economic growth in our countries and in
the world economy. It will not if the carefully negotiated
consensus, to which we committed ourselves at
Marrakesh, is destroyed by the introduction of new
conditionalities. Faith in the multilateral system will be
shaken if countries use their trading strength and bilateral
pressures to weaken and distort agreements to which they
have just become parties.
The themes of the World Summit for Social
Development focus on the critical issues of poverty
eradication together with social integration and the need
to increase avenues for productive employment, without
which we will not have the broad-based, self-sustaining
social and economic development that is the only
guarantor of peace and security. If the Summit is to
succeed, we must agree upon the commitments for
additional resources dedicated to national programmes
around the world. We should not be sidetracked from
this goal by new concepts which do not command
consensus, and do not address the fundamental needs of
development.
14


The United Nations must also re-order its priorities so
as to counter several disturbing centrifugal trends which we
see emerging. What the world needs is support for the
nation-State system on which the United Nations was built.
In June this year, Prime Minister Narasimha Rao and
President Yeltsin, representing two of the largest pluralistic
nations in the world, issued the Moscow Declaration on the
Protection of the Interests of Pluralistic States. In this
Declaration, which has been circulated as a document of the
General Assembly, Russia and India have put forward
principles which, if acted upon, will, we think, promote
greater harmony in the world.
Against this background, there are a few questions for
the Assembly to consider. For the 45 years of the cold
war, the Security Council was forced into immobility, but
when the cold war ended, it found itself shouldering a
stupendous task. As if to make up for years of inactivity,
it has rushed into many areas. We must ponder the
consequences of the decisions taken over the last few years,
which have on occasion sent United Nations peace-keepers
in pursuit of objectives whose nexus with peace is rather
tenuous.
New doctrines justify armed United Nations
intervention under circumstances that are not quite defined -
not yet at any rate. These initiatives are well meaning but
they do not seem to address the problems from the right
end. The ultimate human right is the right to live - the
right to food and shelter without which life is impossible.
The poverty of many nations makes this a problem to
which there are no easy answers. If there are
circumstances which justify armed multilateral intervention,
by the same logic should not the United Nations have the
right to enforce the equitable sharing of resources among
nations?
The Non-aligned Movement, at the meeting of its
Foreign Ministers in Cairo this year, suggested some
guiding principles for peace-keeping operations of enduring
significance. All means for the peaceful settlement of
disputes chosen by the conflicting parties should be
exhausted before coercive measures are considered.
Peace-keeping operations should strictly adhere to the
principles of the Charter, in particular the principles of full
respect for the sovereignty of States, their territorial
integrity and non-intervention in their internal affairs.
Peace-keeping operations should be considered only at the
request of the Member States involved. The resources for
peace-keeping activities should not be at the expense of
resources for development activities of the United Nations.
There should be no hesitation in ending those operations
which have been overtaken by events or become
inconsistent with their mandates. It is also important to
ensure that the distinction between peace-keeping
operations and other activities of the United Nations,
including humanitarian assistance, is maintained at all
times. While coordination between these activities at the
field level is important, their integration could irreversibly
alter the basic purposes of these distinct activities and
detract from their effectiveness.
Prudence must be exercised in the use of regional
organizations in peace-keeping operations. It is the
capacity of the United Nations for peace-keeping that
must be strengthened.
We have responded positively to the Secretary-
General’s appeal for the strengthening of the United
Nations capacity for peace-keeping by designating a
brigade for the stand-by arrangements that are being put
in place.
It is true that the work of the Security Council and
its role in the United Nations are of the greatest
importance. There is therefore all the more reason that
the Council should be representative of the international
community and have maximum legitimacy. The United
Nations needs a Council that is effective, but it cannot be
effective if the impression grows that it represents
entrenched privileges and that its agenda could vary from
those of the general membership. The democracy and
good governance which are urged upon all States cannot
stop at the gates of the United Nations.
The present-day composition of the Security Council
reflects the power balance of the immediate post-war
period. Since then, the membership of the world body
has increased many times over. There is also a greater
diffusion of power. To give the Council’s actions greater
legitimacy, moral authority and political effectiveness, it
is imperative to expand the membership of the Council.
Developing countries must be included in the category of
permanent members to reflect the universal character of
the world body. The number of non-permanent seats
must also be increased to give Member States greater
opportunity for participation in the work of the Council.
A selective, piecemeal expansion of the number of
permanent members would not be prudent. The Security
Council is not a corporate board, where equity shares
determine the voting power, nor can it be likened to the
Bretton Woods institutions, which reflect the wealth of
nations. The United Nations is based on the principle of
15


the sovereign equality of nations. Its primary objective
remains the maintenance of international peace and security.
These elements must find expression in the composition of
the Council, which must be able to address the challenges
of the twenty-first century.
Durability and resilience, rather than expediency,
should determine the time frame of any expansion. On the
basis of any criteria - population, size of economy,
contribution to the maintenance of international peace and
security and to peace-keeping or future potential - India
deserves to be a permanent member of the Security
Council.
The working methods of the Security Council must be
reformed to enhance transparency and to express the
democratic aspirations of the vast majority of Member
States. We hope that the Open-ended Working Group on
the question of increase in the membership of the Security
Council will duly reflect on these issues in its deliberations
next year.
Human rights are the new vogue. The profoundly
humanistic traditions of the Indian civilization, with its
emphasis on tolerance, harmony, non-violence and the
inviolability of the individual, are in-built in our ethos.
Several centuries back, an Indian thinker wrote:
"Man is above everything else. Man is the highest
truth. There is nothing above man."
All human rights are sacrosanct in India, guaranteed
by a secular Constitution, an independent judiciary, a free
press, and public opinion vigorously expressed. India’s
commitment to the promotion and protection of human
rights has now received another institutional impetus with
the establishment of our National Human Rights
Commission, which has begun to function effectively, with
its findings published in its annual report. In keeping with
our policy of transparency we maintain a sustained dialogue
with important non-governmental organizations, which
includes affording greater access to them. We have also
invited the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to visit India.
It is true that much remains to be done on a
worldwide basis to further international cooperation to
promote and protect human rights. But the problem must
be seen in perspective. In India, for instance, we grapple
with the problems of development for 900 million people;
in the north-west and in the north-east we face brutal
terrorist movements, often supported from abroad, which
have killed thousands of innocents, made refugees of
hundreds of thousands within India, and threatened our
sovereignty and territorial integrity. We will face these
problems and defeat them. We welcome the support and
advice of friends abroad, but we cannot accept the
position that all human rights are a privilege of the
terrorists. The rights of innocent and unarmed citizens
must be protected. We urge that the question of human
rights should not be made into a politically motivated
slogan insensitive to the rights of those citizens.
Since the toxin of terrorism is deliberately being
spread by some countries - and none of us is immune -
the international community must come together to defend
itself. Terrorism is fast becoming a means, if not a
weapon, of mass destruction. Many countries have
suffered and many more could be affected. Terrorists
have killed far more people in the last decades than the
chemical and biological weapons which we have agreed
to ban and destroy. Just as the international community
decided that a convention was needed to outlaw those
weapons, so it must urgently negotiate a convention to
counter and eradicate terrorism. We urge the General
Assembly to initiate serious thinking on this subject. The
international community must also provide the necessary
succour to the victims of terrorism, whose numbers are
swelling by the day.
The closing years of the twentieth century will see
human society poised at a critical juncture as regards the
future. Will the end of the cold war mark the beginnings
of a new, more stable global order, of freedom and
well-being growing on the soil of cooperation, consensus
and mutual respect, or will the world instead revert bit by
bit to the mind-set which breeds anarchy and a return to
centrifugalism and destruction, to end up once again in
the tyranny of imposition and domination? Should we
regress to the system of spheres of influence which has
led to so many wars over the last two hundred years?
These questions have still not been adequately answered.
Many years ago the father of our nation, Mahatma
Gandhi, had asked what test should guide human
endeavour. His conclusion, after long years of struggling
on behalf of India’s many dispossessed millions, was as
follows:
"I will give you a talisman. Whenever you are in
doubt, or when the self becomes too much with you,
apply the following test: Recall the face of the
poorest and the weakest man whom you may have
seen, and ask yourself if the step you contemplate is
16


going to be of any use to him. Will he gain anything
by it? Will it restore him to a control over his own
life and destiny?"
If the protection afforded to its weak, its most
dispossessed, people is the measure of community’s worth,
as indeed it must be, then the millions of refugees, and the
conflict, poverty, hunger and deprivation that afflict so
many regions of the world today bear stark testimony to the
loss of some vital ethical underpinning. If the world today
is to redeem a future that seems increasingly mortgaged to
greed and hatred, we must recall once again that it is the
nobility of our means, and the ends we pursue, that
determine our rewards. Our welfare will be determined
only in accordance with the values and principles we abide
by.
As Mahatma Gandhi and sages before have taught and
practised, truthfulness, charity, compassion, non-violence
and treating others as we would wish ourselves to be
treated are the values that really stand the test of time.
These are the values to be inculcated in our great global
Organization, the United Nations, to which we are all
committed.
I should like to congratulate
you, Sir, on your election to the presidency of the General
Assembly. We are pleased that the representative of Côte
d’Ivoire - a nation for which Israel has high regard - has
been elected to this distinguished post. I should like to
express to the Secretary General our deepest appreciation
13


for his contribution to world peace in general, and to peace
in the Middle East in particular.
A year ago, I offered a concept for a new Middle
East. Many applauded; more remained sceptical. What at
that time seemed lofty is today a reality. I feel I can
submit today an invitation to a further journey in the new
Middle East.
Last year was a year of remarkable events. The
Palestinian people, as a result of our agreement, gained
authority in Gaza and Jericho; Jordan and Israel agreed, in
the Washington Declaration, to end the state of war and
move towards an agreement of full peace; voices of
promise are exchanged between Damascus and Jerusalem;
multilateral meetings produced a network of regional
cooperation; Morocco and Israel established formal
relations; and an agenda for a new Middle East will emerge
from an unprecedented economic conference in Casablanca
next month.
The desire for peace is rooted in the millenniums of
Jewish existence. Generations prayed for it, and now a
young generation in Israel is today engaged in making it.
The search for peace is shared by young people all over the
Middle East, Arabs and Israelis alike. We have to fulfil
their hope.
I am addressing this Assembly for the first time, not
as a party to a controversy, but as a representative of a
country that has shown a capacity to solve conflicts that
seemed insoluble.
The United Nations should play an increasing role
facing the changing times. It can define new destinies. It
can adopt new means.
As the United Nations celebrates its fiftieth
anniversary, it may adopt models for new endeavours by
mobilizing builders to construct peace, not just by
deploying troops to keep it. Economic structures will offer
more than military deployment.
Gaza, as an example, has a new authority. It needs a
new economy. The United Nations can provide an answer.
The 7,000 years of Gaza are mainly a history of suffering.
Its population density today is among the highest in the
world.
There is a role for the United Nations in Gaza, and it
has played one. It began by stationing troops - which were
recalled, unfortunately, on the eve of the Six-Day War.
Then UNRWA came and supplied food, health and
education to the refugees. Then UNDP contributed
greatly to the construction of an infrastructure in the Gaza
Strip.
The United Nations can help Gaza today become
free from want. It can introduce there the necessary
economic and proper social institutions. An enlarged
allocation for Gaza, with the existing United Nations
administration, will produce immediate results and may
make Gaza a new model of United Nations endeavours.
The world is moving from military might to social
priorities. It is time to turn from political confrontation
to economic cooperation. In the Middle East, economic
growth can compensate for political compromises.
We no longer live in a closed world. The intensive
flow of information has opened the eyes of many people.
No longer can tyranny blind their perceptions. Iron
curtains can no longer bar the spread of the true story.
Knowledge has finally overcome propaganda.
This current is profound and lasting. The sources of
strength and wealth are today universal rather than
national, intellectual rather than material. The size of the
territory, the number of its people, the wealth of its raw
materials, no longer decide the fate of a nation. It is the
scope of education, the level of science, applied
technology and up-to-date information that make all the
difference.
Intellectual sources are no longer partitioned by
traditional divides. Science has no territorial limits.
Technology has no national flags. Information can travel
without visas. Armies cannot conquer wisdom. Borders
cannot protect knowledge. The talent of creation is
replacing the strategies of destruction. Computers, not
rifles, mark the difference. The hunting season in history
is disappearing.

This does not mean an end to agonies. Starvation,
disease, terrorism, desertification, nuclear weapons,
ecological damage and dangerous drugs overflow the
boundaries of land and the boundaries of reason.
Violence employs new tactics: it has not
disappeared. Confrontations in the future may not
necessarily be wars of conquest, but bloodshed of protest.
14


The strong know that they will not be strengthened by
dominating the poor, or by owning their deserts. The poor
cannot, and will not, comply with their conditions, tolerated
by the indifference of the well-off.
Existing institutions were initiated in a different time.
They are based today on memories rather than on needs.
Ministries of foreign affairs and defence were structured to
confront enemies. Now we face dangers more than
enemies, but without our being organized to handle them.
We are not answering the need. Diplomacy and strategy
should be mobilized to face the undefined dangers. Disease
will not be overcome by traditional diplomatic démarches.
Starvation cannot be eliminated by guns. Deserts will not
bloom beneath air raids. Remedies will not arrive of their
own accord: they should be invented and introduced.
Israel is on the side of this tendency. We are
committed to ending the conflicts. We are determined to
uproot their causes. We do not intend to stop this
momentum or allow its interruption.
For the last five decades the mere existence of Israel
has served as a temptation to try and destroy it. For half a
century we had to give security top priority. To this very
day, we shed tears on the tombs of our children, who paid
with their young lives to overcome the menace. When
wars became futile, suspicion succeeded fighting. The
allegation was that Israel was trying to expand territorially
and was unwilling to compromise geographically. Reality
ended this allegation as well.
Egypt, first to negotiate peace, found an Israel willing
to exchange land for peace. The Palestinians, next in line,
gained jurisdiction over territories they had never controlled
before. With Jordan, we agreed to delineate a permanent
border without one side encroaching on the land of the
other. Syria was told at the outset of negotiations that the
nature of peace would affect the depth of the withdrawal.
Lebanon was told that Israel had no demands on its
territory and no intention of compromising its integrity.
Negotiations have not been easy. With the
Palestinians, we negotiated on uncharted ground. Never
had the Palestinian people experienced self-rule. Today
they possess a territorial address and an administrative
authority. For the first time in their history, their children’s
education is solely in Palestinian hands. In the coming days
Israel will hand over additional responsibilities to the
Palestinian Authority. The Declaration of Principles will be
fully implemented in the spirit and letter. We shall support
a Palestinian readiness to hold democratic elections.
Israel, as well as the Palestinians, may discover that
Palestinian democracy and Israeli security are
complementary. We have demonstrated that we are true
in our moral choice not to govern the destiny of another
people.
We shall continue to negotiate with Syria. We are
negotiating out of conviction, not weakness, and we hope
to conclude the negotiations with a settlement that will
respect the interests of both sides, without harming Syrian
dignity or compromising Israeli security. Syria insists on
a narrow path for the negotiations, postponing meetings
between the leaders and thus slowing the pace of
negotiations. Israel is ready for accelerated negotiations.
We address the Syrians by saying: "Let us talk face to
face. Let us negotiate, as proclaimed in Damascus, with
courage to attain a peace of honour. By ending suspicion,
introducing creativity and allowing flexibility, we can
transform a promising climate into a solid terrain." Syria
declared its strategy for peace. We appreciate it.
Military threats and territorial positions should be
transformed by security arrangements, diplomatic rapport,
full peace and economic endeavours. That will erode the
motivation for conflict. Without peaceful relations,
balances of power are meaningless. The range of
understanding can serve as the only answer to the range
of ballistic missiles.
President Clinton and Secretary of State Christopher
are relentlessly pushing for peace. European, Russian and
many other leaders are genuinely supportive. Important
Middle Eastern leaders are actively engaged in the same
direction. Still, much depends on direct negotiations.
Yesterday’s enemies, tomorrow’s partners, should become
today’s interlocutors.
A peace treaty between Israel and Syria may
produce a historic result greater than just an agreement
between two countries. It may well become the crowning
of a comprehensive peace. It may become an opportunity
for the leaders of the region - Kings, Presidents, Prime
Ministers, supported by the most prominent leaders of our
time - to gather and announce the end of the conflict and
to proclaim full peace throughout the region.
Peace can hardly emerge from stinginess. By
definition, it calls for generosity. Peace is more than a
mere ceremony. It requires ongoing maintenance; it
awaits a passionate cultivation of new relations. We hope
that our neighbours, from Saudi Arabia to Lebanon, from
Djibouti to Algeria, will become constructive partners in
15


it. Dark clouds are still hanging over the horizon - the
shadows of missed opportunities.
We have to build a coalition to prevent subversive
turbulence from undermining legitimate Governments and
harassing the stability needed for the inflow of investment.
All countries of the Middle East face a choice: to remain
politically divided and economically stagnant or to become
economically advanced and politically just.
A high standard of living for the people - all people -
is the best promise for stability in our midst. Israel is
willing to participate in achieving it. There are sceptics, we
know, who do not believe that the Middle East is ripe for
a common market similar to the European one. They forget
that Europe did not do it in one leap. It started with a
Community of coal and steel. We can start with a
community of water and tourism.
Nor do they believe that the Middle East is ready for
a free trade zone like the one in North America. Yet the
North American Free Trade Agreement emerged in a short
while as a success by linking geographic proximity with
economic growth. Those sceptics claim that generations are
needed to cement a new market in the Middle East. Well,
they can see what in 10 short years happened to Asian
countries, which attained unpredicted prosperity. They
achieved it by adopting a market economy.
The profile of a market economy is clear. It is made
of comprehensive education, open borders, free movement,
science-based industries and competitive trade. A market
economy is a fabric woven from political silk and durable
threads of welfare. The time is ripe for its rendezvous with
the Middle East.
At the end of October, under the presidency of King
Hassan II, we shall take the first step to implement a
regional design. We shall try to establish instruments for
development: a regional bank, channels for private
investment and a framework for regional planning. The
wealth of the Middle East should be convinced to remain
at home. Over the last decade it has invested the better
part of its fortunes abroad. Homebound wealth will attract
foreign investment as well.
We should cut the enormous expense - $70 billion
annually - of the arms race. The savings can be directed to
development. The arms race can be reduced only by
regional consent. No single country will do it alone.
To transform the region and make it a stable and
attractive place we need the emergence of the region as
a whole, committed to a new future. Nature, and not
only politics, calls for it. The waters, the winds, the
environment call for regional responsibility and
cooperation, for desalinization plants, energy stations,
highways, railways, runways, piers, telecommunication
networks, high-tech industries, tourism infrastructure,
banking systems, computer terminals and ecological
considerations - a landscape that will meet the future will
create a state of prosperity, and it is a regional challenge.
The Middle East was the cradle of civilization and
has a capacity to contribute. It experienced golden ages,
economically and culturally. It should be our collective
ambition to make it happen again and to make it happen
soon. Today, shortages can be bridged rapidly.
Computers can carry children not only from grade to
grade but from age to age. The software of knowledge
will better replace the hardware of weapons.
I have served my country since its birth. I have
learned that complex problems call for unconventional
solutions. I feel that over the past year we have won a
licence to build a new Middle East, to make it part of the
globe in its new age, free of wars, free of enemies, free
of terrorism; a Middle East which will be nuclear-free,
missile-free, hunger-free, discrimination-free, tyranny-free;
a constituency of peace, a domain of freedom, a land of
prosperity. There is a morning awaiting us after a long
night, calling us to direct our energies and our aims and
our prayers towards that great opportunity.
I should like, first,
to congratulate Mr. Amara Essy of Côte d’Ivoire on his
well-deserved election as President of the General
24


Assembly at its forty-ninth session and to convey to him
our good wishes for every success in his work.
The general debate is our chance, as Members of the
United Nations, to undertake together an annual review of
the Organization’s work - its successes and its failures -
and to identify collectively the issues we want to focus on.
With the fiftieth anniversary next year, there is a pressing
need to do so. That will be the occasion to chart our new
priorities for the twenty-first century.
Our responses to some of today’s challenges and
tragedies have ranged from excellent but often
under-reported to woefully inadequate and, consequently,
defiantly reported.
The peoples of the world want to believe in the United
Nations and what it should achieve. If, however, within
some parts of the Organization we are bereft of purpose
and intentions this golden anniversary threatens to be less
joyous and more muted than many of us anticipated.
New Zealand has a strong vested interest in the United
Nations success, as do most small States. The New
Zealand people have always believed in the United Nations,
in a collective approach to the resolution of global and
regional problems. This has been demonstrated by strong
support for the United Nations by successive Governments.
From our experience of - and I do not hesitate to say
this - a turbulent two years on the Security Council and as
a committed founder Member of the Organization, I would
like to take this opportunity to offer some observations
about the problems we see as players in the collective
decision-making process.
When New Zealand took part in the founding of the
United Nations we and many others saw our primary
purpose as providing for a system of collective security.
Until very recently that was little more than a vision. With
the end of the confrontation between two super-Power
blocs, the goal of "the organized common peace", of which
President Woodrow Wilson spoke so eloquently three
generations ago, presents itself. We must not let it slip
from our grasp this time. It will, however, take real effort
and real determination.
Collective security, or working together, is the
cornerstone of the security of small States. Today they are
the overwhelming majority of the membership of this
Organization. New Zealanders recognize that peace is
indivisible, that remoteness is certainly no safeguard: a
problem in any part of the world can ripple to the Earth’s
farthest corners. While we are the country probably most
distant from the Balkans conflict, we have sent an
enhanced company of soldiers to help in efforts to ease
suffering and, I earnestly hope with the will of the parties
involved, one day bring peace throughout the former
Yugoslavia.
For the same reasons, our defence personnel can be
found engaged in peace-support operations in Africa, the
Middle East, Asia and most recently Haiti. And there are
New Zealand nurses, firefighters and aid workers spread
around the globe in support.
Against this backdrop, however, New Zealanders are
puzzled at times by the way in which the United Nations
carries out some of its important tasks. In Bosnia, despite
the employment of what is by any standards a large, well-
armed and well-trained force, people see on their
television screens nightly the frustration of the United
Nations Protection Force by small groups of irregulars, a
single policeman or even small groups of non-combatants.
In Haiti they witnessed a boat full of Blue Berets turned
away by a small group of pistol-toting thugs
unconvincingly called "attachés".
And what can one say about the appalling tragedy in
Rwanda? How can so much hatred have been unleashed
so viciously, killing hundreds of thousands? What we
watched with horror on our television screens was
destruction on a scale we thought only megaton bombs
were capable of. The systematic slaughter of men,
women and children simply because of their ethnic origin
leaves us all outraged.
There are no easy answers. But the first key to
unlocking the possibilities for a genuine collective
security must be the proper application of the United
Nations Charter. We have to decide at exactly what point
the United Nations should get involved in the
peacemaking operation. Do we recognize a problem, and,
if we do, is the preventive diplomacy that we so firmly
believe in occurring?
In my view, we have to follow the intention of the
Charter. First, at the outset of a crisis, or even the signs
of a crisis, we have to make more serious efforts through
that preventive diplomacy to resolve problems and
conflicts by negotiation. Efforts must be made at an early
25


stage to address the root causes of conflicts by the Security
Council’s exercising all its responsibilities under Chapter VI
of the Charter.
However, on some occasions, in these days of modern
media technology, we face the dilemma caused by the
divergence between what the public perceives as happening
and what is the reality. Extensive media coverage puts
pressure on for immediate response. In the case of
Rwanda, that was appropriate. In other circumstances, the
media oversimplify and ignore the fact that conditions on
the ground are chaotic and United Nations resources are
over-stretched.
A second area where the Charter could be more
carefully applied is when disputes are first placed before
the Council. I believe it should give affected States an
adequate hearing before addressing the problem behind
closed doors. Our experience on the Security Council
suggests the investment in openness that would be achieved
by developing a practice of collectively hearing directly
from the parties involved would be worthwhile, even if it
were done only informally.
In the same vein, the Charter specifically contemplates
the involvement, without vote, of troop-contributing
countries in significant decisions. New Zealand has pressed
this issue for some time, but so far with limited success.
The time is coming, in fact, when the General Assembly
will have to address the question if the Security Council
does not respond adequately to the concerns that have been
raised.
Under the Charter, much is expected of the Council’s
permanent members. There is no doubt that they can and
do contribute greatly to the work of the United Nations.
Leadership and sacrifices by the large Powers were, for
example, instrumental in successfully challenging
aggression against the small State of Kuwait three-and-a-
half years ago.
I emphasize again, however, the importance of the
collective nature of decision-making in the Security
Council. Making distinctions between the views of the
"P5" and the rest is not really healthy. The Council is a
team of 15. It must work together, and by that I mean
giving full weight to the views of all its members. The
strength of the Security Council is enhanced each year by
the vigorous enthusiasm brought by new members on 1
January, testing what may have become an accepted
second-best.
I would remind the Assembly that the Charter
clearly envisages that the norm for operations to maintain
international peace and security will be United Nations
operations. National operations are not ruled out, of
course. I wish therefore to highlight and question recent
trends toward coalitions under national command, and the
implications for the collective security needs of small and
distant countries where no strategic interest is involved.
However, the Security Council will be judged on its
effectiveness. Successes, hopefully, will outweigh
failures, but we all have an obligation to improve the
success rate. I am an enthusiastic supporter of improving
our success rate, but much of that will come down to the
way in which issues are managed. And it is that question
of the management of issues that I wish to address.
In our experience, the key is to use management
tools based on proven modern public- and private-sector
experience. This is very valuable. What are these tools?
And how do we apply them to the conduct of peace-
keeping operations?
I would suggest that there are six critical elements:
first, a sustainable financial system; secondly, a
transparent political accountability; thirdly, clear
objectives that incorporate regular reviews; fourthly, a
clear, unambiguous command and control structure;
fifthly, a credible legal regime that guarantees the security
of United Nations personnel; and, sixthly, the availability
of resources so that objectives can be met quickly and
efficiently.
Let me go back to that first point, a sustainable
financial system. There is no doubt that the Organization
is facing a financial crisis that cannot be ignored. We
have had serious problems with reserves and we have
significant debt to contributing countries. The largest
contributor has indicated that it will unilaterally reduce its
share of funding from October next year. The situation
is not sustainable. It requires urgent action.
Why do we have this crisis? There are some simple
answers. Some members cannot pay; others will not pay;
and some are arguing the legitimacy of their assessment.
The General Assembly, this body, must confront this
issue. The United Nations must stop extending credit to
non-payers. There is enough evidence emerging to
suggest that there may be serious inequities in the present
system.
26


Some countries with extraordinarily strong growth
over the past 5 to 10 years appear in the revised scale
issued by the Committee on Contributions with a constant
or even reduced contribution level. That is not acceptable.
It must be remedied.
We do not want a hollow celebration on the fiftieth
anniversary with a cash crisis hanging over the
Organization. We must make a commitment to resolve this
crisis before the conclusion of the forty-ninth session.
The next point is the need for political accountability.
There is in my view a parallel priority to develop and
improve the Organization’s capacity for undertaking its
collective security responsibilities. To do that we need to
put in place more transparent procedures throughout the
Organization. The management of peace-keeping
operations is allocated to the Secretariat. This is necessary
and appropriate in the same way any Government delegates
responsibility for a complex operation to its public service.
However, and I speak as a politician and as a Minister
responsible for the management and oversight of
Government departments, the days are long gone when a
public service mandarin could run a department or major
operation without detailed political oversight. This is not
a promotion of micro-management, nor am I implying any
criticism of the Secretariat staff. But as any politician
holding executive office in today’s democracies knows, the
classic recipe for a failed project is for those who are
politically accountable to lose track of implementation or to
lose the game plan.
We saw that all too clearly in the past year in
Somalia. Ironically, the Security Council had, in resolution
814 (1993), already foreseen the need in the case of the
United Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM II) for a
detailed political accountability and provided for a
committee to follow the operation closely. But the
committee was never established.
New Zealand has proposed in the Security Council
that a committee or an ad hoc working group should be
established to fill this gap and enhance the accountability of
the Organization to its politically responsible
representatives. I certainly remain hopeful that progress
can be made in this area.
The third point I draw to the attention of members is
the need for clear objectives with regular reviews. Clearer
mission objectives must be developed and kept under
review. I am delighted that some progress has in fact been
made. The Council is now identifying more closely the
terms of mandates for United Nations operations, and it
is becoming usual to build a specific review cycle into its
mandates. But there are still two areas of weakness.
First, there is a great deal of mythology about and
very little sound analysis of the circumstances in which
force should be used by United Nations operations. Many
believe this is governed by the use or non-use of the
words "Chapter VII". This could well be a false
conclusion. The rules of engagement rather than abstract
reference to the Charter are much more likely to
determine actual behaviour in the field.
I am not alone in believing that there is a need to
develop greater commonality in military doctrine for
United Nations peace-keeping operations. This is
especially relevant when so many peace-keeping
contributors are regularly placed side by side in the field.
It is, however, particularly urgent in the face of new-style
operations of the intra-country type where the use of force
by factions, not necessarily Governments, is the challenge
for this body to overcome.
It is clear that common principles are necessary to
guide peace-keepers on the appropriate use of force when
they take part in operations in pursuit of an agreed United
Nations strategic objective. As for the review, while
there are plenty of mid-term reviews there is, as yet, no
systematic process of review at the end of an operation.
The budget of every peace-keeping operation should
include provision, as a principal line item, for the
preparation of a comprehensive review of the operation’s
achievements relative to the mandate set.
Such reviews should be separate from the financial
performance review and should address the substance of
the operation and seek to identify all relevant lessons for
the conduct of future operations.
I address now the question of command and control.
There is a weakness in the command and control
structures and they do need attention. It is true the
personnel of national defence forces which contribute
forces to the United Nations legally remain in their
country’s national service. But as I see it, parallel to the
allocation of responsibility to the United Nations Force
Commander must be a recognition that the national
command structure will not seek to direct their forces in
operational matters. If the national command authority
has serious difficulties, then the appropriate course of
action in all cases - except an emergency - is for the issue
27


to be resolved with United Nations Headquarters. If
resolution is not possible the unit should be withdrawn.
I come to the question of the safety of peace-keeping
personnel. A major requirement for effective collective
security is that countries contributing troops and civilian
personnel should have confidence that their personnel in the
field will have the best possible support to ensure their
safety and security. That is an issue which, as many
members know, New Zealand has pursued relentlessly
during its time on the Council. It bears on the level of
equipment with which the forces are outfitted and there is
plenty of room for improvement.
In addition, the legal regime under which peace-
keeping operations are conducted needs to reflect the
extraordinary personal risk which United Nations personnel
are undertaking on behalf of us all in carrying out collective
security operations. It is right that such personnel should
be differentiated from soldiers in an armed conflict and that
there should be a higher standard of legal responsibility for
anybody who attacks them. I urge all members of the
Assembly to support New Zealand’s initiative on this issue
currently in the Sixth Committee, that the necessary
flexibility be shown on outstanding issues and that we make
a really determined effort to complete work on the draft
convention this year.
The question of resources is always before us. In my
sixth point I would say that a critical tool for effective
collective security is a strategy for resource availability.
The situation we all saw recently in Rwanda is a classic
case. Human resources were available but they lacked
training and they lacked equipment. But there is also the
need for a capacity in all peace-keeping operations for a
forceful response in self-defence. There are important
lessons to be learned from the troop losses in Rwanda last
April and again I draw attention to the linkage between
mandates, rules of engagement, doctrine and planning.
The United Nations will have to go beyond the current
work being done on stand-by forces to address this
problem.
We believe that there is a case for redirecting a
substantial portion of bilateral military assistance into forms
of training that would better assist defence forces with the
requirements of peace-keeping operations.
There is also a role for the United Nations maintaining
the physical equivalent of the peace-keeping reserve fund
that it is supposed to have on the financial side now. A
quick start-up capability, with owned or leased equipment
immediately available to the United Nations, would have
made a significant difference in the Rwanda situation.
This is a practical and feasible step that can be taken to
ensure that future collective security can in fact rise to the
challenge.
I have spoken about the factors that need to be taken
into account in managing peace-keeping operations. I
now wish to address the terms of their engagements.
The United Nations should not be expected to take
responsibility for a situation of up to 30 years because the
parties to a conflict are unable or unwilling to summon up
the necessary political will to reach a settlement. There
comes a point when the parties must take their fate in
their own hands rather than the Council avoiding the hard
decisions just by rolling over the mandates.
At the same time, a range of different considerations
should prevail when the United Nations reaches the end
of a successful peace-keeping process. The United
Nations cannot simply walk away when a perceived end
point - such as an election - has been achieved, because
there may still be outstanding issues that need the
ongoing support of the operation, such as humanitarian
operations or local capability-building programmes to help
provide the required sound administration.
The United Nations deserves congratulations on its
achievements in Cambodia, for example, but the future
there is still not certain, and the United Nations must
maintain its responsibilities. Rehabilitation in that country
must continue.
Another example of a situation in which
peacemaking and peace-building have to be seen as a
coherent whole is in the area of demining. This is a
critically important humanitarian function. New
Zealand’s military forces have had a lot of experience in
helping the United Nations with demining in Afghanistan,
Cambodia and, most recently, Mozambique.
The Security Council Mission that visited
Mozambique about two months ago reported its dismay
at the delays and at the state of the programme generally.
At the request of the United Nations, New Zealand
stepped in early in August and began the rescue effort for
the programme. The wheel should not have had to be
reinvented. It is a concern that lessons learned from
earlier operations such as Afghanistan and Cambodia do
not appear to be retained. Having seen firsthand the
28


effects of mines in Cambodia, I do believe we should move
more expeditiously than the speed of the present
performance.
New Zealand certainly looks forward to working with
other delegations to improve performance in this area, and
I would certainly add that my Government was most
interested in the comments President Clinton made here
yesterday about the proposal for the elimination of the
world’s 85 million anti-personnel land-mines. This is an
urgent task. No one who has seen firsthand the human cost
of mines can offer anything less than full cooperation to
this end.
Finally, when we look ahead to what would really
enhance proper use of the collective security powers, we
have to conclude that reform of the Security Council is a
major task waiting to be fulfilled. Many of the things I
have discussed today require reforms by the Security
Council, or at least in conjunction with it. But I cannot
escape the conclusion that even if all of these were
accomplished, the political legitimacy of the Security
Council could still erode over a period of time. Ultimately
it could lose the credibility vital to the role it carries out.
Collective security requires the Council to be
genuinely representative of the entire United Nations
membership. We have, of course, as many others have
done, followed the debate on Security Council reform in the
Open-ended Working Group set up last year. We hear the
case made for additional permanent members. We also
hear overwhelming support for expanding the number of
non-permanent members of the Council. There are shades
of difference on the numbers for the total membership, but
consensus does seem to be emerging around five or six new
members. We consider that a limited expansion of the
number of members, paying regard to an equitable
geographical participation, is still a priority for the health
of the Organization. It is time to do what is achievable and
what benefits most Members. Given the need for 122
ratifications, we are aware that even a simple expansion,
hopefully adopted next year, will take several years to come
into force. It would not be unrealistic, therefore, for the
year 2000 to see the first meeting of the expanded Council.
There is no worth in being critical of some aspects of
the United Nations without believing, as I do, that the
problems can be cured. We, all 184 of us, are its doctors,
and we need to act quickly. We need to apportion our
costs fairly and systematically. We need to share peace-
keeping tasks, peace-keeping funding and peace-keeping
supplies. We need to accept the democratic decisions of
this Organization. We also need to adjust to the more
complex and interrelated United Nations agendas of the
future.
I therefore leave with the Assembly New Zealand’s
assurance of a renewed commitment to this unique and
essential body and of our willingness to work in that
spirit to ensure the continued relevance of the United
Nations for the next half-century.
At the
very outset I would like to congratulate you, Mr. Amara
Essy, on your election to the high post of President of the
General Assembly at its current session. I view this as a
sign of recognition of your country’s authority in the
international community.
The United Nations is approaching its fiftieth
anniversary, and the entire world has grown older along
with it. What is the world like nowadays? Has it become
better? Has it become wiser? And, most important, what
will the present generation leave behind to its successors?
No State, no people can be indifferent to these
questions. Here in the United Nations we must find
answers to them. This is particularly important for
Russia. We are trying to understand what kind of world
we want to live in, and exactly what kind of world we
should spare no effort to build.
The new Russia was born in 1991 as a democratic
State. Its birth was witnessed by the entire world.
For several years now we have been engaged in a
tremendous, and painstaking task, the essence of which is
to remove the legacy of totalitarianism and the cold war.
Freedom has come to Russia. The people have
obtained fundamental civil rights long denied them.
Profound economic reform is in progress in Russia. A
free market economy is being put into effect. Thus, each
of our new success stories reinforces Russian democracy.
Russia has decisively drawn a final line under the
Second World War. Our forces have been withdrawn
from Germany, Central Europe and the Baltic States. Of
its own accord, and at great effort, Russia has removed
any threat to the security of other States.
Furthermore, our country, through its own efforts,
has promoted the end of confrontation in Europe, setting
up new security structures there, not only for a select
number, the chosen but for all. The Conference on
Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) should
become a powerful driving force in that process.
1


We expect there to be more understanding on the part
of our partners with regard to the problems of security in
Russia. We count on their ability to overcome the old
suspicion inherent in a world divided into blocs, suspicion
that is now unjustified.
Russia is undergoing changes and regaining its
identity, but in every respect it remains a great Power.
Russia is ready for equal cooperation within the framework
of the international community, which should in turn accept
an active, open Russia.
We would like nuclear weapons and other kinds of
weapons of mass destruction to cease to exist. Efficient
control over the non-proliferation of the technologies for
their production is imperative.
Russia needs a world without wars and armed conflicts
and without environmental calamities. We favour the
development of international economic ties without
discrimination. Russia stands for a world capable of
combating terrorism, drug-trafficking and other types of
international crime.
To make such gigantic changes possible, efforts by all
the Members of the United Nations will be required. There
is no room for either soloists or supernumeraries.
Naturally, we cannot do without new relations between
the two major nuclear Powers. I am convinced that the
entire world has a vital stake in the establishment of a
strategic partnership between Russia and the United States.
I am ready for a serious and fruitful dialogue with President
Bill Clinton, who today gave an optimistic forecast of our
interaction.
Russia’s economic and foreign-policy priorities lie in
the countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS), the former Republics of the Soviet Union. Russia’s
ties with them are closer than the traditional relations of
good-neighbourliness; we have, rather, an extraordinary
blood relationship. In virtually all the CIS countries today
there is a growing desire for closer cooperation and a
genuine, rather than merely proclaimed, integration. Its
foundation will be good will and mutual benefit.
Attempts to use the contradictions between the CIS
States for selfish ends are extremely short-sighted.
Conflicts in a number of CIS countries threaten not only
the security of our State, but also security at the regional
and global levels.
We are acutely interested in the active participation
of the world community in settling these difficult
problems. However, the main peace-keeping burden in
the territory of the former Soviet Union sits is being
borne by the Russian Federation.
Our efforts have not been fruitless. A solid truce
has already been established in Moldova. The peace
process in Georgia is developing; hope of stopping the
bloodshed in Nagorny Karabakh is already emerging and
initial agreements on Tajikistan have also been reached.
Everybody knows how difficult life is for millions of
Russians in newly independent States; it is not a time for
complacency. Once they were in their own home, but
now they are guests - and not always welcome ones.
We cannot remain indifferent to the fate of our
countrymen. I an not referring to special rights or
privileges. But the people in Russia will not understand
if I do not state here and now that the democratic States
have to prove through their actions that guaranteeing
human rights is indeed the cornerstone of their foreign
policy. And in this area neither a selective approach nor
double standards are permissible.
Two years ago the General Assembly adopted the
Declaration on the rights of national minorities. At this
session we propose to come to an agreement on the
principles of that Declaration being embodied in the
legislation of all United Nations Member States.
Russia makes no distinction between settling its
problems and the problems of others. That is why we
particularly highly value what is done within the United
Nations.
The world is now at a crossroads. The tragedy of
the struggle of two opposing blocs is finally over. The
delicate balance based on power, fear and mutual
intimidation has disappeared for ever.
But the world is still not stable. The changes that
are taking place entail not only hopes for a better future,
but also profound anxieties.
It is not only Russia that is trying to respond to the
emerging challenges. To a certain degree, the united
Germany, Japan, the United States and other countries of
the West face the same problem. The same applies
equally to many countries in Asia, Africa and Latin
America.
2


The fundamental changes in international relations are
accompanied by the emergence of new problems. More
and more countries see strengthening the effectiveness of
inter-State structures as the solution. At the same time, this
does not always prevent an increase in the activity of those
who hold separatist and nationalist aspirations.
A veritable floodgate of regional and local conflicts,
national, tribal and religious enmity and economic, social
and political confrontations has been opened wide. The
bleeding wound in Bosnia has not healed. It is a tragic
paradox that in the wake of the cold war in Europe hotbeds
of war have flared up there anew.
The unprecedented tragedy in Rwanda resounds
painfully in the hearts of all people. This has proved to be
a defeat for us all.
But let us look around. Are there not other parts of
the world where more refined and civilized unlawful actions
are being taken against national and cultural minorities?
Are their rights and their security not threatened? Have
racism and anti-Semitism disappeared? Is there no longer
any discrimination against those who are categorized as
non-indigenous?
When aggressive nationalism is made into State policy
it is a grave danger for all mankind.
These problems are all the more urgent today because
the threat of local conflicts has not waned.
Each of these conflicts could cause a veritable
avalanche of geopolitical changes all over the world.
The cold war is over, but its material infrastructure -
the mountains of arms and the military-industrial complexes
of the developed countries - still remain. The spread of
nuclear weapons could make them into instruments of
terror. Huge amounts of weapons have been dumped onto
international markets. Unfortunately, vested interests
frequently prevail over the awareness of the danger implicit
in this process. In fact, this is nothing but an arms race
that has simply been transferred to the developing countries
through the market.
The worsening ecological crisis and the proliferation
of AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome) and other
dangerous diseases are also realities at the close of this
twentieth century.
The lessons of history can be learned only with great
difficulty. Obsession with the idea of supremacy is
extremely dangerous. The pathological failure to accept
something different has time and again resulted in
numerous ethnic and religious problems and conflicts.
The fear of open political territory wind up once again
with a "cordon sanitaire" or "iron curtain".
Let us be honest: equality, partnership, mutual
benefit and cooperation still remain, to a large extent,
words used to cover State egotism. Such a situation
indicates an urgent need to develop a solid system of
security on the basis of principles and mechanisms of
cooperation on the part of everyone, and a need for the
reform of international institutions. Such a system should
be in keeping with the new conditions that now prevail
and should function under the auspices of the United
Nations.
As a specific contribution towards the establishment
of such a system, I would propose the following
measures.
First, we must speed up the negotiations on the
conclusion of a comprehensive nuclear test-ban treaty.
Russia advocates the signing of this treaty next year,
when we celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the United
Nations. We should also give thought to further steps to
limit Russian and American strategic nuclear weapons in
order to make it possible eventually to renounce the
inherited "balance of terror" based on mutual nuclear
deterrence.
Secondly, we must extend non-proliferation measures
to cover weapons of mass destruction. Next spring, when
the Conference of the States Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons takes place, it is
essential to adopt a decision to the effect that the treaty
should be open-ended and of unlimited duration. No one
has the right to deny this. In this context, we believe that
the non-nuclear-weapon States will need to be given
additional and more precise security assurances. We
propose the holding in the near future of a special
meeting of the Security Council, at the Foreign Minister
level, to coordinate and adopt a new resolution on
so-called "positive" security assurances.
Thirdly, we should launch a multilateral debate on
the issues with regard to the regulation of the
international traffic in weaponry and military equipment.
Moreover, there is an urgent need for all nuclear-weapon
States to participate in the process of the control and
3


limitation of nuclear weapons. We propose that a treaty on
nuclear security and strategic stability be elaborated by the
five nuclear-weapon States. Such a treaty could provide for
cessation of the production of fissionable materials for
military purposes, for prohibition of the recycling of
fissionable materials for weapons purposes and for further
elimination of nuclear weapons and the reduction of their
means of delivery.
Fourthly, it would be advisable to open discussions on
regional programmes to strengthen peace and security.
Regional security systems are being formed even now: I
am thinking particularly of the treaty on collective security
between the members of the Commonwealth of Independent
States (CIS) of the former Soviet Union. We believe that
at the present stage that the United Nations could direct its
efforts towards coordinating the process of building up
regional security systems.
Finally, the experience of recent years demonstrates
that the renunciation of the arms race is a complicated and
highly expensive process. Conversion of the military
industry gives rise to extremely difficult economic and
social problems that have to be dealt with, particularly as
they relate to the elimination of chemical and
bacteriological weapons. In this context, it is important to
pool the efforts of the international community. Such
cooperation among States would help to enhance the level
of mutual trust. In 1996, it might be possible to hold a
conference, under the auspices of the United Nations, on
international cooperation in the field of conversion.
Implementation of these measures will enable us to
substantially stabilize the situation in the world. However,
from the long-term point of view, these measures will not
be sufficient.
The former purely military understanding of the
concept of "security" has today become obsolete. The
range of problems faced by mankind is much wider than it
was. The modern definition of security is inseparable from
the notion of stable development.
The world is urgently in need of a strategy for the
twenty-first century - a strategy of mutual responsibility.
The most important points of reference for such a strategy
could be defined as follows:
- Stable economic and social development, not
only for individual regions and States but,
indeed, for the entire planet as a single entity.
People themselves must assume the
responsibility of carrying out this immense task;
- The renunciation of diktat by the powerful
vis-à-vis the weak. Any country, whether large
or small, should be aware of its responsibility
for the maintenance of order based on law and
morality;
- The unconditional recognition of human rights,
including the rights of national minorities. In
view of the great diversity of cultures,
traditions and the historical experience of
countries and peoples, fundamental human
rights are a universal value and we cannot
permit them to be devalued;
- Strengthening the ecological security of
mankind. The world is now facing a most
serious crisis because of the deficit of
resources, deterioration of the natural
environment, and many other negative trends.
Common sense and the instinct for survival tell
us to stop exploiting our depleting resources to
the detriment of nature, society and mankind.
Russia supports the programme on Global
education and observation to preserve the
environment. Moreover, this programme is
entirely consistent with the strategy of shared
responsibility. We intend to participate
actively in its implementation.
At the same time, I should like to emphasize that
only a profound understanding, on the part of each
participant in international cooperation, of his or her
individual responsibility can engender a common sense of
responsibility for the world situation.
To paraphrase a well known expression we could
say that the United Nations is a good idea whose time has
finally come. I should like in particular to note the great
personal contribution of the United Nations Secretary-
General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, to the cause of
advocating peace and settling regional conflicts.
If the United Nations is to achieve maximum
effectiveness in the twenty-first century, it must undergo
a well-thought-out reform.
Obviously, changes will be required both at
Headquarters and in the functioning of the specialized
agencies. Also, it will be impossible to avoid changes in
4


the Security Council, which should remain sufficiently
compact and an effective functioning body. This is
especially important because, according to the Charter, the
Security Council bears primary responsibility for supporting
and maintaining world peace and security.
We have to strike a new balance of law, morality and
force in world politics. The United Nations could play a
decisive role in these efforts in accordance with the Charter.
Russia stands ready, as provided in Article 43 of the
Charter, to enter into an agreement with the Security
Council to make available national military contingents for
United Nations operations. If a sufficient number of other
States follows this lead, then it could be possible to go
ahead with the realization of the concept of United Nations
stand-by forces.
The Military Staff Committee has already been
formally in existence for several decades. According to the
Charter its function is "to advise and assist the Security
Council on all questions relating to the Security Council’s
military requirements". Let them finally do just that.
The pertinent task now will be to work out a strategy
of peace-keeping, conflict and crisis prevention and, if
necessary, operations on peace enforcement.
Through specific actions, Russia has shown support
for United Nations efforts aimed at setting up efficient
mechanisms of response to humanitarian emergencies. We
stand ready to cooperate with all countries anxious to
reinforce the capability of the world community to produce
a rapid humanitarian response.
Because the problems we are increasingly
encountering are multifaceted, they require adequate
solutions. The question is not about who should enjoy
more rights - the United Nations, the regional structures or
States. The future world system can be truly durable only
if it is possible to find efficient and effective mechanisms
to address problems at all levels - national, regional and
global. Sharing responsibility will make it possible for the
United Nations to remain flexible and a pragmatic and
effective structure and enable it to focus its efforts on the
solution of the genuinely key problems faced by mankind.
Russia believes that these are all fundamental issues
that have a direct bearing on the fate of the world
community. Both the authority of the United Nations and
the future of world politics as a whole will depend on the
way these issues are dealt with.
People have always sought stability, happiness and
prosperity. But history provides evidence of the fact that
these goals cannot be achieved with the help of brute
force alone. Once again we become acutely aware of this
fact now that we are approaching a sacred date for
mankind: the fiftieth anniversary of the end of the
Second World War and the restoration of peace.
Let us remember with gratitude those who gave their
lives for this great victory. Let 1995 become the
universal year of commemoration of the victims of the
Second World War.
For the sake of those living and those who have not
yet been born, we must preserve peace and establish
stability on our planet. Mankind should finally feel that
it is at home, a home which is both kind and reliable.
Our civilization has always been varied. It is
precisely in the variety of cultures, traditions and values
that the possibility of development is basically found.
At this time, we have reached a stage when different
interests and aspirations of peoples can be achieved only
through cooperation among them.
The world community should make every possible
effort to ensure that its policies are embodied in the new
thinking about the influence of States, national pride and
patriotism.
The United Nations is a child of the world. Fifty
years ago when the Second World War was in progress,
it became abundantly clear that the future of mankind is
to be found in the realm of cooperation and tolerance
rather than aggression and hatred.
Cooperation and tolerance are prerequisites for the
next century.
This is the most important condition for there to be
a worthy future for our planet.
This is a unique opportunity that has been given to
the human race.
I believe that the United Nations, in fulfilment of its
general responsibility, will not allow us to pass it up, and
I hope that the great dream of peace to which all peoples
and States aspire to will take its due place in the life of
our planet.
Let me first congratulate you, Mr.
President, on your election as President of the General
Assembly for its forty-ninth session. The American people
look forward to working with you to celebrate the United
Nations fiftieth anniversary.
We meet today at a time of great hope and change.
The end of the cold war, the explosion of technology and
trade and enterprise have given people the world over new
opportunities to live up to their dreams and their God-given
potential. This is an age of hope -yet in this new world,
we face a contest as old as history.
It is a struggle between freedom and tyranny; between
tolerance and bigotry; between knowledge and ignorance;
between openness and isolation. It is a fight between those
who would build free societies governed by laws and
those who would impose their will by force.
Our struggle today - in a world more high-tech,
more fast-moving, more chaotically diverse than ever - is
the age-old fight between hope and fear.
Three times in this century - from the trenches of the
Somme to the island of Iwo Jima to the shattered Wall in
Berlin - the forces of hope were victorious. But the
victors of the First World War squandered their triumph
when they turned inward, bringing on a global depression,
and allowing fascism to rise and reignite global war.
After the Second World War, the Allies learned the
lesson of the past. In the face of a new totalitarian threat
and the nuclear menace, great nations did not walk away
from the challenge of the moment. Instead they chose to
reach out, to rebuild and to lead. They chose to create the
United Nations and they left us a world stronger, safer
and freer.
Our generation has a difficult task: the cold war is
over. We must secure the peace. It falls to us to avoid
the complacency that followed the First World War -
without the spur of the imminent threat to our security
that followed the Second World War.
We must ensure that those who fought and found the
courage to end the cold war - those from both East and
West who loved freedom - did not labour in vain. Our
sacred mission is to build a new world for our children -
more democratic, more prosperous, more free of ancient
hatreds and modern means of destruction.
That is no easy challenge; but we accept it with
confidence. After all, the walls that once divided nations
in this very Hall have come down. More nations have
chosen democracy than ever before. More have chosen
free markets and economic justice. More have embraced
the values of tolerance and liberty and civil society that
allow us all to make the most of our lives.
But while the ideals of democracy and free markets
are ascendant, they are surely not the whole story.
Terrible examples of chaos, repression and tyranny also
mark our times. The twentieth century has proved that
the forces of freedom and democracy can endure against
great odds; our job is to see that in the twenty-first
century these forces triumph.
6


The dangers we face are less stark and more diffuse
than those of the cold war, but they are still formidable:
the ethnic conflicts that drive millions from their homes;
the despots ready to repress their own people or conquer
their neighbours; the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction; the terrorists wielding their deadly arms; the
criminal syndicates selling those arms, or drugs, infiltrating
the very institutions of fragile democracies; a global
economy that offers great promise but also deep insecurity,
and in many places declining opportunity; diseases like
AIDS that threaten to decimate nations; the combined
dangers of population explosion and economic decline,
which prompted the world community to reach the
remarkable consensus at the Cairo Conference; global and
local environmental threats that demand that sustainable
development become a part of the lives of people all
around the world; and, finally, within many of our nations,
high rates of drug abuse and crime and family breakdown,
with all their terrible consequences. These are the dangers
we face today.
We must address these threats to our future.
Thankfully, the end of the cold war gives us a chance to
address them together. In our efforts, different nations may
be active in different situations in different ways, but their
purposes must be consistent with freedom and their
practices consistent with international law. Each nation will
bring to our common task its own particular strengths -
economic, political or military.
Of course, the first duty of every Member of the
United Nations is to its own citizens, to their security, their
welfare and their interests. As President of the United
States, my first duty is to the citizens of my country.
When our national security interests are threatened, we will
act with others when we can, but alone if we must. We
will use diplomacy when we can, but force if we must.
The United States recognizes that we also have a
special responsibility in these common endeavours that we
are undertaking, the responsibility that goes along with
great power and also with our long history of democracy
and freedom. But we seek to fulfil that responsibility in
cooperation with other nations. Working together increases
the impact and the legitimacy of each of our actions, and
sharing the burdens lessens everyone’s load. We have no
desire to be the world’s policeman, but we will do what we
can to help civil societies emerge from the ashes of
repression, to sustain fragile democracies, to add more free
markets to the world, and of course to restrain the
destructive forces that threaten us all.
In every corner of the globe, from South Africa to
Asia, to Central and Eastern Europe, to the Middle East
and Latin America, and now to a small island in the
Caribbean, ordinary citizens are striving to build their
own future. Promoting their cause is our generation’s
great opportunity, and we must do it together. A
coalition for democracy is good for America.
Democracies, after all, are more likely to be stable, less
likely to wage war; they strengthen civil society and can
provide people with the economic and political
opportunities to build their futures in their own homes -
not to flee their borders.
Our efforts to help build more democracies will
make us all more secure, more prosperous and more
successful as we try to make this era of terrific change
our friend, and not our enemy. In my nation, as in all of
your nations, there are many people who are
understandably reluctant to undertake these efforts
because often the distances are great or the cultures are
different. There are good reasons for the caution that
people feel. Often, the chances of success or its costs are
unclear. And, of course, in every common endeavour
there is always the potential for failure and often the risk
of loss of life.
And yet our people - as we have seen in the
remarkable global response to the terrible crisis in
Rwanda - genuinely want to help their neighbours around
the world and to make some effort in our common cause.
We have seen that progress can be made as well. The
problem is deciding when we must respond and how we
shall overcome our reluctance. This will never be easy.
There are no simple formulas. All of us will make these
decisions in part based on the distance of the problem
from our shores, the interests of our nation, the difference
we think we can make, the costs required, or the threat to
our own citizens in the endeavour.
Hard questions will remain, and cannot be erased by
some simple formula. But we should have the confidence
that these efforts can succeed, whether they are efforts to
keep people alive in the face of terrible tragedy, as in
Rwanda, or our efforts to avert a tragedy, as in the Horn
of Africa, or our efforts to support processes that are
literally changing the future of millions. History is on
our side. We should have confidence about this. Look
at the march of freedom we have seen in the last year
alone. Who, a decade ago, would have dared predict the
startling changes in South Africa, in the Middle East and
in Ireland; the stunning triumph of democracy and
majority rule and the redemption of the purpose of Nelson
7


Mandela’s life; the brave efforts of Israel and its Arab
neighbours to build bridges of peace between their peoples;
the earnest search by the people of Northern Ireland and
Great Britain and Ireland to end centuries of division and
decades of terror? In each case, credit belongs to those
nations’ leaders and their courageous people. But in each
instance the United States and other nations were privileged
to help in these causes.
The growth of cooperation between the United States
and the Russian Federation also should give us all great
cause for confidence. This is a partnership that is rooted in
democracy, a partnership that is working, a partnership of,
not complete agreement, but genuine mutual respect. After
so many years of nuclear terror, our two nations are taking
dramatic steps to ease tensions around the world. For the
first time since the Second World War, foreign troops do
not occupy the nations of Central and Eastern Europe. The
Baltic nations are free. Russian and American missiles no
longer target each other’s people. Three of the four nuclear
members of the former Soviet Union have agreed to
remove all nuclear weapons from their soil. And we are
working on agreements to halt production of fissile
materials for nuclear explosives; to make dismantling of
nuclear warheads transparent and irreversible; and further
to reduce our nuclear weapons and delivery vehicles.
The United States and Russia also recognize that we
must cooperate to control the emerging danger of terrorists
who traffic in nuclear materials. To secure nuclear
materials at their sources, we have agreed with Russia to
stop plutonium production by the year 2000; to construct a
storage facility for fissile materials and buy up stocks of
weapons-grade fuel; and to combat the criminals who are
trying to smuggle materials for nuclear explosives. Our
two nations and Germany have increased cooperation and
engaged in joint anti-terrorist training. Soon, under the
leadership of our Federal Bureau of Investigation, we will
open a law enforcement training academy in Europe, where
police will learn how to combat more effectively trafficking
of nuclear weapons components, as well as the drug trade,
organized crime and money laundering.
The United States will also advance a wide-ranging
non-proliferation agenda: a global convention to halt
production of fissile materials; efforts to curb North
Korea’s nuclear ambitions; transparent procedures for
dismantling nuclear warheads; and our work to ban testing
and to extend the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. And today I am proposing a first step
toward the eventual elimination of a less visible but still
deadly threat: the world’s 85 million anti-personnel land-
mines - one for every 50 persons on the face of the earth.
I ask all nations concerned to join with us and conclude
an agreement to reduce the number and availability of
those mines. Ridding the world of those often hidden
weapons will help to save the lives of tens of thousands
of men, women and innocent children in the years to
come.
Our progress in the last year also provides
confidence that in the post-cold-war years we can adapt
and construct global institutions that will help to provide
security and increase economic growth throughout the
world. Since I spoke here last year, 22 nations have
joined the Partnership for Peace of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO). The first joint exercises
have been conducted, helping to give Europe the chance
to become a more unified continent in which democratic
nations live within secure borders. In Asia, security talks
and economic cooperation will lead to further stability.
By reducing nations’ fears about their borders and
allowing them to spend less on military defences, our
coalition for democracy can give nations in transition a
better chance to offer new freedoms and opportunities to
their own people. It is time that we think anew about the
structures of this global economy as well, tearing down
walls that separate nations instead of hiding behind them.
At the Group of Seven meeting at Naples this year
we committed ourselves to this task of renewal, to re-
examining the economic institutions that have served us
so well in the past. In the interests of shared prosperity,
the United States actively promotes open markets.
Though still in its infancy, the North American Free
Trade Agreement has dramatically increased trade
between the United States and Mexico and has produced
in the United States alone an estimated 200,000 new jobs.
It offers a model to nations throughout the Americas
which we hope to build on. And this week I will send
legislation to the Congress to implement the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), the largest
trade agreement in all of history. GATT - and its
successor, the World Trade Organization - holds the
promise for all of us of increased exports, higher wages
and improved living standards. In the months and years
to come we will work no less to extend the reach of open
markets, starting with the Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation Council and the Summit of the Americas
later this year.
Here at the United Nations we must develop a
concrete plan to meet the challenges of the next 50 years
even as we celebrate the last 50 years. I believe we
8


should declare next year’s fiftieth anniversary not just a
year of celebration but a year of renewal. We call on the
Secretary-General to name a working group so that by the
time we meet next year we will have a concrete action plan
to revitalize the obligations of the United Nations to address
the security, economic and political challenges ahead -
obligations we must all be willing to assume.
Our objectives should include ready, efficient and
capable United Nations peace-keeping forces, and I am
happy to report that, as I pledged last year and thanks to
support in the United States Congress, $1.2 billion is now
available from the United States for this critical account.
We must also pledge to keep United Nations reform
moving forward so that we do more with less, and we must
improve our ability to respond to urgent needs. Let me
suggest that it is time for the members of the Assembly to
consider seriously President Menem’s suggestion for the
creation of a civilian rapid-response capability for
humanitarian crises.
And let us not lose sight of the special role that
development and democracy can play in preventing
conflicts once peace has been established. Never before
has the United Nations been in a better position to achieve
the democratic goals of our founders. The end of the cold
war has freed us from decades of paralysing divisions. And
we all know that multilateral cooperation is not only
necessary to address the new threats we face but possible
to succeed.
The efforts we have undertaken together in Haiti are
a prime example. Under the sponsorship of the United
Nations, American troops, now being joined by the
personnel of an ever-growing international coalition of over
two dozen nations, are giving the people of Haiti their
chance at freedom. Creative diplomacy, the influence of
economic power and the credible threat of military force -
all have contributed to this moment of opportunity.
Essential civil order will be restored. Human rights
violations will be curbed. The first refugees will be
returning within hours, on this day. The military leaders
will step down. The democratic Government will be
restored. President Aristide will return. The multinational
mission will turn its responsibilities over to the United
Nations mission, which will remain in Haiti throughout
1995, until a new president is elected. During this time a
multinational development effort will make available more
than $1 billion to begin helping the Haitians rebuild their
country. In the spirit of reconciliation and reconstruction,
President Aristide yesterday called for the immediate easing
of sanctions so that the work of rebuilding can begin
immediately. Accordingly, I intend to act expeditiously,
within Security Council resolutions 917 (1994) and 940
(1994) to enable us to restore health care, water and
electrical services, construction materials for humanitarian
efforts, and communications, agricultural and educational
materials.
Today I am also announcing that the United States
will suspend all unilateral sanctions against Haiti except
those that affect the military leaders and their immediate
supporters. This will include regularly scheduled air
flights when the airport becomes available, financial
transactions and travel restrictions. I urge all other
nations to do the same.
In Haiti, the United States has demonstrated that it
would lead a multinational force when our interests are
plain, when the cause is right, when the mission is
achievable and the nations of the world stand with us.
But Haiti’s people will have to muster the strength and
the patience to travel the road of freedom. They have to
do this for themselves. Every new democratic nation is
fragile. But we will see the day when the people of Haiti
fulfil their aspirations to liberty and when they are once
again making genuine economic progress.
United Nations actions in Bosnia, like those in Haiti,
demonstrate that progress can be made when a coalition
backs up diplomacy with military power. For the first
time ever, NATO has taken, since we met last year,
military actions beyond the territory of its members. The
threat of NATO air power helped to establish the
exclusion zone around Sarajevo and to end the Bosnian
Serbs’ spring offensive against Gorazde. NATO’s
February ultimatum boosted our mediation efforts, which
helped to end the war between the Bosnian Government
and the Bosnian Croats and forged a federation between
those two communities. To that extent the situation in
Bosnia has improved, but in recent weeks the situation
around Sarajevo has deteriorated substantially, and
Sarajevo once again faces the prospect of strangulation.
A new resolve by the United Nations to enforce its
resolutions is now necessary to save Sarajevo, and NATO
stands ready to act.
The situation in Bosnia is yet another reminder of
the greatest irony of this century we are leaving. This
century, so full of hope and opportunity and achievement,
has also been an age of deep destruction and despair. We
cannot help but remember the millions who gave their
lives during two world wars and the half century of
9


struggle by men and women in the East and West who
ultimately prevailed in the name of freedom.
But we must also think of our children and the world
we will leave them in the twenty-first century. History has
given us a very rare opportunity - the chance to build on
the greatest legacy of this century without reliving its
darkest moments. And we have shown that we can carry
forward humanity’s ancient quest for freedom to build a
world where democracy knows no borders but where
nations know their borders will always be secure, a world
that gives all people the chance to realize their potential and
to live out their dreams.
It surely must be one of the
great ironies of our age that this Assembly is being
addressed, for the first time in its 49 years’ history, by a
South African Head of State drawn from among the
African majority of what is an African country.
Future generations will find it strange in the extreme
that it was only so late in the twentieth century that it was
possible for our delegation to take its seat in the
Assembly, recognized both by our people and by the
nations of the world as the legitimate representative of the
people of our country.
It is indeed most welcome that the Organization will
mark its fiftieth anniversary next year with the apartheid
system vanquished and consigned to the past. That
historic change has come about not least because of the
great efforts in which the United Nations engaged to
ensure the suppression of the apartheid crime against
humanity. Even as it was still in the process of
establishing its institutions, the United Nations was
confronted by the challenge of the accession to power of
the party of apartheid domination in our country.
Everything that that system stood for represented the very
opposite of all the noble purposes for which the
Organization was established. Because apartheid reduced
and undermined the credibility of the United Nations as
an effective international instrument to end racism and
secure the fundamental human rights of all peoples, the
establishment and consolidation of apartheid constituted
a brazen challenge to the very existence of the
Organization.
6
General Assembly 14th meeting
Forty-ninth session 3 October 1994
The United Nations was born out of the titanic
struggle against nazism and fascism, with their pernicious
doctrines and practices of racial superiority and genocide.
It therefore could not stand by while, in South Africa, a
similar system was being established by a Government
which also had the temerity to claim representation within
the United Nations.
We believe that it was indeed of great importance to
the universal efficacy of, and respect for, the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and the United Nations
Charter that the United Nations should have spurned the
pleas of the apartheid regime that the gross violation of
human rights in South Africa was a domestic matter of no
legal or legitimate concern to the world body.
We stand here today to salute the United Nations and
its Member States, both singly and collectively, for joining
forces with the masses of our people in a common struggle
that has brought about our emancipation and pushed back
the frontiers of racism.
The millions of our people say "Thank you" and
"Thank you again, because the respect for your own dignity
as human beings inspired you to act to ensure the
restoration of our dignity as well".
We have together traversed a course which we are
convinced has strengthened human solidarity in general and
reinforced the bonds of friendship between our peoples and
the nations of the world. This dates back to the early days
when India put the question of racism in South Africa on
the Assembly’s agenda, to the moment when the world
community, as represented here, could adopt consensus
resolutions against apartheid with none dissenting.
It was therefore with great joy that at our inauguration
as President of our Republic we received, among others,
such high and distinguished officials of the Organization as
the Secretary-General, the President of the General
Assembly and the Chairman of the Special Committee
against Apartheid. Their presence reaffirmed the
incontrovertible truth that the victory over apartheid, the
success of the cause of democracy, non-racialism and non-
sexism in our country belongs as much to our people as it
does the United Nations.
And so we have embarked on the road to the remaking
of our country, basing ourselves both on the democratic
Constitution, which came into force on 27 April this year,
and on the Reconstruction and Development Programme,
which has become the property of all our people.
Clearly, these documents would have no life unless
the people gave them life. The words printed in them
must inspire common ownership by all our people and
their common allegiance to the process and the results
which these documents intend. For this to happen, as we
propagate the vision these documents contain we must at
the same time engage in a historic effort of redefinition
of ourselves as a new nation.
Our watchwords must be justice, peace,
reconciliation and nation-building in the pursuit of a
democratic, non-racial and non-sexist country. In all that
we do we have to ensure the healing of the wounds
inflicted on all our people across the great dividing line
imposed on our society by centuries of colonialism and
apartheid.
We must ensure that colour, race and gender become
only a God-given gift to each one of us, and not an
indelible mark or attribute that accords a special status to
any.
We must work for the day when we as South
Africans see one another and interact with one another as
equal human beings and as part of one nation united,
rather than torn asunder, by its diversity.
The road we shall have to travel to reach this
destination will by no means be easy. All of us know
how stubbornly racism can cling to the mind and how
deeply it can infect the human soul. Where it is sustained
by the racial ordering of the material world, as is the case
in our country, that stubbornness can multiply a
hundredfold.
And yet, however hard this battle may be, we will
not surrender. Whatever the time it may take, we will not
tire. The very fact that racism degrades both the
perpetrator and the victim commands that, if we are true
to our commitment to protect human dignity, we fight on
until victory is achieved.
We firmly believe that we who have particular
experience of the destructive and anti-human force of
racism owe it to ourselves to centre our transformation on
the creation of a truly non-racial society. Because we
know racism so intimately, we must stand a good chance
of developing and nurturing its opposite.
It will perhaps come to be that we who have
harboured in our country the worst example of racism
since the defeat of nazism will make a contribution to
7
General Assembly 14th meeting
Forty-ninth session 3 October 1994
human civilization by ordering our affairs in such a manner
that we strike an effective and lasting blow against racism
everywhere.
Some of the steps that we have already taken -
including the establishment of a Government of National
Unity, the orderly transformation of the institutions of State
and the cultivation of a national consensus on the major
issues of the day - have started us off on a correct footing
with regard to continuing the processes leading to the
creation of the just society we have been speaking of.
Our political emancipation has also brought into sharp
focus the urgent need to engage in the struggle to secure
our people’s freedom from want, from hunger and from
ignorance. We have written this on our banners: that the
society we seek to create must be a people-centred society;
all its institutions and its resources must be dedicated to the
pursuit of a better life for all our citizens. That better life
must mean an end to poverty, joblessness, homelessness
and the despair that comes of deprivation. This is an end
in itself because the happiness of the human being must, in
any society, be an end in itself.
At the same time, we are intensely conscious of the
fact that the stability of the democratic settlement itself and
the possibility actually to create a non-racial and non-sexist
society depend on our ability to change the material
conditions of life of our people so that they not only have
the vote but have bread and work as well.
We therefore return to the United Nations to make the
commitment that, as we undertook never to rest until the
system of apartheid was defeated, so do we now undertake
that we cannot rest while millions of our people suffer the
pain and indignity of poverty in all its forms.
At the same time, we turn once more to this world
body to say "We are going to need your continued support
to achieve the goal of the betterment of the conditions of
life of our people." We are pleased and inspired that both
the Secretary-General and the specialized agencies of the
United Nations have taken up the development challenge in
South Africa with the enthusiasm that they have shown.
We believe that it is in the common interest that we
sustain the common victory that we have scored in South
Africa, and take it further by achieving success not only in
politics but also in the socio-economic sphere.
It is perhaps common cause among us that everywhere
on our globe there is an unmistakable process leading to the
entrenchment of democratic systems of government. The
empowerment of the ordinary people of our world freely
to determine their destiny, unhindered by tyrants and
dictators, is at the very heart of the reason for the
existence of this Organization.
But it is equally true that hundreds of millions of
these politically empowered masses are caught in the
deathly trap of poverty, unable to live life in its fullness.
Out of all this are born social conflicts which
produce insecurity and instability, civil and other wars
that claim many lives, millions of desperate refugees and
the destruction of the little wealth that poor countries are
able to accumulate. Out of this cauldron are also born
tyrants, dictators and demagogues who not only take away
or restrict the rights of the people but also make it
impossible to do the things that must be done to bring
lasting prosperity to the people.
At the same time, the reality can no longer be
ignored that we live in an interdependent world which is
bound together to a common destiny. The very response
of the international community to the challenge of
apartheid confirmed this very point that we all
understood - that so long as apartheid existed in South
Africa, so long would the whole of humanity feel
demeaned and degraded.
The United Nations understood very well that racism
in our country could not but feed racism in other parts of
the world as well. The universal struggle against
apartheid was therefore not an act of charity arising out
of pity for our people, but an affirmation of our common
humanity. We believe that that act of affirmation requires
that this Organization should once more turn its focused
and sustained attention to the basics of everything that
makes for a better world for all humanity.
The elaboration of a new world order must, of
necessity, centre on this world body. In it we should find
the appropriate forum in which we can all participate to
help determine the shape of the new world.
The four elements that will need to be knit together
in fashioning that new universal reality are the issues of
democracy, peace, prosperity and interdependence.
The great challenge of our age to the United Nations
is to answer the question "Given the interdependence of
the nations of the world, what is it that we can and must
8
General Assembly 14th meeting
Forty-ninth session 3 October 1994
do to ensure that democracy, peace and prosperity prevail
everywhere?"
We are aware of the fact that the United Nations is
addressing these questions in many ways; yet there can be
no gainsaying the fact that such progress as we have made
has been made more by stealth than in the bold and
determined fashion that the world crisis demands today.
Perhaps a new and forceful initiative is required. Such
an initiative should inspire all of humanity because of the
seriousness of its intent. It should also have a chance to
succeed because it will have been underwritten by the
commitment of the masses of the people in each member
country to join hands with other nations, to address together
the related issues of democracy, peace and prosperity in an
interdependent world.
We are aware of the fact that the dictates of realpolitik
militate against the speedy realization of such an initiative.
But we do believe that the reality of life and the realism of
policy will, at some point, bring to the fore the fact that the
delay we impose on ourselves today will serve only to
increase the pressure on all of us to incorporate, within
what we consider possible, a sustainable vision of a
common world that will rise or fall together.
Undoubtedly, to inspire greater confidence in itself
among all the member nations and to reflect better the
impulse towards the democratization of international
relations, the United Nations will have to continue looking
at itself to determine what restructuring of itself it should
effect. This process must naturally affect, among others,
the structure and functioning of the Security Council and
the peacemaking and peace-keeping issues raised by the
Secretary-General in "An Agenda for Peace".
Democratic South Africa rejoins the world community
of nations determined to play its role in helping to
strengthen the United Nations and to contribute what it can
to the furtherance of its purposes. Among other things, we
have this morning acceded to the covenants and
conventions adopted by this Organization, which address
various matters such as economic, social and cultural rights,
civil and political rights, and the elimination of all forms of
racial discrimination, to say nothing of our irrevocable
commitment to the realization of the objectives contained
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
We are determined to play our full part in all
processes that address the important question of the
non-proliferation and elimination of weapons of mass
destruction. Our Government has also decided to become
a signatory to the Convention on prohibition and
restrictions on the use of certain conventional weapons.
In a similar vein, we shall not be found wanting in
the quest for sustainable development that is in keeping
with the Rio de Janeiro Declaration on Environment and
Development as well as with Agenda 21.
Equally, our own national interest dictates that we
join forces with the United Nations and all its Member
States in the common struggle to contain and end the
traffic in narcotics.
Even in constitutional terms, we are committed to
the advancement of the objective of the emancipation of
women through the creation of a non-sexist society.
Apart from anything else, we are therefore actively
engaged in the preparations for what we are convinced
will be a successful Beijing Conference.
We are part of the region of southern Africa and the
continent of Africa. As members of the Southern African
Development Community and the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), and an equal partner with other Member
States, we will play our role in the struggles of these
organizations to build a continent and a region that will
help to create for themselves and all humanity a common
world of peace and prosperity.
Ours must become a continent free of such tragedies
as those that have afflicted our own country as well as
Rwanda, Somalia, Angola, Mozambique, the Sudan and
Liberia. Happily, the OAU is actively addressing the
issues of peace and stability on our continent.
We are greatly encouraged that the countries of our
region, faced with a crisis in Lesotho, acted together
speedily and, with the cooperation of the Government and
the people of that country, succeeded in demonstrating
that together we have the will to defend democracy, peace
and national reconciliation.
Furthermore, as members of the Non-Aligned
Movement and the Group of 77, we are committed
especially to the promotion of South-South cooperation
and to the strengthening of the voice of the poor and
disadvantaged in the ordering of world affairs.
We would like to take this opportunity to express
our appreciation to the members of the General Assembly
for the speed and readiness with which they accepted the
9
General Assembly 14th meeting
Forty-ninth session 3 October 1994
credentials of democratic South Africa, enabling us to
participate in the work of the last General Assembly. We
are pleased to note that this same spirit characterized the
approach of other international organizations towards our
new democracy, including the Commonwealth and the
European Union.
We would like to close by congratulating you, Mr.
President, on your election to your high post, and we
express our confidence that you will guide the work of the
Assembly with the wisdom and sense of purpose for which
we admire you.
The millions across our globe who stand expectant at
the gates of hope look to this Organization to bring them
peace, to bring them life, to bring them a life worth living.
We pray that the new South Africa, which the General
Assembly helped bring into being and so warmly welcomed
among the community of nations, will, in its own and in the
wider interest, make its own contribution, however small,
to the realization of those hopes.
Our common humanity and the urgency of the knock
on the door of this great edifice demand that we must
attempt even the impossible.
At the outset, I should like warmly to
congratulate you, Sir, on your election to the presidency of
the current session of the General Assembly. I am
convinced that given your outstanding talent and
consummate experience, you will fulfil this lofty mission
with distinction. At the same time, I should like to express
my appreciation and thanks to Mr. Samuel Insanally for the
positive contribution he made during his presidency at the
last session.
I wish to avail myself of this opportunity to extend a
hearty welcome and congratulations to the delegation of
South Africa, which is taking part in the work of the
current session. We are convinced that a united,
democratic and non-racial new South Africa led by
President Nelson Mandela will contribute positively to the
peace and development of Africa and of the world as a
whole.
The world is still undergoing profound changes, and
the transition toward multipolarity has accelerated.
Economic factors are playing a greater role in
international relations. Relaxation of tensions has become
the main trend of the world today. However,
hegemonism and power politics continue to hold out.
Regional hot spots flare up intermittently. Destabilizing
factors tend to multiply, thus compounding the volatility
of the international scene. The maintenance of peace,
strengthening of cooperation and promotion of
development remain the major challenges of our era.
To eliminate regional hot spots and settle
international disputes are the world’s priorities and the
common concern with which the international community
has been trying to deal in one way or another.
Experience has shown that such practices as interfering in
other countries’ internal affairs and resorting to pressure,
sanctions or even force at will cannot help; they can only
increase the complications and difficulties that stand in
the way of a final solution. In the interest of maintaining
regional peace and stability, the international community
and regional organizations should take an appropriate and
effective approach, that is, to promote dialogue and
negotiations between parties directly concerned so as to
reach a solution acceptable to all sides. This has been
best illustrated by the breakthrough achieved in the
Middle East peace process and by the progress made on
the Korean nuclear issue.
United Nations peace-keeping operations can play a
positive role, but not all of them have been successful.
Experience and lessons learned in this regard should be
summed up. It is our consistent view that peace-keeping
operations should strictly conform to the principles of the
United Nations Charter and the norms of international
relations. Such operations should be undertaken with the
consent and cooperation of the parties concerned, and an
impartial and unbiased attitude should be maintained. No
peace-keeping operations or humanitarian aid programmes
should be permitted to interfere in the internal affairs of
any country, still less to use force or become embroiled
in a conflict between the parties. A lesson should be
drawn from what befell the United Nations peace-keeping
forces in Somalia.
Here I wish to underline the importance of strict
adherence to the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence
as the basic means to prevent international conflicts.
9


These principles, namely, mutual respect for sovereignty
and territorial integrity, mutual non-aggression,
non-interference in each other’s internal affairs, equality
and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence, were jointly
initiated four decades ago by China, India and Myanmar -
called "Burma" at the time - and were subsequently
embodied in the 10 principles formulated by Asian and
African countries at the Bandung Conference and in the
purposes and principles espoused by the Association of
South-East Asian Nations and other regional organizations
of the developing countries.
The history of the past four decades has testified to
the immense vitality of the Five Principles. All nations,
notwithstanding their differences in social systems,
ideologies, values or religious faiths, can live in amity and
carry out mutually beneficial cooperation as long as they
abide by these principles. Failure to do so will lead to
friction, confrontation or even military conflicts. In a world
as diversified as ours, nations have no alternative but to
adhere to the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence and
to find common ground while shelving their differences in
order to live together amicably and pursue common
development.
The peoples of the world have long lived in the
shadow of a nuclear holocaust, due to the all-out nuclear
arms race between the two super-Powers during the cold
war, which resulted in a massive stockpiling of nuclear
weapons. Now the international situation has drastically
changed. Not only can we avert another world war, but the
chances have increased for the complete prohibition and
thorough elimination of nuclear weapons and for mankind
ultimately to eliminate the threat of a nuclear war.
China has always stood for the complete prohibition
and thorough elimination of all weapons of mass
destruction. The Chinese Government holds that a
convention on the complete prohibition of nuclear weapons
should be concluded in the same way as the conventions
banning all biological and chemical weapons, respectively.
As a signatory to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, China is in favour of its extension. Yet
a mere extension of the Treaty is obviously not sufficient.
With a view to ultimately ridding mankind of the threat of
a nuclear war and ushering in a nuclear-weapon-free world,
the Chinese Government proposes the following.
All countries that possess nuclear weapons should
pledge unconditionally not to be the first to use them and
should immediately start negotiations to conclude a treaty
on non-first-use of nuclear weapons against each other;
efforts for the establishment of nuclear-free zones should
be supported and all nuclear Powers should undertake not
to use or to threaten to use nuclear weapons against any
non-nuclear-weapon State or nuclear-free zone;
negotiations should be undertaken with a view to
concluding a comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty not
later than 1996; the principal nuclear Powers should
implement their existing nuclear disarmament treaties as
scheduled and go on to drastically cut back their nuclear
stockpiles; negotiations should be undertaken to conclude
a convention banning the production of weapon-grade
fissile materials; a convention on the complete prohibition
of nuclear weapons should be signed under which all
nuclear Powers should undertake the obligation to destroy
all their nuclear weapons under effective international
supervision; and international cooperation in the peaceful
use of nuclear energy should be vigorously promoted
simultaneously with the efforts to prevent the proliferation
of nuclear weapons and step up the nuclear disarmament
process.
The above points make up an integrated and
interrelated nuclear disarmament process. We hold that
all States, whether they possess nuclear weapons or not,
are entitled to participate fully in this process.
Since mankind has been able to make nuclear
weapons and tap nuclear energy for peaceful purposes in
the twentieth century, we are confident that in the twenty-
first century it will be able to completely ban and destroy
nuclear weapons and fully harness nuclear energy to
enhance its own welfare. Before the advent of the new
century, we stand ready to join the other nuclear as well
as non-nuclear States to blaze the way towards this lofty
goal and make our due contribution to its ultimate
realization.
It is now an international trend to give priority to
economic problems. Hence all countries are devoting
themselves to economic development and the expansion
of international cooperation. This year the world
economy has started a recovery and East Asia continues
to maintain a high growth rate. But there is unevenness
in the world as a whole. It is disturbing to note that the
impoverishment of some developing countries has
worsened. In the interest of common development, we
call for the abolition of protectionism and of
discrimination in international economic relations and
trade. Neither global multilateral trade arrangements nor
regional economic and trade cooperation should be
exclusive. The principles of openness, equality and
mutual benefit should be upheld. The World Trade
10


Organization, to be founded next year, should from the
outset be a broadly representative and open trade institution
based on equality and mutual benefit.
The world economy is an interdependent whole.
Developed countries should make more tangible
contributions to global economic development and the
expansion of international economic cooperation. Primarily
they should take effective measures to open their markets,
provide development funds, transfer technology and
increase assistance to the developing countries to reduce
their debt burden, thereby contributing to their economic
growth, social stability and relief from poverty. Such
actions will in turn bolster the economic growth of the
developed countries themselves.
The international community and the United Nations
should be more concerned with development matters and in
particular should actively help the developing countries to
achieve prosperity. We appreciate the Secretary-General’s
efforts in submitting the Agenda for Development pursuant
to General Assembly resolutions. We hope that our
deliberations thereon will serve to reinvigorate world
economic development and international cooperation.
The Chinese Government considers economic
development the central task of the whole nation and makes
reform and opening its basic state policy. This year we
have taken a new series of major steps to intensify the
reform and opening which have the effect of ensuring
sustained, rapid and healthy economic growth. Gross
domestic product, foreign trade volume and overseas
investments registered increases in the first six months of
11.6 per cent, 25.5 per cent and 54.9 per cent respectively,
compared with the corresponding period last year. We will
step up our all-directional opening-up and continue to work
for world prosperity. We have been striving for an early
resumption of our contracting party status in the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. A solution to this matter
will be in the interest of both China and the world as a
whole. China needs to cooperate with the rest of the world
which in turn needs such an important trading partner as
China. A World Trade Organization without China would
be inconceivable.
Human society continues to move forward and make
progress. But social ills still stand out starkly such as
poverty, unemployment, the deteriorating environment, the
population explosion, refugees, illegal immigration, drug
trafficking, crime and injurious and unfair treatment of
social groups such as women, children and the disabled.
Some of these problems have become even more acute, and
have cried out for a remedy by the world community
through international cooperation. We consider that it is
necessary to step up such cooperation. Because
conditions vary, different countries face different social
problems. Each country has to draw up social
development policies adaptable to its own conditions.
International cooperation in this field should adhere to the
principles of mutual respect, equality and mutual benefit
without political strings or interference in domestic
affairs. Developing countries account for the majority of
the world’s population and are in a disadvantaged position
socially. This is where the emphasis of the United
Nations social programmes should be placed.
In recent years we have actively supported and
participated in important international conferences on the
environment, human rights and population under the
auspices of the United Nations. We will actively take
part in the World Summit for Social Development, to be
held in Copenhagen next March. The Chinese
Government attaches great importance to the Fourth
World Conference on Women, to be held in Beijing in
September 1995. The Chinese people, our women folk in
particular, are preparing for and looking forward to this
grand event with tremendous enthusiasm.
In response to the call in the documents of the 1992
United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, the Chinese Government has analysed the
actual conditions in the country and drawn up "Agenda 21
- White Paper on China’s Population, Environment and
Development in the 21st Century", which will be an
important guide in the formulation of our medium- and
long-term national, economic and social development
plans.
To ensure and protect human rights is an essential
part of a nation’s social policy. My Government makes
it a basic policy to constantly enhance the people’s
enjoyment of human rights commensurate with our
economic and social development. We always hold that
the principle of universality of human rights must be
viewed in the context of the actual conditions of a given
country. Conditions vary from country to country. It is
inevitable and normal that there is divergence of views on
human rights issues. We are in favour of dialogue on the
basis of equality and mutual respect so as to increase
mutual understanding. We are against using human rights
as a pretext to interfere in the internal affairs of other
countries.
11


Next year will mark the fiftieth anniversary of the
founding of the United Nations. Both the world and the
United Nations have undergone drastic changes in that half
century. The United Nations is the most representative
intergovernmental Organization of sovereign States.
Members of the Organization are equal, irrespective of size,
strength or wealth.
Notwithstanding its shortcomings, the status and role
of the United Nations in global international affairs remain
irreplaceable by any other international organizations or
groupings. It is the hope of the people of the world that
the Organization will better fulfil the mission conferred on
it by the Charter and and that it will make even greater
contributions to the maintenance of peace and the
promotion of development.
To cope with the greatly changed international
situation and grim challenges ahead, United Nations
institutions should undergo relevant and necessary reforms.
In our view, any such reforms should serve to maintain and
enhance the positive role of the United Nations in
international affairs and improve its efficiency. At the
same time, the reforms should take full account of the
concerns and interests of the developing countries, which
make up the majority of the membership, so that their role
may be enhanced. The function and role of the General
Assembly should be strengthened. Reform of the Security
Council must be aimed at facilitating a better performance
of its functions under the Charter. Any enlargement of the
Council’s membership must fully conform to the principle
of equitable geographical distribution to ensure broader
representation. Actions by the Council should better reflect
the collective will and common aspirations of the entire
United Nations membership.
To prepare for the commemoration of the fiftieth
anniversary of the United Nations, China has set up a
national committee, in accordance with the relevant United
Nations resolution. We hope that the commemoration in
various countries in the coming year will be used to review
the experience of the past and look to the future so that we
may carry forward the purposes and principles of the
Charter and enable the Organization to do a better job in
maintaining peace and promoting development.
It was sad that the first half of our century witnessed
two world wars with disastrous consequences for mankind.
The ensuing cold war cast a dark and menacing shadow of
war over the world for the greater part of the second half
of the century. It is gratifying, none the less, that we have
been able to fulfil the historic mission of eliminating the
centuries-old colonial system from the Earth within this
century. This is unquestionably one of the greatest
achievements of contemporary human society.
Looking ahead to the twenty-first century, we are
fully confident of the future of humanity. The Chinese
people will make common efforts with all other peoples
of the world to usher in a new century of peace and
prosperity.
First, I should like to
offer you, Sir, my personal congratulations on your election
as President of the General Assembly at its forty-ninth
session, and also those of the European Union, on whose
behalf I am addressing the Assembly today. We wish you
luck and success in your high office.
We thank Ambassador Insanally for the wise
leadership with which he guided the forty-eighth session
of the General Assembly to a successful conclusion.
I am addressing the Assembly on behalf of a Europe
that has become more closely integrated as a result of the
Maastricht Treaty, a Europe which in a few weeks’ time
will admit four new members, and which intends to
broaden its cooperation based on partnership with the
world’s other regions as well. I am speaking for a
Europe that is committed to world peace and development
and whose political actions are determined by its belief in
individual freedom, democracy and the rule of law, a
Europe which sees in the realization of justice a crucial
precondition for avoiding war and the use of force and
which is prepared to play its part in promoting the
economic development of all regions, the struggle against
hunger, and measures to protect the Earth’s natural
sources of life. But I am speaking above all on behalf of
a Europe that wishes to place the United Nations in a
better position to meet its foremost obligation as
guarantor of peace and security in the world.
Next year’s fiftieth anniversary of the United
Nations coincides with that marking the end of the
Second World War. The founding of the United Nations
was the response to that catastrophe, which had its origins
in Europe. Today we can look back on impressive
achievements by the United Nations. The 51 members in
1945 have grown into a membership of 184. The United
Nations has thus developed into a truly universal
Organization.
By recently concluding the negotiations on the Law
of the Sea Convention, the United Nations has made
outstanding progress in promoting the reconciliation of
interests and the peaceful settlement of disputes around
the world. The choice of Hamburg as seat of the
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea is a token
of confidence in Germany and an obligation for my
country.
The achievements of the United Nations are
considerable, yet it is often the object of unfair criticism.
The United Nations can be only as good as its Members
allow it to be. It needs their active support. Many of its
personnel, both soldiers and civilians, have done their
utmost to help alleviate distress and save lives. No small
number of them have lost their own lives in the process.
We pay tribute to them and honour their memory.
15


Many of us believed that the ending of the cold war
would usher in an era of peace. Today we know,
unfortunately, that that hope was premature. Day in and
day out, hundreds of people are falling victim to hostilities
and thousands more are dying of starvation or disease.
What has happened and is still happening in Bosnia,
Somalia and Rwanda is appalling.
The European Union sees a response to these global
challenges in a strengthening of the United Nations and of
the multilateral system for the safeguarding of peace world
wide, in more intensive preventive diplomacy and conflict
prevention within the United Nations and regional
institutions, in respect for human rights in the world and for
the rule of law, and in closer development cooperation in
and among the regions.
We Europeans therefore welcome the report of the
Secretary-General on an Agenda for Development. An
Agenda for Development must soon find its place alongside
the Agenda for Peace. With his report, Mr. Boutros-Ghali
has again pointed the way for our Organization’s future
development and work. I wish to convey to him the
appreciation of the European Union. We pledge a
constructive contribution to the debate on this document.
Following the disaster of the Second World War,
Europe had the opportunity for political renewal and it took
that opportunity. We Europeans derive courage and
strength from that renewal. No other region in the world
has such a dense network of regional, intergovernmental
and supranational institutions, and no region in the world
has such close relations with other nations and their
organizations. In the field of security, therefore, it is our
aim to create a network of mutually supporting institutions
which will include, together with the European Union (EU),
the Western European Union (WEU), the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) and the Conference on
Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE). All must
work closely with the United Nations. NATO and the
WEU are already helping the United Nations to carry out
its difficult mission in the former Yugoslavia.
Because our interests are interwoven as they have
always been, we will not allow ourselves to be discouraged
by set-backs and will therefore do our utmost to bring
about a peaceful settlement in the former Yugoslavia. The
United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) has our
unreserved support. The terrible war of destruction in
Bosnia and Herzegovina must be brought to an end.
Federation is, we believe, a first and indispensable step
towards a peace settlement. Winter will be here soon and
the people will once again have cold and hunger to
contend with. But the precondition for lasting progress
and for peace is the will for reconciliation among all
ethnic groups. The European Union is trying to help, and
we shall continue to do so. For that reason we have
established an administrative office in Mostar, which
began its work in July under the courageous leadership of
Hans Koschnick.
The entire international community must constantly
make it unmistakably clear to the Bosnian Serbs that in
rejecting the peace plan they cannot reckon with tacit
approval. There must be no toleration of a policy of war
and expulsion. We seek a solution for the Croatian
territories under UNPROFOR protection which will be
acceptable to both sides. The territorial integrity of
Croatia must be respected. Autonomy arrangements will
have to be found for the Krajina Serbs. We Europeans
believe that an extension of the mandate of UNPROFOR
is absolutely essential for this purpose.
The United Nations envisages a world in which it is
not the law of the strongest but rather international law
that prevails. We Europeans share that vision. We are
even more convinced by what has happened in the former
Yugoslavia that a relapse into divisive nationalism must
be prevented.
We, the Members of the United Nations, must
summon the strength to make a great joint effort to
provide the United Nations and its Secretary-General with
the means to meet their global responsibility. The United
Nations must become what its founding fathers aspired to
in their noble vision nearly 50 years ago: mankind’s
principal guardian of the peace.
But we, the Members of the United Nations, must
above all be prepared to stand up for the cause of peace.
The members of the European Union have played, and
are continuing to play, a major role in helping maintain
or restore peace in many of the world’s trouble spots on
behalf of the United Nations. We Europeans are guided
by the following basic principles.
First, for its peace-keeping measures the United
Nations should be able to rely on the broadest possible
support and involvement of its Members. Such
operations ought to foster peace and unity among them
but not divide the community of nations.
16


Secondly, we Europeans will always be in favour of
giving priority to non-military means of safeguarding peace
wherever possible. But aggressors must also realize that
the United Nations is capable of military intervention where
other means of achieving the aims of the Charter have
failed, and that it has the will to take such action.
Thirdly, the use of military force cannot be an end in
itself. Successful peace-keeping presupposes an
unequivocal mandate based on international law, a
convincing political plan for settling the conflict, and the
equitable participation of the Member States.
Fourthly, we Europeans welcome the idea of stand-by
arrangements developed by Secretary-General
Boutros-Ghali. It can effectively help reduce the length of
time between the decision to mount a peace-keeping
operation and its actual implementation. Many members of
the European Union, including Germany, are willing to
contribute to stand-by arrangements.
Fifthly, in many countries military training is geared
solely to the traditional duties of the army. The specific
tasks of peace-keeping require a completely different kind
of training. The national preparation of Blue Helmets
needs to be coordinated to a greater degree by the United
Nations. What is needed for this are common training
guidelines and the training capacity of the United Nations.
Joint training and exercises are, at the same time, important
steps in confidence-building.
Speaking as the Foreign Minister of Germany, I would
add that last year I stated in the Assembly that my country
was willing to shoulder more responsibilities with regard to
United Nations peace-keeping operations. Today I can
confirm that Germany will be able to join fully in
peace-keeping operations of the United Nations, the
German Federal Constitutional Court having cleared the
way a few months ago.
The European Union looks for the revitalization of the
United Nations and its various organizations. In the course
of the forty-eighth session of the General Assembly a
working group considered all aspects of the question of
increasing the membership of the Security Council and
other matters related to the Security Council. The working
group had a substantive and constructive discussion. Its
report states that
"... while there was convergence of views that the
membership of the Security Council should be
enlarged, there was also agreement that the scope and
nature of such enlargement require further
discussion." (A/48/47, para. 8)
Security Council reform is an important issue which
requires a productive outcome. These days, the most
important decisions on security and peace are made in the
Security Council. We therefore look forward to a report
on enlargement of the Security Council membership and
related issues from the open-ended working group, and to
productive results.
Transparency in the Council’s decision-making
processes is important, particularly in peace-keeping,
where the interests of contributor nations are involved.
Indeed, the cost of establishing and consolidating peace
is enormous. The explosion of the peace-keeping budget
has almost brought the United Nations to a standstill. In
order to overcome the financial crisis, three tasks must be
accomplished.
The United Nations urgently requires more efficient
management and better organization. The creation of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services by the General
Assembly at its forty-eighth session was an important step
towards this objective, and the fact that a German has
been appointed as the first head of that Office is a mark
of confidence in my country. Members’ contributions
must be brought more into line with their actual capacity
to pay. The aim of comprehensive financial reform must
be to establish a scale that is transparent and reliable,
reflects Members’ financial situations, is automatically
adapted to changed national circumstances, and gives
consideration to the needs of countries with low per
capita incomes. But it is crucial that all Members be
willing to meet their membership obligations. We cannot
have a situation in which the United Nations has
difficulty carrying out its responsibilities because
individual Members feel exempted from their duties.
It is always better to prevent a fire than to have to
put it out. The European experience is that conflicts must
be prevented -but this is not a purely European
experience. We bank on the power of preventive
diplomacy, confidence-building and the early detection of
conflicts. The United Nations must further enlarge and
strengthen its instruments of preventive diplomacy. This
includes helping countries along the road to democracy
and observing elections. The establishment of and respect
for human and minority rights, as well as measures to
bring about economic and social stability, are other basic
elements of prevention.
17


The Declaration and Programme of Action of the
World Conference on Human Rights held in Vienna calls
for more active implementation. Our priority must be to
support the High Commissioner for Human Rights. In
addition, we must substantially increase the resources
available in the United Nations for human rights activities.
It is, I believe, inadequate for the United Nations to provide
only 1 per cent of its funds for this task.
Work on the establishment of an international criminal
court must proceed apace. Human rights and the protection
of minorities are indivisibly linked. Ethnic or cultural
arrogance and the curtailing of minority rights are one
cause of the ever-swelling refugee flows in our world
today. That is why minorities need the protection of the
United Nations. We Europeans are striving to implement
this objective. In Europe, the Pact on Stability is designed
to promote political stability and the protection of
minorities.
We do not want to close our eyes to our own
shortcomings. There must be no room for racism and
xenophobia in Europe. That is why we have made it our
goal to develop a Union-wide strategy against racism and
xenophobia in the course of the coming year. We need
more efficient management of humanitarian relief actions.
The need for resources and measures to alleviate emergency
situations through disaster relief operations is likely to
increase rather than decrease.
We expect the United Nations Disaster Relief
Coordinator to ensure more effective coordination of
measures within the United Nations system. He must be
able to intervene before it is too late for the people
affected. I should like to stress that point. Work on the
drafting of a convention for the protection of the work of
humanitarian organizations must be brought to a speedy
conclusion.
One task of preventive policy as we understand it is to
combat terrorism. There is no justification for terrorism.
Drugs and organized crime are an ever-increasing danger
not only to our young people, but also to the social and
political stability of whole societies. To combat these
dangers we need international alliances, and we need them
urgently. The European Union offers comprehensive
cooperation and the experience it has gained in this field.
Disarmament policy, too, is preventive policy. Over
the past few years, major successes have been attained in
this field. These must now be made irreversible. The
START Treaties must be implemented quickly. In Europe,
the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces has proved to
be a milestone.
Uncleared mines are amongst the worst legacies of
war and civil war. We Europeans are in favour of the
establishment of a United Nations fund for mine-clearing
and of more stringent provisions under international law
to protect civilian populations.
The increasing proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, the continuing operation of unsafe nuclear
plants and the smuggling of plutonium and other nuclear
materials are among the new global dangers of our age.
We must counter them at the national and global levels.
We Europeans urgently appeal to North Korea to fulfil its
international obligations. We in the European Union are
committed to the indefinite, unconditional extension of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. In
Geneva, we want to arrive at a universal and universally
verifiable comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty. I
believe that it is also high time that consensus was
reached there on negotiations to bring about a ban on the
manufacture of weapons-grade fissile material.
The European Union, together with its partners, is
providing considerable funds for improving the safety of
nuclear plants in the neighbouring countries to our east.
What happened at Chernobyl must never, ever be
repeated. That would indeed be terrible.
I appeal to all signatory States to ensure speedy
ratification and implementation of the chemical weapons
Convention at the national level in order for it quickly to
become fully effective.
The dangers I have just mentioned affect us all. As
those dangers have a global dimension, action by the
United Nations, too, is called for. At its summit meeting
on 31 January 1992, the Security Council rightly stated
that the proliferation of all weapons of mass destruction
constitutes a threat to international peace and security.
The United Nations, the Security Council and all of us
must resolutely shoulder our responsibility to overcome
these new threats.
A fair balancing of interests through the ever-closer
regional integration of States and ever-increasing
cooperation between regions of our planet in the spirit of
Article 1 of the Charter of the United Nations are the
necessary response to the huge economic, ecological and
social challenges and the manifold ethnic conflicts we are
facing today - unfortunately, I might add. No one region
18


alone can master the global tasks confronting us. Nor can
the United Nations accomplish everything itself. The
burden on the United Nations can be substantially reduced
with the help of regional associations and cooperation. We
should strive to achieve that objective.
For Europe, the post-war era has finally reached an
end. A few weeks ago, the last Russian soldiers left
Germany. Russian troops have also withdrawn from the
Baltic States and other Eastern European countries. Now
the aim must be to prevent new divides from emerging in
Europe. The European Union will become not a "Fortress
Europe" but a Europe based on partnership and solidarity.
The European Union is supporting the countries of
Central and Eastern Europe on their way to democracy and
the establishment of market economies. The peoples in the
reformist States fought for their freedom. We encouraged
them in their struggle and we will not now abandon them.
We will gradually smooth their path towards the
Euro-Atlantic institutions. It is important to mention that
there will be no pan-European order of peace without or
against Russia. The European Union has concluded
partnership and cooperation agreements with Russia and
Ukraine. The North Atlantic Alliance’s "Partnership for
Peace" enhances Europe’s security.
The CSCE, as a new instrument of conflict-prevention,
confidence-building and conflict resolution, can set an
example for other regions of the world. And it can, as a
regional arrangement under Chapter VIII of the Charter,
relieve the United Nations as the guardian of peace. At the
CSCE Summit in December the European Union will urge,
on the basis of a German-Dutch initiative, that the CSCE be
given priority in conflict settlement and prevention within
its area and that it be equipped accordingly.
The European Union wants to further extend and
tighten its network of regional cooperation. Transatlantic
relations with the United States and Canada remain the
cornerstone of European policy. The Summit meeting
between the European Union and the United States in
Berlin in July this year confirmed our resolve to further
strengthen transatlantic relations.
We are seeking closer relations with the countries of
Asia. In Germany a few days ago we discussed with the
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) the
possibilities for even more intensive political and economic
cooperation. We are following with interest ASEAN’s
initiative to launch a policy dialogue on security in
South-East and East Asia, and I wish to emphasize the
European Union’s interest in and willingness to cooperate
more closely with the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
Council (APEC).
The European Council meeting in Corfu reaffirmed
that it attaches great importance to relations with the
countries of Latin America and with their regional
associations. The institutionalized dialogue with the Rio
Group has become for us an important element for the
consolidation of democracy and peace. We intend to
broaden the cooperation agreement with the States of the
Southern Cone Common Market (MERCOSUR).
Through its policy on the Mediterranean, the
European Union will have made available a total of
roughly $9.6 billion between 1975 and 1996. Europe
attaches great importance to security in the
Mediterranean.
From the outset the European Union actively
supported the Middle East peace process, playing a
leading role in international assistance for the
development of the Palestinian economy and society.
With the roughly $600 million earmarked for direct aid
from 1994 to 1998, the European Union is the
Palestinians’ largest international donor.
Cooperation in southern Africa has made great
strides. The course South Africa has embarked upon
under Nelson Mandela shows that it is possible for former
adversaries to be reconciled and to shape a common
future, given the necessary political will and wise
leadership. At the Berlin conference with the States of
the Southern African Development Community (SADC)
early this month the European Union initiated a new
phase of cooperation with southern Africa.
We in Europe want closer dialogue with the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) on conflict
prevention and security cooperation because we want
partnership with the countries of Africa and thereby a
greater United Nations peace-keeping capacity.
Agreement on an agenda for development is
becoming ever more urgent. One billion people in this
world are still living in absolute poverty. Global
expenditure on arms still amounts to as much as the
income of half of the five and a half billion people on our
planet.
Poverty, increasing demographic pressure and
irresponsible harming of the environment have made the
19


dangers to peace and stability greater, not smaller. The
Conference on Environment and Development in Rio and
the International Conference on Population and
Development, which ended in Cairo a few days ago,
confirmed that there are no simple answers to global
problems. The two conferences none the less sent out an
encouraging signal: there is growing recognition that we
must tackle such problems together, and this I believe is a
very important basis for the World Social Summit, which
will be held next year in Denmark.
In many countries women are still excluded from
active participation in public life. We expect the World
Conference on Women, to be held in Beijing next year, to
heighten awareness of this.
In the Maastricht Treaty we Europeans for the first
time made development policy an integral part of a treaty
system for Europe. We undertook to seek the sustainable
economic and social development of the South, to promote
its integration into the global economy and to combat
poverty.
Despite the huge budget difficulties facing its member
States, the European Union has increased its development
assistance from over $1 billion in 1988 to almost $3 billion
today. Funds for emergency disaster relief and food aid
were increased to $1 billion this year. Even more
important than such financial transfers, however, is the task
of integrating the countries of the South into the world
economy. Without doubt, the conclusion of the Uruguay
Round improved the chances of growth for all States
participating in world trade. The aim now must be for the
Treaty to enter into force on 1 January 1995, as planned,
and for the newly-established World Trade Organization to
commence work.
The treaty-based cooperation between the European
Union and the other regions of the world is designed to
further liberalize world trade. Every region should be able
to participate in the European market. That is why we
want to complete the forthcoming review of Lomé IV,
including the new finance protocol, on time, and we are
working to achieve that end.
Speaking here last year I suggested the development
of an early detection capacity for environmental disasters in
developing countries, and for the European Union I can
today say this: World-wide energy consumption is
increasing, although the use of fossil fuels is already
endangering climatic stability. In particular, we, the
industrialized countries, therefore need a more
environment-friendly and resource-friendly attitude on the
part of producers and consumers and increased recycling
of raw materials. Reducing carbon dioxide emissions
must be tackled as a matter of urgency.
The destruction of the forests continues mercilessly.
Soil erosion, loss of bio-diversity and impaired
regeneration are the consequences. This destruction must
be halted. We Europeans will seek better international
cooperation in the United Nations for the sustainable
utilization and protection of the forests. The United
Nations is the guardian not only of peace, but also of the
environment.
The historian Arnold Toynbee was right when he
concluded that people are entirely capable of learning
from disasters and finding responses to historic
challenges. Today we Europeans know that only
integration and cooperation lead to the desired goal, and
the international community’s response to the global
problems is and has to be to strengthen the United
Nations. Our central tasks for the future are: first, to
secure peace world-wide; secondly, to respect human
rights and the rule of law; and, thirdly, to create the
conditions for lasting stability through economic and
social development.
Our common goal is to create a better world for all.
But the determination with which we implement this goal
in practice is the precondition for success against which
we will be measured.
France is especially pleased, Mr. President, to see the
General Assembly meeting under your authority. At the
end of a year marked by the passing of an extraordinary
statesman, President Houphouët-Boigny, your election has
given the international community another occasion to
stop and think about the situation in the African continent,
which in recent months has brought us both hope and
tragedy.
In South Africa, a decisive evolutionary process took
concrete form this year in the first elections there with
universal suffrage. We can now express our joy at seeing
that country take its rightful place in the concert of
nations. The choice of the South African people, inspired
by outstanding men to whom France wishes again to pay
a tribute, provides an example for all those who aspire to
democracy, reconciliation and peace and gives them hope.
In Rwanda, on the other hand, an unprecedented
tragedy has set the international community’s
responsibility squarely before it. The Assembly is
familiar with the efforts made by France to respond to
that tragedy and with the support it managed to find,
primarily among the African States. The operation that
was carried out enabled us to shelter more than 3 million
Rwandans from the fighting. None the less, we have
found it necessary once again to say the word "genocide",
which, almost 50 years after the birth of the United
Nations, amounts to saying that the worst is still possible.
During the darkest years of the Second World War,
General De Gaulle spoke of the need to establish a world
order that could guarantee the security of all, to make
rational use of all the world’s riches and to bring together
all the people on the face of the Earth. The time has
come for us to rediscover the ideal that inspired the
12


generation of the founders and to ask ourselves with clarity
what means are necessary to implement it.
Almost everywhere in the world we are seeing the
positive movement of nation-States into groups. France
has made the building up of Europe one of the pillars of its
foreign policy. How could it not, then, encourage the
formation of new areas of solidarity?
The experience of building Europe, which began 40
years ago, is a case in point. It has done more than just do
away with the age-old rivalries that had led to two world
wars. In the western part of the European continent,
economic integration and political cooperation have attained
a level that is unmatched in the world.
Since the iron curtain ceased to exist, we have been
primarily concerned with expanding to all parts of Europe
the zone of peace and prosperity resulting from that
process. This explains our desire to speed up the
integration of the Central and Eastern European
democracies into the European Union. It also accounts for
our efforts to organize a partnership with Russia and the
States of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS).
The European Union, the Western European Union (WEU),
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE)
are all coooperating in the efforts towards this end.
Furthermore, it explains France’s initiative, taken up in turn
by the European Union, to establish a stability pact. This
is an ambitious exercise in preventive diplomacy, aimed at
resolving issues of relations between neighbours and of
minority groups, where such issues persist in the European
theatre.
Today Europe is a world power, as it demonstrated
during the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(GATT) negotiations, at which its efforts led, notably, to
the establishment of a World Trade Organization (WTO).
This is a major success that will benefit all its member
countries by putting an end to unilateral practices and
guaranteeing fair and free trade. Europe is thus assuming
its international responsibilities. It is actively supporting
the peace processes in the Middle East, in southern Africa
and elsewhere. It has long been involved in the struggle to
achieve development, particularly through the Lomé
Conventions. It provides substantial financing everywhere -
the most in the world - for peoples mired in humanitarian
crises. Its actions prove that a genuine regional power can
benefit the entire international community.
New regional groups of solidarity are gradually
taking shape in all parts of the world. In Africa, France
supports the principle of an OAU mechanism for
preventing, handling and settling conflicts. We are ready
to help set up a military mechanism to enable the OAU
to intervene more quickly, under United Nations control,
in the framework of peace-keeping operations.
In South-East Asia, the countries of the Association
of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) are working to
strengthen their economic ties and to establish confidence-
building measures to reinforce the stability of the region.
France, which through the European Union was present
at ASEAN’s regional forum on security, held recently in
Bangkok, takes a special interest in the beneficial effects
this process should have on the countries of the Indo-
Chinese peninsula.
On the American continent, the entry into force of
the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)
adds to the dynamism of existing regional organizations,
old and new.
Thus, perhaps, there may be such a group in the
Middle East as well, where progress in the peace process
allows us to envision the development of intensive
regional cooperation. The organization of all kinds of ties
among the countries concerned will help to establish
peace in the region, as will the search for solutions to the
political problems that are still pending. France can
therefore only repeat that we hope to see the boycotts
finally ended. Our financial support for the peace
process, as well as our active participation in the
multilateral negotiations, including participation in such
ultra-sensitive areas as regional security, reflect this very
same conviction.
Above and beyond that, France would like to see
Europe organize a forum for cooperation involving all the
Mediterranean States. We have, on the initiative of
Egypt, already made a contribution to the coming into
being of the Mediterranean Forum, which recently held its
first meeting in Alexandria. We will make this one of the
main goals of the French presidency of the European
Union in the first semester of the coming year.
Everywhere, then, the progress being made in
processes leading to integration and the establishment of
regional frameworks for cooperation reflects positive
trends. These organizations, however, have neither the
right nor the capability to do everything. It is the United
Nations that is and must remain the sole forum for
13


organizing peace and solidarity throughout the world. It is
up to the United Nations and to that Organization alone to
ensure international equilibrium since, in the last resort, it
alone has the power to decide on enforcement measures or
on the use of force. Regional organizations do contribute
to peace and international stability. They may indeed fulfil
missions in preventive diplomacy, but they must then be
inspired by the principles enshrined in the United Nations.
As regards peace-keeping, Chapter VIII of our Charter
expressly provides that the United Nations may, in certain
circumstances, employ the means at the disposal of the
regional organizations.
But when conflicts become exacerbated, when a crisis
calls for a mandatory solution, the Charter requires us to
turn to the Security Council, the sole authority having
power to decide on enforcement measures or on the use of
force other than for legitimate self-defence. The
justification for such measures may come only from the
will of the international community, and that is why the
Security Council, in our view, must exert its authority and
control at all stages of operations it may decide upon:
conception and approval of the mandate, the major phases
of implementation and the monitoring of implementation.
The adoption of a system of mandatory sanctions
against States that breach international legality is also a
prerogative of the Security Council. But, and we are very
keenly aware of this, this concerns serious, exceptional
measures whose purpose must be precisely defined to bring
pressure to bear on a Government to change its attitude.
That is the objective in such instances. France therefore
proposes that in future, when a resolution imposing
sanctions upon a Member State is to be voted upon, three
conditions must be met. These are, that all other
diplomatic avenues have been explored without success;
that the Council resolution state explicitly what actions the
targeted State should take in order for the sanctions to be
lifted; and that the maintenance of the sanctions should be
subject to regular review in good faith.
In the realm of disarmament, our Organization is once
again the sole forum where international commitments may
be entered into. Given this perspective, France ascribes
especial importance to the speedy ratification of the
Convention banning chemical weapons - the first
multilateral disarmament treaty - and thereby its entry into
force in 1995. France hopes to see our Organization make
progress towards strengthening the Convention banning
biological weapons and to see new efforts made to ban
anti-personnel mines. I was particularly pleased to hear
President Clinton endorse this very concept in his recent
statement to the Assembly. Finally, the requirement for
non-proliferation, which North Korea’s attitude compels
us to take especially seriously, must lead, at the 1995
Conference, to the unconditional and indefinite renewal of
the non-proliferation Treaty. In this same vein, France
reaffirms its support for the decision taken by the General
Assembly last year to begin negotiations on a
comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty that would be
internationally and effectively verifiable.
Over recent years, crisis prevention and crisis
management have absorbed the greater part of our efforts.
We have thus imperceptibly strayed somewhat from what
was a major chapter in the history of the United Nations:
the North-South dialogue, the major conferences on trade
and development. France thus proposes that the United
Nations restore development and the struggle to achieve
it to their central place in its work.
It is not a question of repeating what was done in
past decades. Our approach to development has changed.
The work pursued under the auspices of the United
Nations and its agencies has helped to call attention to the
interdependence of the economic, demographic, cultural
and social ramifications of the development question.
That is why the main theme conferences devoted to the
environment, to population, to social development and to
the status of women are now once again the instruments
to be used to mobilize for development. Given this
perspective, France will organize in Paris before the end
of this year the signing of the Convention on the struggle
against desertification, as well as the Aids Summit.
The United Nations alone is capable of ensuring that
all these efforts be pursued consistently. It has the
necessary legitimacy and authority, inasmuch as all the
main institutions concerned, including what are known as
the Bretton Woods institutions, are part and parcel of the
United Nations system. We therefore consider it
necessary to strengthen the links that unite all these
separate bodies. In particular, we should ensure that the
policies of adjustment carried out under World Bank or
International Monetary Fund auspices take due account of
the social requirements of development. France is
committed to doing so in working with its partners, and
has recently agreed to a substantial effort to help the franc
zone countries overcome the short-term effects of the
devaluation of the CFA franc.
The Economic and Social Council should be the
place for ensuring coherence and consistency within these
organizations. France therefore proposes that the next
14


annual meeting of the Council in Geneva should be an
opportunity for the ministers of Member States personally
to undertake a complete examination of the policies
followed by these various institutions with regard to
development, and especially to study specific ways by
which they might work together better.
The Secretary-General’s efforts for renewal and
clarification through the "Agenda for Development"
naturally form part of this global approach. The European
Union, for its part, has presented recommendations in its
aide-mémoire that it believes would enhance that draft.
France intends to take an active part in General Assembly
discussions on this subject.
The role of our Organization is no less critical where
humanitarian action is involved. France intervenes
regularly on the ground alongside United Nations agencies,
and we should like to pay a tribute to the outstanding work
done by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the World Food Programme and UNICEF,
working under tragically difficult circumstances. We were
able to appreciate in full measure their usefulness as the
Rwandan crisis unfolded. We have had confirmation that
the United Nations alone is able to coordinate such difficult
operations. Naturally, there is need for further progress:
in shortening the Organization’s reaction time, and in better
allocating tasks among agencies. But the reform that began
three years ago with the establishment of the Department
for Humanitarian Affairs is beginning to bear fruit. We are
indeed on the right track.
Lastly, France would like to stress the underlying
principle of international law: the universality of human
rights, a principle which may not be challenged in the name
of any religious, cultural or national specificities. I am all
the more ready to say that because France is itself keen on
preserving its identity and intent on defending it. However
different people may be, they share the same rights. The
very existence of our Organization rests on this principle.
France has consistently urged the acceleration of
progress in the field of human rights, by seeking
recognition that certain principles must be applied to States’
actions. I welcome the steps taken by the High
Commissioner for Human Rights since his designation and
express the hope that the resources made available to him
will be commensurate with his mission.
The establishment of the International Tribunal for war
crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia is a significant
event. Until very recently there had been some scepticism
about this initiative. Today, thanks to the resolve of the
Tribunal’s judges and prosecutor, it is in place and
beginning to examine actual cases being submitted to it.
France supports these efforts and hopes that comparable
crimes of genocide that may have been committed in
Rwanda will also lead to the establishment of an
international legal body.
The juridical work of the United Nations extends to
other areas as well. It is designed to address matters of
international trade with a view to making it both freer and
fairer. In this regard, I have already expressed our
satisfaction at the establishment of the World Trade
Organization. The signing a few weeks ago of an act that
completes the monumental work done by the United
Nations on the law of the sea is also a historic event.
If our Organization is to be able to carry out the
many difficult tasks which I have just described, we must
constantly work to reform it and adjust the means
available to it - in the first place, by strengthening the
means available to the Secretary-General. On behalf of
France, I should like to pay a tribute here to the
Secretary-General - and this is not a mere formality. We
have the good fortune to have at the helm of our
Organization a man who, thanks to his ceaseless efforts
over the past two years, has made progress possible in all
areas: preventive diplomacy, crisis management,
development, the running of the institution. We must
therefore give him the means to continue his work.
This is true, too, of peace-keeping missions. Recent
experience has shown the need to make military forces
available to the Secretary-General on very short notice in
the implementation of Security Council resolutions. To
that end, France wishes to develop a network of stand-by
forces. On the initiative of the President of the Republic,
we have offered to make a standing unit of several
thousand men available to the United Nations. It is also
essential for the Secretary-General to be able to control
the evolution of peace-keeping missions. To that end,
France recommends systematic recourse to the designation
of a special representative.
The Secretary-General must be able to rely on the
assistance of prominent and particularly competent
persons. With regard to management, last year’s
establishment of the post of Inspector General marked an
important step forward. We expect further progress to be
made this year with the establishment of a committee on
budgetary discipline, as I proposed last year from this
very rostrum. Lastly, as our Prime Minister has
15


suggested, France proposes that someone be appointed on
a permanent basis to the Secretary-General’s Office who
would deal with the question of the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.
Our Assembly is the most universal of international
institutions. Its prestige and authority must therefore be
strengthened. To that end, France is making three
proposals.
First, sessions of the Fifth Committee must be held
more closely together in order to ensure better control over
our finances, particularly with regard to peace-keeping
operations.
Secondly, there must be more frequent missions of the
Assembly to deal with certain crisis situations, as was done
in the cases of Haiti and South Africa. The financial
reform of the United Nations, which has been discussed for
several years now, must be set in motion. Following the
work of the high-level Working Group established last year
to consider the question of enlarging the Security Council,
France proposes that a group, led by the President of the
General Assembly, be set up this year to make proposals
that could lead to the financial reform of our Organization.
Thirdly, we must work to achieve the enlargement of
the Security Council. This question has already been the
focus of in-depth discussions that have clarified the
positions at issue. For its part, France has no panacea to
offer, but it believes that the solution must answer the dual
imperative of efficacy and representativeness.
On the one hand, if the Security Council is to function
efficiently, given its tasks and the circumstances in which
it intervenes, its capacity to take important decisions
quickly must clearly be maintained. But the Council must
also allow for full public debate in reaching its decisions.
Hence, we are in favour of the Council’s holding official
meetings - without of course giving up its informal
consultations - to hear Members of the Organization and
talk with them before taking positions on the important
questions before it. We believe that this is the appropriate
response to the demand for transparency made by many
delegations.
On the other hand, the Council’s authority and thus its
efficacy also depend on its representativeness. We
therefore favour the enlargement of the Council to include
new permanent and non-permanent members. France
confirms its support for the desires of Germany and Japan
to accede to permanent membership. It also considers that
the representatives of the developing world should in no
case find themselves marginalized by any future reform.
The United Nations exists and acts only through the
will of its Member States. Though that is obvious it
bears repeating. Any failure of our Organization is in
fact the failure of those same States - that is, as my
colleague from the United Kingdom stated earlier today,
our own failure. Its efficacy depends above all on the
degree of commitment each of us brings to it.
Without the commitment of States there can be no
solution to the financial crisis of the United Nations.
Each of us is aware of the gravity of our Organization’s
financial situation. Each of us also knows that this
critical situation is not the result solely of the sum total of
expenditures. The real source of our crisis is well known:
it is the negligence of States which do not pay their
contributions or do not pay them in full.
Of course, we welcome the fact that one of the main
contributor countries has decided to pay a substantial part
of its arrears, thereby bringing temporary relief to the
Organization’s financial situation. We can understand
why some Member States are requesting that the scale of
contributions be adjusted in order better to reflect real
abilities to pay. France hopes that at the present session
the General Assembly will address the revision of this
scale in accordance with the principle of fairness and in
a spirit of consensus.
But fairness also requires swifter and more
substantial reimbursement to States that provide the troops
necessary to peace-keeping operations and are therefore
the primary victims of late payments. The situation in
which some in fact pay twice while others do not pay at
all must come to an end. France therefore asks once
again that a working group be established and mandated
to propose all the measures that can encourage tardy
States to pay their arrears.
And without the commitment of States there cannot
be any solution to international instability. France has
made considerable efforts to help resolve crises that have
threatened the international order over the past few years.
It has been the first and is now the second largest troop
contributor to the United Nations. It has well-known
experience in the three areas of preventive diplomacy,
peace-keeping and humanitarian action. Obviously,
France does not wish to lecture anyone, but its own
commitment does permit it to say that the readiness of
16


States does not meet the demands made today upon our
Organization.
Need we cite all the circumstances in which the non-
participation or temporizing of States has compromised
action mandated by the Security Council? How many
weeks did we have to wait last year for the military
arrangements provided for under Security Council
resolution 824 (1993) on safe areas in Bosnia were finally
in place? We all remember that, during the Rwandan
crisis, the decision taken by the Security Council in mid-
May to strengthen the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Rwanda had yet to be implemented two months later.
Rather than dwelling on these disappointments,
however, France wishes to pay tribute to all those States
that have shown, by their commitment and sense of
international solidarity, that the United Nations can prove
that it is effective. The African countries that chose to
share with us the risks involved in the operation in Rwanda;
the United States, which is working in Haiti to effect the
implementation of Security Council resolution 940 (1994);
the States whose soldiers stand with ours in the United
Nations Protection Force: it is thanks to them that there
remains a chance for peace in the former Yugoslavia,
delayed only by the stubbornness of the Bosnian Serb
leaders. France expects that the greatest of firmness will be
used in dealing with these most recent warmongers. But
the change in position of the other parties, and in particular
the authorities in Belgrade, makes it incumbent upon us to
continue to seek a negotiated settlement. In this spirit, we
appeal to Presidents Izetbegovic, Tudjman and Milosevic,
who have all accepted the peace plan for Bosnia, to resume
the direct dialogue necessary for a comprehensive
settlement. Otherwise, the international community must be
prepared to propose the terms of a comprehensive, just and
lasting settlement, taking into account the legitimate
interests of the various communities that made up the
former Yugoslavia and must enjoy equal rights.
Bringing to trial those responsible for war crimes is a
moral imperative to which France is committed. We must
above all make the people in the former Yugoslavia
understand that there are prospects for the future other than
endless violence and vengeance. That is France’s message.
That is the reason for the commitment of our soldiers in
Bosnia and, sadly, the sacrifice of several dozen of them.
There is nothing pre-ordained about failure to get involved,
or inertia. There is a strong will at the heart of our
Organization. Therefore France appeals to all Member
States to mark the fiftieth anniversary with a genuine
renewal of commitment.
Voices are being raised today urging our
Organization to show greater realism in defining the
missions that it has to carry out. In appealing to Member
States to mobilize, France wishes to reaffirm its
unwavering conviction that, in the face of the challenges
to the international community, realism consists not in
being less ambitious but in ensuring that we have the
means fully to achieve our ambitions. They must not be
limited to what seems possible; they must be to make
possible what is obviously necessary. It is in this spirit
that France will continue actively to play its role within
the United Nations.
I should like first to
congratulate you most warmly, Sir, on your election as
President. The Assembly could not have made a wiser
choice. I wish you all good fortune and success in your
mission.
In a few months we shall commemorate the fiftieth
anniversary of the birth of the United Nations. The United
Nations is the fullest expression man has yet achieved of
the age-old desire to escape from war and establish an
enduring peace.
When the United Nations was founded in San
Francisco 50 years ago the threat of nuclear war between
the super-Powers had already begun to cast a shadow
across the world. That shadow has now lifted, and we all
live and sleep more safely as a result. Yet as we approach
the anniversary we are all more conscious of the suffering
and destruction that still disfigure parts of almost every
continent in the world. The threats to international peace
and security are more diffuse and perhaps less serious than
they were, but not less real and not less tragic for those
caught up in them.
To some extent, disappointment comes out of
exaggerated expectation. There is still a tendency to think
of the United Nations as if it were some great palace of
world order which descended splendidly from heaven 50
years ago. If that were our view, then every broken pane
of glass in that palace, every door, every pillar fouled or
damaged would be a disgrace and a scandal.
But, of course, in reality world order does not descend
from heaven at the moment when a Charter is signed. It is
not like that at all. World order is built painfully,
gradually, brick by brick. Sometimes the wind and the
weather destroy what has already been built. But the
builders cannot afford to be discouraged - and we are all
builders. They have to repair; they have to rebuild; they
have to hope that gradually in what they build the
advances will outnumber the retreats.
There have been recent advances that have been
dramatic - beyond expectation. No one who was present
at the Union Buildings in Pretoria this May could fail to
be moved at the birth of the new South Africa. The
goodwill and the cheerful determination of all South
Africans on that occasion were a marvelous refutation, it
seemed to me, of the cynicism that so often weakens our
work.
And we have seen the same as the peace process
gathers strength in the Middle East.
In part of my own country, we may - and I fervently
hope we shall - see killings cease, see fears slowly
dissolve, as a result of the process started by the British
and Irish Governments in the Downing Street Declaration
on Northern Ireland.
In Europe - in Cyprus, in the former Yugoslavia, in
Georgia -the United Nations has helped at least to contain
if not yet to resolve deep-rooted conflicts. The world’s
most intractable problems continue to be laid at your
door, Mr. Secretary-General, like infants laid at the door
of some medieval monastery. It is not surprising that, for
all the efforts of 77,000 men and women serving in
United Nations peace-keeping operations in the field, our
Organization has had failures as well as successes to its
name.
As is common in our society of mass media, the
headlines have been dominated by the reversals, and some
of them have indeed been tragic. In Rwanda the efforts
of the United Nations failed to avert genocide. In
Somalia it looks as if our efforts have been effectively
spurned by a people whose need for help seemed, and
seems, self-evident.
A word about Bosnia. There has in recent months,
mercifully, been more peace in Bosnia. It is a fragile,
uncertain, inconclusive, often interrupted peace, but it is
still better than what went before. We necessarily discuss
Bosnia all the time. The debate in particular in this
building about the United Nations arms embargo has at
times seemed to rage more fiercely than the fighting on
the ground. Certainly the diplomatic efforts have been
frustrating. And I can understand those who believe that
reverting to a fight, even a fight to the death, would be
5


preferable to the tangle of negotiations and compromise that
sometimes seems to stretch ahead for ever.
Nevertheless, I do not agree with that opinion. We
should value, we should build on, the advances that have
been made, we should value the lives that have been saved
by the reduction in fighting on the ground. We can now
see perhaps more clearly that the United Nations Protection
Force (UNPROFOR) has been essential in protecting
civilians and in preventing the Bosnian Serb army from
making further advances. Who here can believe that
Gorazde, or Srebrenica or Zepa would still be in the hands
of the Bosnian Government if it were not for the bravery
and commitment of UNPROFOR troops?
UNPROFOR can operate only if it is able to keep
lines open to all the parties to the fighting. It could not
continue if leading members of the United Nations were
rearming one side; UNPROFOR would then be identified
as a party to the war. It is not mandated or equipped for
that purpose. Our Secretary-General has endorsed that
view, and the Commander of United Nations forces in
Bosnia has rightly said "We have not come here to fight a
war from inside white painted vehicles".
So I welcome the decision of which we heard
yesterday from the Bosnian President, the decision to accept
that now is not the moment to lift the arms embargo. And
that Bosnian decision allows UNPROFOR to continue its
mission. We have said before that if the Bosnian Serbs do
not join the peace process and agree the map presented by
the Contact Group, then our present approach may become
exhausted. Lifting the arms embargo may become
unavoidable, as we said at Geneva in July, and in those
circumstances UNPROFOR would have to withdraw. But
it would not be a good policy. Indeed, it would be a policy
of despair, a policy that, as in Shakespeare’s King Lear,
"Bids the wind blow the earth into the sea,
"...
"That things might change or cease". (King Lear, Act
III, scene i, l. 5)
A real solution to the conflict, as always, lies with
those who are doing the fighting. We from outside must
continue to show all the parties that the way forward is
political agreement and not more military action. There is
a settlement plan, the settlement plan of the Contact Group,
on the table. Those who refuse it, those who continue the
warfare, must be isolated, must be put under sustained -
indeed, increased - pressure. Those who cooperate with the
international peace plan effectively, in deeds and not just
in words, should have that cooperation recognized.
I need to say a few words in response to the remarks
made yesterday by the distinguished President of
Argentina concerning the dispute over the Falkland
Islands. President Menem was right - and I am glad that
he mentioned it - when he referred to the increasing
cooperation between the United Kingdom and Argentina
in several areas. Indeed, this cooperation nowadays
characterizes our bilateral relationship. And we certainly
hope, sincerely hope, that the progress that we have
achieved together will not be reversed.
We are quite clear about British sovereignty over the
Falkland Islands and the other British dependencies in the
South Atlantic, so we were concerned at the recent
incorporation into the constitution of Argentina of the
new clause to which President Menem referred. It seems
to us that in these Falkland Islands, as in Northern
Ireland, we must heed the wishes of the people
concerned. Indeed, any other course for us or for the
United Nations would be inconceivable. This body has
heard those wishes of the Islanders expressed, most
recently by their elected representatives who visited the
United Nations for the debate in the Committee of 24 last
July.
So we have a difference. But despite this difference,
we have joined a dialogue with the Argentine
Government on fisheries and petroleum development. We
look forward to resuming discussions in the near future
with the Argentine authorities on a new agreement on
fishing and on the development of possible hydrocarbon
resources in the South Atlantic continental shelf. We are
also discussing the welcome Argentine offer to remove
mines from the Falklands. It seems to me that that is the
rational and logical path to the wider progress of which
the President of Argentina spoke.
I return to this Organization. It is often the target of
criticism because it cannot solve every problem laid at its
door. We all know that there is scope for improving the
performance of the United Nations here in New York
and, more critically, where the United Nations and its
agencies are in action on the ground. The steps taken so
far are a beginning, but only a beginning.
Machinery cannot run on thin air. The United
Nations can only run on the fuel that we, its Member
States, supply to it. So where it has failed, we must not
pretend that the failure lies with the system. It lies with
6


us. The failure of the United Nations is our failure, and so
it is for us to take action. For example, the sufferings of
the Rwandan refugees will not be helped by Member
States’ holding their heads in their hands. Their hands
should be ready to provide from their pockets what is
needed to remedy such suffering.
Preventive diplomacy is the ideal. But it often will
not be enough. We have to be prepared for the demand for
peace-keepers to continue. There are practical ways in
which we can respond better to that demand: first, by
ensuring that we learn the lessons from our experiences in
peace-keeping; secondly, by taking practical steps to
improve our capacity to keep the peace, especially in
Africa; and, thirdly, by reforming our financing system.
I should like to say a brief word about peace-keeping.
It is often impossible to predict at the outset of a mission
what demands or dangers United Nations troops will
encounter. Within limits, they must be ready to improvise.
But allowing their role to drift from peace-keeping to taking
sides in a war carries high risks to the troops themselves,
to the political process they support, and to the ability of
the United Nations to put in peace-keepers elsewhere. It
undermines the willingness of Member States to contribute
troops. So in making their decision to contribute to a
United Nations operation countries need to be confident that
their troops will be supporting peace and not becoming a
party to war.
Rwanda put this to the test, and we were found
wanting for a response for the time being. The issue was
not really whether the United Nations should have sent an
intervention force to stop the fighting - which it clearly
could not - but whether it could find the means, the men
and the equipment, for a force to protect the civilian
population. That, tragically, took far too long.
That is the latest lesson we need to learn from. It is
not now, it seems to me, a question of will, because there
is a far greater readiness than there used to be to
contemplate intervention on the ground to mitigate or
prevent humanitarian disaster. It is not so much the will,
the intellectual willingness; it is the resources, the know-
how, the ability to respond swiftly, which are still not
enough.
You, Mr. Secretary-General, have pointed this out over
and over again, and I should like to pay tribute to the
patience and persistence with which you have rammed
home this lesson and sought not merely to tell us the truths
about it but to persuade us into practical action and remedy.
I agree with what you have said on many occasions. We
need to work hard and fast to overcome obstacles which
are essentially practical.
We British will continue to contribute practically.
We have 4,000 British men and women in blue berets,
from Georgia to Rwanda, something which would have
been thought inconceivable even 10 years ago. We have
the seconded British experts at United Nations
Headquarters. The speed with which the Department of
Peace-keeping Operations has adapted to cope with ever-
increasing demand has been impressive. The
development of the professional military staff at United
Nations Headquarters has been particularly welcome. So
has the trend to bring more seconded staff in alongside
United Nations personnel. But it will be vital also to help
to strengthen our ability to respond quickly in areas where
it remains weak. Africa, in the light of experience,
should be a priority.
Africa’s need for peace-keepers is plain to see:
nearly 40 per cent of all United Nations peace-keepers are
deployed in Africa. Africa needs peace. There can be no
doubt of that, because it is only in peace that Africans
will succeed in finding their own solutions to their
problems. The remarkable events in South Africa earlier
this year showed that.
The efforts of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) to develop a coherent approach to the prevention
of conflict are welcome. They deserve our full support.
But the OAU has warned that its resources are not
enough. I believe that the United Nations must respond.
By setting up a coherent structure of support systems,
running from early warning and preventive diplomacy
right through to humanitarian and peace-keeping
deployment on the ground, we can make sure that the
skills and resources can be put into action as soon as the
need arises, and not months later.
What does that mean? It means, first, an early
warning system. Not all conflicts can be foreseen. Some
are triggered by assassination or a coup d’état or other
sudden events. More often, surely, we can see trouble
brewing: competition for land and resources, ethnic or
religious rivalry, the gradual breakdown of law and order,
ill-judged responses by central governments. We need a
mechanism to pull together information and analysis of
events like these, to take a regular forward look at
potential troublespots and decide whether preventive
diplomacy needs to be triggered.
7


Then, secondly, it means a capacity to react, that is to
say, to intervene diplomatically before warfare breaks out.
We do not have that capacity now. Britain and France - we
announced this last year - have offered help, making
available experienced diplomats and offering equipment and
support. There needs to be an institutional framework. In
Europe we have the Conference on Security and
Cooperation in Europe (CSCE), which operates to agreed
principles and has intervened, for example, in Ukraine,
Moldova and the Baltic States to try to help parties to
resolve disputes before there is recourse to fighting. The
OAU has its own experience of pre-emptive action, and it
would clearly need to be the focal point of an enhanced
effort in Africa. I am proposing that the United Nations
should help the OAU and African countries to share this
expertise and establish agreed mechanisms for preventive
diplomacy in Africa.
But, thirdly, that will not always be enough. Peace-
keeping skills will continue to be in demand. We must
build up the necessary capabilities in Africa. Many African
countries already make a major contribution to peace-
keeping - Ghana, Egypt, Botswana, Zimbabwe and Zambia,
to mention just some. But we all know the United Nations
has not been able to deploy in Africa with the necessary
speed and effectiveness.
I therefore propose that, under the auspices of the
United Nations, a number of military staff colleges existing
in Africa should become peace-keeping skills centres; that
is to say, they should give training in doctrines and
disciplines of peace-keeping, and in mediation and conflict
resolution.
The physical capacity also needs to be strengthened if
intervention is to be rapid when it is needed. That requires
United Nations logistics basing centres, like those already
existing in Europe, to store equipment and ensure that it is
quickly available, with rapid mobile logistics teams,
earmarked by Member States, to help to maintain that
equipment in good running order and to give training and
on-the-spot maintenance support. Again, the lesson of
Rwanda is clear. These centres will also need headquarters
staff to identify and remedy logistic weaknesses, give
advice on maps or communications and advise existing and
potential troop contributors.
These are not proposals for enormous new machinery.
We need a framework within which existing resources,
capability and know-how can be mobilized. We will
strongly support such an effort. It needs further
discussion - above all, among and with African countries.
We would welcome such discussion soon, here in New
York, to develop these ideas, other people’s ideas and
take some practical decisions quickly.
Finally, money. As you, Mr. Secretary-General,
remind us, as you are bound to remind us, the United
Nations at the moment works miracles with what we do
not pay it. It simply cannot keep running on exhausted
credit. It must be able to pay its peace-keepers, for
example. We will not be able to build up the operations
of the United Nations unless we act now to put the
finances of the United Nations on a sound and sustainable
footing for the long term.
No radical change in principles is needed, but we do
need a sensible updating of the way in which assessments
are calculated. The existing system was adopted in 1973.
Much has changed. No one now would propose that
States with above average per capita incomes should
enjoy an 80 per cent discount on their peace-keeping
contributions. No one now would suggest that discounts
for all the newly independent Member States should be
absorbed by five countries in an open-ended arrangement.
But that is the system. It means that some countries are
paying too much and others too little. It means that we
now need to put these anomalies right. Moving to a
system based on relative capacity to pay, with automatic
adjustment for changing circumstances, would not mean
very much change for most countries, but it would mean
a fair, equitable basis on which the long-term viability
and therefore vitality of the United Nations could be
assured.
A word about the Security Council. Reform is on
the agenda - that is quite right - and I believe it is in the
interests of the United Nations to sort out the question of
enlargement in good time. We would like the momentum
of discussion to be maintained.
Next year’s fiftieth anniversary is a good milestone
for the debate. We will work hard for a good outcome,
both on enlargement and on transparency, where recent
informal arrangements to improve consultation on peace-
keeping between the Secretariat, the Security Council and
troop contributors should be further developed.
We should ensure that the Council is representative,
while avoiding an enlargement so great that it puts at risk
the effectiveness of the Council. If consensus can be
reached, then clearly there are countries that, by virtue of
their global interests and their contribution to international
8


security and United Nations operations, should be invited to
accept the responsibilities of permanent membership.
I have concentrated today on how we deal with crises
and defuse tensions. But, of course, those are only some of
the challenges that our Organization faces. Drug trafficking
and associated international crime are other threats to our
security and well-being. We need to give new energy and
encouragement to all those who are involved in developing
cooperation against those threats. I mention this because I
feel that we must give particular support to the United
Nations International Drug Control Programme. This is the
programme that has the responsibility for leading all the
world’s efforts in this field. Once again, the United
Nations is the best resource we have for tackling a menace
that threatens the whole world.
In conclusion, we can say confidently that the United
Nations is indispensable. It is not a perfect glass palace,
but it is the best building we have, even though the winds
still blow cruelly through its gaps and its defects. We all,
therefore, have a duty to repair, make good, build afresh.
Next year we will look back rightly on the
achievements, and the list of achievements is long. But it
will remind us, and we will remind ourselves, of what has
not yet been achieved. And I hope that will stir us to show
the same vision, the same strength of purpose as the
founders of the United Nations, with, I hope, results of
equal value for the next 50 years.
I congratulate Mr.
Amara Essy on his election as President of the General
Assembly at the forty-ninth session. We are particularly
gratified that an eminent son of Africa is leading the
Assembly’s deliberations this year.
We offer our thanks to his predecessor, Ambassador
Insanally, who presided over a year of considerable
activity in the General Assembly with great aplomb and
finesse. The Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros
Boutros-Ghali, will be completing three years in office.
We wish him well as he continues to lead the United
Nations.
We have already welcomed the new South Africa to
the United Nations. South Africa today is a reminder of
the triumph of the principle of equality of man - a
triumph in which the United Nations played a major role.
The world community must commit itself to ensuring that
this principle is implemented for all time to come. All
efforts should be made for the development of South
Africa.
Forty-nine years ago a world tired of war declared
that at this foundry of the United Nations it would beat its
swords into ploughshares. Instead, we have only
produced words, while the swords have not disappeared.
The words may be important, but unfortunately they have
remained mere words. We seem to be stepping into a
new world order in a gaping moral void, with no credible
promise of peace nor of a nonviolent world. And we are
approaching 1995: the fiftieth anniversary of the United
Nations; the fortieth anniversary of Panchsheel - the Five
Principles of Peaceful Coexistence; the Year of Tolerance,
which is being celebrated by the United Nations; and the
one hundred and twenty-fifth birthday of the apostle of
13


peace and moral force, Mahatma Gandhi, whose message
only gains in relevance year after year.
Global security today demands a holistic approach
involving the promotion of economic and social
development; the protection of human rights; the promotion
of harmony and social cohesion in multi-racial and
multi-ethnic societies; the combating of terrorism,
drug-trafficking and clandestine traffic in armaments; and
the enhancing of the capacity of the United Nations, within
the framework of its Charter, to prevent conflicts, preserve
peace and alleviate suffering. The new agenda of the
United Nations must be shaped on the basis of this
approach, giving peace and development equal priority and
treatment. The General Assembly, with its universal
participation and comprehensive mandate, should project
such a holistic vision and revitalize that vision into action.
The Secretary-General’s Agendas have reminded us
of what we should focus on, namely, disarmament,
development and peace. I put them in that order because
true peace can only follow disarmament and development.
The cold war was not war, yet certainly not peace. In its
wake, we have seen how, most frighteningly, poverty,
disease and a host of miseries affect the cause of peace.
They had been there all the time, but were not seen by the
jaundiced eye of the cold war. In the new post-cold-war
context, therefore, the nexus of disarmament and
development with peace becomes crystal clear - indeed
inescapably clear.
We have to start with disarmament. The slaughter in
Rwanda has taken place during the forty-ninth anniversary
of the devastation of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. For almost
50 years, we have lived in fear of general and complete
extinction instead of global and complete disarmament.
Those who had biological and chemical weapons have
given them up under universally binding commitments. We
must now go one logical step further and exorcise the
greatest evil of all, namely, the weapons of mass
destruction.
We have had global discussions on nuclear
disarmament before, but now that the cold war, which
spawned these weapons, is over, and the previous
adversaries have been drawn into a partnership for peace,
this is surely the time to agree - in regimes which are
global, comprehensive, verifiable and non-discriminatory -
on steps to make the world a safer place. Another
opportunity will arise when the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) comes up for
review next April. We hope that States Parties will use that
occasion to refashion the Treaty into a real instrument for
global disarmament. Quite apart from the NPT, it is
essential that we examine a detailed implementation
process of total and global disarmament, which has been
accepted in principle, though in words only thus far.
Last June in Cairo, the Foreign Ministers of the non-
aligned countries, at India’s suggestion, proposed that a
fourth special session on disarmament be convened. We
think the time and the circumstances are right for the
General Assembly to plan for this special session for next
year, or as soon as possible.
But disarmament alone will be inadequate. We are
rushing towards another precipice, where the disparities
in wealth between nations would trigger violent revolution
within States. A global convulsion will come if we
continue to disregard the development imperative. The
problems of development are global problems and must
be addressed by all of us. We must set a substantive
agenda for development, commit ourselves to it and
implement it.
The World Trade Organization, which should soon
come into being, must promote what we expected but did
not quite achieve so far in the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade (GATT) - non-discrimination,
consensus and transparency in the international trade
regime. We hope that the multilateral trade negotiations
will stimulate economic growth in our countries and in
the world economy. It will not if the carefully negotiated
consensus, to which we committed ourselves at
Marrakesh, is destroyed by the introduction of new
conditionalities. Faith in the multilateral system will be
shaken if countries use their trading strength and bilateral
pressures to weaken and distort agreements to which they
have just become parties.
The themes of the World Summit for Social
Development focus on the critical issues of poverty
eradication together with social integration and the need
to increase avenues for productive employment, without
which we will not have the broad-based, self-sustaining
social and economic development that is the only
guarantor of peace and security. If the Summit is to
succeed, we must agree upon the commitments for
additional resources dedicated to national programmes
around the world. We should not be sidetracked from
this goal by new concepts which do not command
consensus, and do not address the fundamental needs of
development.
14


The United Nations must also re-order its priorities so
as to counter several disturbing centrifugal trends which we
see emerging. What the world needs is support for the
nation-State system on which the United Nations was built.
In June this year, Prime Minister Narasimha Rao and
President Yeltsin, representing two of the largest pluralistic
nations in the world, issued the Moscow Declaration on the
Protection of the Interests of Pluralistic States. In this
Declaration, which has been circulated as a document of the
General Assembly, Russia and India have put forward
principles which, if acted upon, will, we think, promote
greater harmony in the world.
Against this background, there are a few questions for
the Assembly to consider. For the 45 years of the cold
war, the Security Council was forced into immobility, but
when the cold war ended, it found itself shouldering a
stupendous task. As if to make up for years of inactivity,
it has rushed into many areas. We must ponder the
consequences of the decisions taken over the last few years,
which have on occasion sent United Nations peace-keepers
in pursuit of objectives whose nexus with peace is rather
tenuous.
New doctrines justify armed United Nations
intervention under circumstances that are not quite defined -
not yet at any rate. These initiatives are well meaning but
they do not seem to address the problems from the right
end. The ultimate human right is the right to live - the
right to food and shelter without which life is impossible.
The poverty of many nations makes this a problem to
which there are no easy answers. If there are
circumstances which justify armed multilateral intervention,
by the same logic should not the United Nations have the
right to enforce the equitable sharing of resources among
nations?
The Non-aligned Movement, at the meeting of its
Foreign Ministers in Cairo this year, suggested some
guiding principles for peace-keeping operations of enduring
significance. All means for the peaceful settlement of
disputes chosen by the conflicting parties should be
exhausted before coercive measures are considered.
Peace-keeping operations should strictly adhere to the
principles of the Charter, in particular the principles of full
respect for the sovereignty of States, their territorial
integrity and non-intervention in their internal affairs.
Peace-keeping operations should be considered only at the
request of the Member States involved. The resources for
peace-keeping activities should not be at the expense of
resources for development activities of the United Nations.
There should be no hesitation in ending those operations
which have been overtaken by events or become
inconsistent with their mandates. It is also important to
ensure that the distinction between peace-keeping
operations and other activities of the United Nations,
including humanitarian assistance, is maintained at all
times. While coordination between these activities at the
field level is important, their integration could irreversibly
alter the basic purposes of these distinct activities and
detract from their effectiveness.
Prudence must be exercised in the use of regional
organizations in peace-keeping operations. It is the
capacity of the United Nations for peace-keeping that
must be strengthened.
We have responded positively to the Secretary-
General’s appeal for the strengthening of the United
Nations capacity for peace-keeping by designating a
brigade for the stand-by arrangements that are being put
in place.
It is true that the work of the Security Council and
its role in the United Nations are of the greatest
importance. There is therefore all the more reason that
the Council should be representative of the international
community and have maximum legitimacy. The United
Nations needs a Council that is effective, but it cannot be
effective if the impression grows that it represents
entrenched privileges and that its agenda could vary from
those of the general membership. The democracy and
good governance which are urged upon all States cannot
stop at the gates of the United Nations.
The present-day composition of the Security Council
reflects the power balance of the immediate post-war
period. Since then, the membership of the world body
has increased many times over. There is also a greater
diffusion of power. To give the Council’s actions greater
legitimacy, moral authority and political effectiveness, it
is imperative to expand the membership of the Council.
Developing countries must be included in the category of
permanent members to reflect the universal character of
the world body. The number of non-permanent seats
must also be increased to give Member States greater
opportunity for participation in the work of the Council.
A selective, piecemeal expansion of the number of
permanent members would not be prudent. The Security
Council is not a corporate board, where equity shares
determine the voting power, nor can it be likened to the
Bretton Woods institutions, which reflect the wealth of
nations. The United Nations is based on the principle of
15


the sovereign equality of nations. Its primary objective
remains the maintenance of international peace and security.
These elements must find expression in the composition of
the Council, which must be able to address the challenges
of the twenty-first century.
Durability and resilience, rather than expediency,
should determine the time frame of any expansion. On the
basis of any criteria - population, size of economy,
contribution to the maintenance of international peace and
security and to peace-keeping or future potential - India
deserves to be a permanent member of the Security
Council.
The working methods of the Security Council must be
reformed to enhance transparency and to express the
democratic aspirations of the vast majority of Member
States. We hope that the Open-ended Working Group on
the question of increase in the membership of the Security
Council will duly reflect on these issues in its deliberations
next year.
Human rights are the new vogue. The profoundly
humanistic traditions of the Indian civilization, with its
emphasis on tolerance, harmony, non-violence and the
inviolability of the individual, are in-built in our ethos.
Several centuries back, an Indian thinker wrote:
"Man is above everything else. Man is the highest
truth. There is nothing above man."
All human rights are sacrosanct in India, guaranteed
by a secular Constitution, an independent judiciary, a free
press, and public opinion vigorously expressed. India’s
commitment to the promotion and protection of human
rights has now received another institutional impetus with
the establishment of our National Human Rights
Commission, which has begun to function effectively, with
its findings published in its annual report. In keeping with
our policy of transparency we maintain a sustained dialogue
with important non-governmental organizations, which
includes affording greater access to them. We have also
invited the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to visit India.
It is true that much remains to be done on a
worldwide basis to further international cooperation to
promote and protect human rights. But the problem must
be seen in perspective. In India, for instance, we grapple
with the problems of development for 900 million people;
in the north-west and in the north-east we face brutal
terrorist movements, often supported from abroad, which
have killed thousands of innocents, made refugees of
hundreds of thousands within India, and threatened our
sovereignty and territorial integrity. We will face these
problems and defeat them. We welcome the support and
advice of friends abroad, but we cannot accept the
position that all human rights are a privilege of the
terrorists. The rights of innocent and unarmed citizens
must be protected. We urge that the question of human
rights should not be made into a politically motivated
slogan insensitive to the rights of those citizens.
Since the toxin of terrorism is deliberately being
spread by some countries - and none of us is immune -
the international community must come together to defend
itself. Terrorism is fast becoming a means, if not a
weapon, of mass destruction. Many countries have
suffered and many more could be affected. Terrorists
have killed far more people in the last decades than the
chemical and biological weapons which we have agreed
to ban and destroy. Just as the international community
decided that a convention was needed to outlaw those
weapons, so it must urgently negotiate a convention to
counter and eradicate terrorism. We urge the General
Assembly to initiate serious thinking on this subject. The
international community must also provide the necessary
succour to the victims of terrorism, whose numbers are
swelling by the day.
The closing years of the twentieth century will see
human society poised at a critical juncture as regards the
future. Will the end of the cold war mark the beginnings
of a new, more stable global order, of freedom and
well-being growing on the soil of cooperation, consensus
and mutual respect, or will the world instead revert bit by
bit to the mind-set which breeds anarchy and a return to
centrifugalism and destruction, to end up once again in
the tyranny of imposition and domination? Should we
regress to the system of spheres of influence which has
led to so many wars over the last two hundred years?
These questions have still not been adequately answered.
Many years ago the father of our nation, Mahatma
Gandhi, had asked what test should guide human
endeavour. His conclusion, after long years of struggling
on behalf of India’s many dispossessed millions, was as
follows:
"I will give you a talisman. Whenever you are in
doubt, or when the self becomes too much with you,
apply the following test: Recall the face of the
poorest and the weakest man whom you may have
seen, and ask yourself if the step you contemplate is
16


going to be of any use to him. Will he gain anything
by it? Will it restore him to a control over his own
life and destiny?"
If the protection afforded to its weak, its most
dispossessed, people is the measure of community’s worth,
as indeed it must be, then the millions of refugees, and the
conflict, poverty, hunger and deprivation that afflict so
many regions of the world today bear stark testimony to the
loss of some vital ethical underpinning. If the world today
is to redeem a future that seems increasingly mortgaged to
greed and hatred, we must recall once again that it is the
nobility of our means, and the ends we pursue, that
determine our rewards. Our welfare will be determined
only in accordance with the values and principles we abide
by.
As Mahatma Gandhi and sages before have taught and
practised, truthfulness, charity, compassion, non-violence
and treating others as we would wish ourselves to be
treated are the values that really stand the test of time.
These are the values to be inculcated in our great global
Organization, the United Nations, to which we are all
committed.
I should like to congratulate
you, Sir, on your election to the presidency of the General
Assembly. We are pleased that the representative of Côte
d’Ivoire - a nation for which Israel has high regard - has
been elected to this distinguished post. I should like to
express to the Secretary General our deepest appreciation
13


for his contribution to world peace in general, and to peace
in the Middle East in particular.
A year ago, I offered a concept for a new Middle
East. Many applauded; more remained sceptical. What at
that time seemed lofty is today a reality. I feel I can
submit today an invitation to a further journey in the new
Middle East.
Last year was a year of remarkable events. The
Palestinian people, as a result of our agreement, gained
authority in Gaza and Jericho; Jordan and Israel agreed, in
the Washington Declaration, to end the state of war and
move towards an agreement of full peace; voices of
promise are exchanged between Damascus and Jerusalem;
multilateral meetings produced a network of regional
cooperation; Morocco and Israel established formal
relations; and an agenda for a new Middle East will emerge
from an unprecedented economic conference in Casablanca
next month.
The desire for peace is rooted in the millenniums of
Jewish existence. Generations prayed for it, and now a
young generation in Israel is today engaged in making it.
The search for peace is shared by young people all over the
Middle East, Arabs and Israelis alike. We have to fulfil
their hope.
I am addressing this Assembly for the first time, not
as a party to a controversy, but as a representative of a
country that has shown a capacity to solve conflicts that
seemed insoluble.
The United Nations should play an increasing role
facing the changing times. It can define new destinies. It
can adopt new means.
As the United Nations celebrates its fiftieth
anniversary, it may adopt models for new endeavours by
mobilizing builders to construct peace, not just by
deploying troops to keep it. Economic structures will offer
more than military deployment.
Gaza, as an example, has a new authority. It needs a
new economy. The United Nations can provide an answer.
The 7,000 years of Gaza are mainly a history of suffering.
Its population density today is among the highest in the
world.
There is a role for the United Nations in Gaza, and it
has played one. It began by stationing troops - which were
recalled, unfortunately, on the eve of the Six-Day War.
Then UNRWA came and supplied food, health and
education to the refugees. Then UNDP contributed
greatly to the construction of an infrastructure in the Gaza
Strip.
The United Nations can help Gaza today become
free from want. It can introduce there the necessary
economic and proper social institutions. An enlarged
allocation for Gaza, with the existing United Nations
administration, will produce immediate results and may
make Gaza a new model of United Nations endeavours.
The world is moving from military might to social
priorities. It is time to turn from political confrontation
to economic cooperation. In the Middle East, economic
growth can compensate for political compromises.
We no longer live in a closed world. The intensive
flow of information has opened the eyes of many people.
No longer can tyranny blind their perceptions. Iron
curtains can no longer bar the spread of the true story.
Knowledge has finally overcome propaganda.
This current is profound and lasting. The sources of
strength and wealth are today universal rather than
national, intellectual rather than material. The size of the
territory, the number of its people, the wealth of its raw
materials, no longer decide the fate of a nation. It is the
scope of education, the level of science, applied
technology and up-to-date information that make all the
difference.
Intellectual sources are no longer partitioned by
traditional divides. Science has no territorial limits.
Technology has no national flags. Information can travel
without visas. Armies cannot conquer wisdom. Borders
cannot protect knowledge. The talent of creation is
replacing the strategies of destruction. Computers, not
rifles, mark the difference. The hunting season in history
is disappearing.

This does not mean an end to agonies. Starvation,
disease, terrorism, desertification, nuclear weapons,
ecological damage and dangerous drugs overflow the
boundaries of land and the boundaries of reason.
Violence employs new tactics: it has not
disappeared. Confrontations in the future may not
necessarily be wars of conquest, but bloodshed of protest.
14


The strong know that they will not be strengthened by
dominating the poor, or by owning their deserts. The poor
cannot, and will not, comply with their conditions, tolerated
by the indifference of the well-off.
Existing institutions were initiated in a different time.
They are based today on memories rather than on needs.
Ministries of foreign affairs and defence were structured to
confront enemies. Now we face dangers more than
enemies, but without our being organized to handle them.
We are not answering the need. Diplomacy and strategy
should be mobilized to face the undefined dangers. Disease
will not be overcome by traditional diplomatic démarches.
Starvation cannot be eliminated by guns. Deserts will not
bloom beneath air raids. Remedies will not arrive of their
own accord: they should be invented and introduced.
Israel is on the side of this tendency. We are
committed to ending the conflicts. We are determined to
uproot their causes. We do not intend to stop this
momentum or allow its interruption.
For the last five decades the mere existence of Israel
has served as a temptation to try and destroy it. For half a
century we had to give security top priority. To this very
day, we shed tears on the tombs of our children, who paid
with their young lives to overcome the menace. When
wars became futile, suspicion succeeded fighting. The
allegation was that Israel was trying to expand territorially
and was unwilling to compromise geographically. Reality
ended this allegation as well.
Egypt, first to negotiate peace, found an Israel willing
to exchange land for peace. The Palestinians, next in line,
gained jurisdiction over territories they had never controlled
before. With Jordan, we agreed to delineate a permanent
border without one side encroaching on the land of the
other. Syria was told at the outset of negotiations that the
nature of peace would affect the depth of the withdrawal.
Lebanon was told that Israel had no demands on its
territory and no intention of compromising its integrity.
Negotiations have not been easy. With the
Palestinians, we negotiated on uncharted ground. Never
had the Palestinian people experienced self-rule. Today
they possess a territorial address and an administrative
authority. For the first time in their history, their children’s
education is solely in Palestinian hands. In the coming days
Israel will hand over additional responsibilities to the
Palestinian Authority. The Declaration of Principles will be
fully implemented in the spirit and letter. We shall support
a Palestinian readiness to hold democratic elections.
Israel, as well as the Palestinians, may discover that
Palestinian democracy and Israeli security are
complementary. We have demonstrated that we are true
in our moral choice not to govern the destiny of another
people.
We shall continue to negotiate with Syria. We are
negotiating out of conviction, not weakness, and we hope
to conclude the negotiations with a settlement that will
respect the interests of both sides, without harming Syrian
dignity or compromising Israeli security. Syria insists on
a narrow path for the negotiations, postponing meetings
between the leaders and thus slowing the pace of
negotiations. Israel is ready for accelerated negotiations.
We address the Syrians by saying: "Let us talk face to
face. Let us negotiate, as proclaimed in Damascus, with
courage to attain a peace of honour. By ending suspicion,
introducing creativity and allowing flexibility, we can
transform a promising climate into a solid terrain." Syria
declared its strategy for peace. We appreciate it.
Military threats and territorial positions should be
transformed by security arrangements, diplomatic rapport,
full peace and economic endeavours. That will erode the
motivation for conflict. Without peaceful relations,
balances of power are meaningless. The range of
understanding can serve as the only answer to the range
of ballistic missiles.
President Clinton and Secretary of State Christopher
are relentlessly pushing for peace. European, Russian and
many other leaders are genuinely supportive. Important
Middle Eastern leaders are actively engaged in the same
direction. Still, much depends on direct negotiations.
Yesterday’s enemies, tomorrow’s partners, should become
today’s interlocutors.
A peace treaty between Israel and Syria may
produce a historic result greater than just an agreement
between two countries. It may well become the crowning
of a comprehensive peace. It may become an opportunity
for the leaders of the region - Kings, Presidents, Prime
Ministers, supported by the most prominent leaders of our
time - to gather and announce the end of the conflict and
to proclaim full peace throughout the region.
Peace can hardly emerge from stinginess. By
definition, it calls for generosity. Peace is more than a
mere ceremony. It requires ongoing maintenance; it
awaits a passionate cultivation of new relations. We hope
that our neighbours, from Saudi Arabia to Lebanon, from
Djibouti to Algeria, will become constructive partners in
15


it. Dark clouds are still hanging over the horizon - the
shadows of missed opportunities.
We have to build a coalition to prevent subversive
turbulence from undermining legitimate Governments and
harassing the stability needed for the inflow of investment.
All countries of the Middle East face a choice: to remain
politically divided and economically stagnant or to become
economically advanced and politically just.
A high standard of living for the people - all people -
is the best promise for stability in our midst. Israel is
willing to participate in achieving it. There are sceptics, we
know, who do not believe that the Middle East is ripe for
a common market similar to the European one. They forget
that Europe did not do it in one leap. It started with a
Community of coal and steel. We can start with a
community of water and tourism.
Nor do they believe that the Middle East is ready for
a free trade zone like the one in North America. Yet the
North American Free Trade Agreement emerged in a short
while as a success by linking geographic proximity with
economic growth. Those sceptics claim that generations are
needed to cement a new market in the Middle East. Well,
they can see what in 10 short years happened to Asian
countries, which attained unpredicted prosperity. They
achieved it by adopting a market economy.
The profile of a market economy is clear. It is made
of comprehensive education, open borders, free movement,
science-based industries and competitive trade. A market
economy is a fabric woven from political silk and durable
threads of welfare. The time is ripe for its rendezvous with
the Middle East.
At the end of October, under the presidency of King
Hassan II, we shall take the first step to implement a
regional design. We shall try to establish instruments for
development: a regional bank, channels for private
investment and a framework for regional planning. The
wealth of the Middle East should be convinced to remain
at home. Over the last decade it has invested the better
part of its fortunes abroad. Homebound wealth will attract
foreign investment as well.
We should cut the enormous expense - $70 billion
annually - of the arms race. The savings can be directed to
development. The arms race can be reduced only by
regional consent. No single country will do it alone.
To transform the region and make it a stable and
attractive place we need the emergence of the region as
a whole, committed to a new future. Nature, and not
only politics, calls for it. The waters, the winds, the
environment call for regional responsibility and
cooperation, for desalinization plants, energy stations,
highways, railways, runways, piers, telecommunication
networks, high-tech industries, tourism infrastructure,
banking systems, computer terminals and ecological
considerations - a landscape that will meet the future will
create a state of prosperity, and it is a regional challenge.
The Middle East was the cradle of civilization and
has a capacity to contribute. It experienced golden ages,
economically and culturally. It should be our collective
ambition to make it happen again and to make it happen
soon. Today, shortages can be bridged rapidly.
Computers can carry children not only from grade to
grade but from age to age. The software of knowledge
will better replace the hardware of weapons.
I have served my country since its birth. I have
learned that complex problems call for unconventional
solutions. I feel that over the past year we have won a
licence to build a new Middle East, to make it part of the
globe in its new age, free of wars, free of enemies, free
of terrorism; a Middle East which will be nuclear-free,
missile-free, hunger-free, discrimination-free, tyranny-free;
a constituency of peace, a domain of freedom, a land of
prosperity. There is a morning awaiting us after a long
night, calling us to direct our energies and our aims and
our prayers towards that great opportunity.
I should like, first,
to congratulate Mr. Amara Essy of Côte d’Ivoire on his
well-deserved election as President of the General
24


Assembly at its forty-ninth session and to convey to him
our good wishes for every success in his work.
The general debate is our chance, as Members of the
United Nations, to undertake together an annual review of
the Organization’s work - its successes and its failures -
and to identify collectively the issues we want to focus on.
With the fiftieth anniversary next year, there is a pressing
need to do so. That will be the occasion to chart our new
priorities for the twenty-first century.
Our responses to some of today’s challenges and
tragedies have ranged from excellent but often
under-reported to woefully inadequate and, consequently,
defiantly reported.
The peoples of the world want to believe in the United
Nations and what it should achieve. If, however, within
some parts of the Organization we are bereft of purpose
and intentions this golden anniversary threatens to be less
joyous and more muted than many of us anticipated.
New Zealand has a strong vested interest in the United
Nations success, as do most small States. The New
Zealand people have always believed in the United Nations,
in a collective approach to the resolution of global and
regional problems. This has been demonstrated by strong
support for the United Nations by successive Governments.
From our experience of - and I do not hesitate to say
this - a turbulent two years on the Security Council and as
a committed founder Member of the Organization, I would
like to take this opportunity to offer some observations
about the problems we see as players in the collective
decision-making process.
When New Zealand took part in the founding of the
United Nations we and many others saw our primary
purpose as providing for a system of collective security.
Until very recently that was little more than a vision. With
the end of the confrontation between two super-Power
blocs, the goal of "the organized common peace", of which
President Woodrow Wilson spoke so eloquently three
generations ago, presents itself. We must not let it slip
from our grasp this time. It will, however, take real effort
and real determination.
Collective security, or working together, is the
cornerstone of the security of small States. Today they are
the overwhelming majority of the membership of this
Organization. New Zealanders recognize that peace is
indivisible, that remoteness is certainly no safeguard: a
problem in any part of the world can ripple to the Earth’s
farthest corners. While we are the country probably most
distant from the Balkans conflict, we have sent an
enhanced company of soldiers to help in efforts to ease
suffering and, I earnestly hope with the will of the parties
involved, one day bring peace throughout the former
Yugoslavia.
For the same reasons, our defence personnel can be
found engaged in peace-support operations in Africa, the
Middle East, Asia and most recently Haiti. And there are
New Zealand nurses, firefighters and aid workers spread
around the globe in support.
Against this backdrop, however, New Zealanders are
puzzled at times by the way in which the United Nations
carries out some of its important tasks. In Bosnia, despite
the employment of what is by any standards a large, well-
armed and well-trained force, people see on their
television screens nightly the frustration of the United
Nations Protection Force by small groups of irregulars, a
single policeman or even small groups of non-combatants.
In Haiti they witnessed a boat full of Blue Berets turned
away by a small group of pistol-toting thugs
unconvincingly called "attachés".
And what can one say about the appalling tragedy in
Rwanda? How can so much hatred have been unleashed
so viciously, killing hundreds of thousands? What we
watched with horror on our television screens was
destruction on a scale we thought only megaton bombs
were capable of. The systematic slaughter of men,
women and children simply because of their ethnic origin
leaves us all outraged.
There are no easy answers. But the first key to
unlocking the possibilities for a genuine collective
security must be the proper application of the United
Nations Charter. We have to decide at exactly what point
the United Nations should get involved in the
peacemaking operation. Do we recognize a problem, and,
if we do, is the preventive diplomacy that we so firmly
believe in occurring?
In my view, we have to follow the intention of the
Charter. First, at the outset of a crisis, or even the signs
of a crisis, we have to make more serious efforts through
that preventive diplomacy to resolve problems and
conflicts by negotiation. Efforts must be made at an early
25


stage to address the root causes of conflicts by the Security
Council’s exercising all its responsibilities under Chapter VI
of the Charter.
However, on some occasions, in these days of modern
media technology, we face the dilemma caused by the
divergence between what the public perceives as happening
and what is the reality. Extensive media coverage puts
pressure on for immediate response. In the case of
Rwanda, that was appropriate. In other circumstances, the
media oversimplify and ignore the fact that conditions on
the ground are chaotic and United Nations resources are
over-stretched.
A second area where the Charter could be more
carefully applied is when disputes are first placed before
the Council. I believe it should give affected States an
adequate hearing before addressing the problem behind
closed doors. Our experience on the Security Council
suggests the investment in openness that would be achieved
by developing a practice of collectively hearing directly
from the parties involved would be worthwhile, even if it
were done only informally.
In the same vein, the Charter specifically contemplates
the involvement, without vote, of troop-contributing
countries in significant decisions. New Zealand has pressed
this issue for some time, but so far with limited success.
The time is coming, in fact, when the General Assembly
will have to address the question if the Security Council
does not respond adequately to the concerns that have been
raised.
Under the Charter, much is expected of the Council’s
permanent members. There is no doubt that they can and
do contribute greatly to the work of the United Nations.
Leadership and sacrifices by the large Powers were, for
example, instrumental in successfully challenging
aggression against the small State of Kuwait three-and-a-
half years ago.
I emphasize again, however, the importance of the
collective nature of decision-making in the Security
Council. Making distinctions between the views of the
"P5" and the rest is not really healthy. The Council is a
team of 15. It must work together, and by that I mean
giving full weight to the views of all its members. The
strength of the Security Council is enhanced each year by
the vigorous enthusiasm brought by new members on 1
January, testing what may have become an accepted
second-best.
I would remind the Assembly that the Charter
clearly envisages that the norm for operations to maintain
international peace and security will be United Nations
operations. National operations are not ruled out, of
course. I wish therefore to highlight and question recent
trends toward coalitions under national command, and the
implications for the collective security needs of small and
distant countries where no strategic interest is involved.
However, the Security Council will be judged on its
effectiveness. Successes, hopefully, will outweigh
failures, but we all have an obligation to improve the
success rate. I am an enthusiastic supporter of improving
our success rate, but much of that will come down to the
way in which issues are managed. And it is that question
of the management of issues that I wish to address.
In our experience, the key is to use management
tools based on proven modern public- and private-sector
experience. This is very valuable. What are these tools?
And how do we apply them to the conduct of peace-
keeping operations?
I would suggest that there are six critical elements:
first, a sustainable financial system; secondly, a
transparent political accountability; thirdly, clear
objectives that incorporate regular reviews; fourthly, a
clear, unambiguous command and control structure;
fifthly, a credible legal regime that guarantees the security
of United Nations personnel; and, sixthly, the availability
of resources so that objectives can be met quickly and
efficiently.
Let me go back to that first point, a sustainable
financial system. There is no doubt that the Organization
is facing a financial crisis that cannot be ignored. We
have had serious problems with reserves and we have
significant debt to contributing countries. The largest
contributor has indicated that it will unilaterally reduce its
share of funding from October next year. The situation
is not sustainable. It requires urgent action.
Why do we have this crisis? There are some simple
answers. Some members cannot pay; others will not pay;
and some are arguing the legitimacy of their assessment.
The General Assembly, this body, must confront this
issue. The United Nations must stop extending credit to
non-payers. There is enough evidence emerging to
suggest that there may be serious inequities in the present
system.
26


Some countries with extraordinarily strong growth
over the past 5 to 10 years appear in the revised scale
issued by the Committee on Contributions with a constant
or even reduced contribution level. That is not acceptable.
It must be remedied.
We do not want a hollow celebration on the fiftieth
anniversary with a cash crisis hanging over the
Organization. We must make a commitment to resolve this
crisis before the conclusion of the forty-ninth session.
The next point is the need for political accountability.
There is in my view a parallel priority to develop and
improve the Organization’s capacity for undertaking its
collective security responsibilities. To do that we need to
put in place more transparent procedures throughout the
Organization. The management of peace-keeping
operations is allocated to the Secretariat. This is necessary
and appropriate in the same way any Government delegates
responsibility for a complex operation to its public service.
However, and I speak as a politician and as a Minister
responsible for the management and oversight of
Government departments, the days are long gone when a
public service mandarin could run a department or major
operation without detailed political oversight. This is not
a promotion of micro-management, nor am I implying any
criticism of the Secretariat staff. But as any politician
holding executive office in today’s democracies knows, the
classic recipe for a failed project is for those who are
politically accountable to lose track of implementation or to
lose the game plan.
We saw that all too clearly in the past year in
Somalia. Ironically, the Security Council had, in resolution
814 (1993), already foreseen the need in the case of the
United Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM II) for a
detailed political accountability and provided for a
committee to follow the operation closely. But the
committee was never established.
New Zealand has proposed in the Security Council
that a committee or an ad hoc working group should be
established to fill this gap and enhance the accountability of
the Organization to its politically responsible
representatives. I certainly remain hopeful that progress
can be made in this area.
The third point I draw to the attention of members is
the need for clear objectives with regular reviews. Clearer
mission objectives must be developed and kept under
review. I am delighted that some progress has in fact been
made. The Council is now identifying more closely the
terms of mandates for United Nations operations, and it
is becoming usual to build a specific review cycle into its
mandates. But there are still two areas of weakness.
First, there is a great deal of mythology about and
very little sound analysis of the circumstances in which
force should be used by United Nations operations. Many
believe this is governed by the use or non-use of the
words "Chapter VII". This could well be a false
conclusion. The rules of engagement rather than abstract
reference to the Charter are much more likely to
determine actual behaviour in the field.
I am not alone in believing that there is a need to
develop greater commonality in military doctrine for
United Nations peace-keeping operations. This is
especially relevant when so many peace-keeping
contributors are regularly placed side by side in the field.
It is, however, particularly urgent in the face of new-style
operations of the intra-country type where the use of force
by factions, not necessarily Governments, is the challenge
for this body to overcome.
It is clear that common principles are necessary to
guide peace-keepers on the appropriate use of force when
they take part in operations in pursuit of an agreed United
Nations strategic objective. As for the review, while
there are plenty of mid-term reviews there is, as yet, no
systematic process of review at the end of an operation.
The budget of every peace-keeping operation should
include provision, as a principal line item, for the
preparation of a comprehensive review of the operation’s
achievements relative to the mandate set.
Such reviews should be separate from the financial
performance review and should address the substance of
the operation and seek to identify all relevant lessons for
the conduct of future operations.
I address now the question of command and control.
There is a weakness in the command and control
structures and they do need attention. It is true the
personnel of national defence forces which contribute
forces to the United Nations legally remain in their
country’s national service. But as I see it, parallel to the
allocation of responsibility to the United Nations Force
Commander must be a recognition that the national
command structure will not seek to direct their forces in
operational matters. If the national command authority
has serious difficulties, then the appropriate course of
action in all cases - except an emergency - is for the issue
27


to be resolved with United Nations Headquarters. If
resolution is not possible the unit should be withdrawn.
I come to the question of the safety of peace-keeping
personnel. A major requirement for effective collective
security is that countries contributing troops and civilian
personnel should have confidence that their personnel in the
field will have the best possible support to ensure their
safety and security. That is an issue which, as many
members know, New Zealand has pursued relentlessly
during its time on the Council. It bears on the level of
equipment with which the forces are outfitted and there is
plenty of room for improvement.
In addition, the legal regime under which peace-
keeping operations are conducted needs to reflect the
extraordinary personal risk which United Nations personnel
are undertaking on behalf of us all in carrying out collective
security operations. It is right that such personnel should
be differentiated from soldiers in an armed conflict and that
there should be a higher standard of legal responsibility for
anybody who attacks them. I urge all members of the
Assembly to support New Zealand’s initiative on this issue
currently in the Sixth Committee, that the necessary
flexibility be shown on outstanding issues and that we make
a really determined effort to complete work on the draft
convention this year.
The question of resources is always before us. In my
sixth point I would say that a critical tool for effective
collective security is a strategy for resource availability.
The situation we all saw recently in Rwanda is a classic
case. Human resources were available but they lacked
training and they lacked equipment. But there is also the
need for a capacity in all peace-keeping operations for a
forceful response in self-defence. There are important
lessons to be learned from the troop losses in Rwanda last
April and again I draw attention to the linkage between
mandates, rules of engagement, doctrine and planning.
The United Nations will have to go beyond the current
work being done on stand-by forces to address this
problem.
We believe that there is a case for redirecting a
substantial portion of bilateral military assistance into forms
of training that would better assist defence forces with the
requirements of peace-keeping operations.
There is also a role for the United Nations maintaining
the physical equivalent of the peace-keeping reserve fund
that it is supposed to have on the financial side now. A
quick start-up capability, with owned or leased equipment
immediately available to the United Nations, would have
made a significant difference in the Rwanda situation.
This is a practical and feasible step that can be taken to
ensure that future collective security can in fact rise to the
challenge.
I have spoken about the factors that need to be taken
into account in managing peace-keeping operations. I
now wish to address the terms of their engagements.
The United Nations should not be expected to take
responsibility for a situation of up to 30 years because the
parties to a conflict are unable or unwilling to summon up
the necessary political will to reach a settlement. There
comes a point when the parties must take their fate in
their own hands rather than the Council avoiding the hard
decisions just by rolling over the mandates.
At the same time, a range of different considerations
should prevail when the United Nations reaches the end
of a successful peace-keeping process. The United
Nations cannot simply walk away when a perceived end
point - such as an election - has been achieved, because
there may still be outstanding issues that need the
ongoing support of the operation, such as humanitarian
operations or local capability-building programmes to help
provide the required sound administration.
The United Nations deserves congratulations on its
achievements in Cambodia, for example, but the future
there is still not certain, and the United Nations must
maintain its responsibilities. Rehabilitation in that country
must continue.
Another example of a situation in which
peacemaking and peace-building have to be seen as a
coherent whole is in the area of demining. This is a
critically important humanitarian function. New
Zealand’s military forces have had a lot of experience in
helping the United Nations with demining in Afghanistan,
Cambodia and, most recently, Mozambique.
The Security Council Mission that visited
Mozambique about two months ago reported its dismay
at the delays and at the state of the programme generally.
At the request of the United Nations, New Zealand
stepped in early in August and began the rescue effort for
the programme. The wheel should not have had to be
reinvented. It is a concern that lessons learned from
earlier operations such as Afghanistan and Cambodia do
not appear to be retained. Having seen firsthand the
28


effects of mines in Cambodia, I do believe we should move
more expeditiously than the speed of the present
performance.
New Zealand certainly looks forward to working with
other delegations to improve performance in this area, and
I would certainly add that my Government was most
interested in the comments President Clinton made here
yesterday about the proposal for the elimination of the
world’s 85 million anti-personnel land-mines. This is an
urgent task. No one who has seen firsthand the human cost
of mines can offer anything less than full cooperation to
this end.
Finally, when we look ahead to what would really
enhance proper use of the collective security powers, we
have to conclude that reform of the Security Council is a
major task waiting to be fulfilled. Many of the things I
have discussed today require reforms by the Security
Council, or at least in conjunction with it. But I cannot
escape the conclusion that even if all of these were
accomplished, the political legitimacy of the Security
Council could still erode over a period of time. Ultimately
it could lose the credibility vital to the role it carries out.
Collective security requires the Council to be
genuinely representative of the entire United Nations
membership. We have, of course, as many others have
done, followed the debate on Security Council reform in the
Open-ended Working Group set up last year. We hear the
case made for additional permanent members. We also
hear overwhelming support for expanding the number of
non-permanent members of the Council. There are shades
of difference on the numbers for the total membership, but
consensus does seem to be emerging around five or six new
members. We consider that a limited expansion of the
number of members, paying regard to an equitable
geographical participation, is still a priority for the health
of the Organization. It is time to do what is achievable and
what benefits most Members. Given the need for 122
ratifications, we are aware that even a simple expansion,
hopefully adopted next year, will take several years to come
into force. It would not be unrealistic, therefore, for the
year 2000 to see the first meeting of the expanded Council.
There is no worth in being critical of some aspects of
the United Nations without believing, as I do, that the
problems can be cured. We, all 184 of us, are its doctors,
and we need to act quickly. We need to apportion our
costs fairly and systematically. We need to share peace-
keeping tasks, peace-keeping funding and peace-keeping
supplies. We need to accept the democratic decisions of
this Organization. We also need to adjust to the more
complex and interrelated United Nations agendas of the
future.
I therefore leave with the Assembly New Zealand’s
assurance of a renewed commitment to this unique and
essential body and of our willingness to work in that
spirit to ensure the continued relevance of the United
Nations for the next half-century.
At the
very outset I would like to congratulate you, Mr. Amara
Essy, on your election to the high post of President of the
General Assembly at its current session. I view this as a
sign of recognition of your country’s authority in the
international community.
The United Nations is approaching its fiftieth
anniversary, and the entire world has grown older along
with it. What is the world like nowadays? Has it become
better? Has it become wiser? And, most important, what
will the present generation leave behind to its successors?
No State, no people can be indifferent to these
questions. Here in the United Nations we must find
answers to them. This is particularly important for
Russia. We are trying to understand what kind of world
we want to live in, and exactly what kind of world we
should spare no effort to build.
The new Russia was born in 1991 as a democratic
State. Its birth was witnessed by the entire world.
For several years now we have been engaged in a
tremendous, and painstaking task, the essence of which is
to remove the legacy of totalitarianism and the cold war.
Freedom has come to Russia. The people have
obtained fundamental civil rights long denied them.
Profound economic reform is in progress in Russia. A
free market economy is being put into effect. Thus, each
of our new success stories reinforces Russian democracy.
Russia has decisively drawn a final line under the
Second World War. Our forces have been withdrawn
from Germany, Central Europe and the Baltic States. Of
its own accord, and at great effort, Russia has removed
any threat to the security of other States.
Furthermore, our country, through its own efforts,
has promoted the end of confrontation in Europe, setting
up new security structures there, not only for a select
number, the chosen but for all. The Conference on
Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) should
become a powerful driving force in that process.
1


We expect there to be more understanding on the part
of our partners with regard to the problems of security in
Russia. We count on their ability to overcome the old
suspicion inherent in a world divided into blocs, suspicion
that is now unjustified.
Russia is undergoing changes and regaining its
identity, but in every respect it remains a great Power.
Russia is ready for equal cooperation within the framework
of the international community, which should in turn accept
an active, open Russia.
We would like nuclear weapons and other kinds of
weapons of mass destruction to cease to exist. Efficient
control over the non-proliferation of the technologies for
their production is imperative.
Russia needs a world without wars and armed conflicts
and without environmental calamities. We favour the
development of international economic ties without
discrimination. Russia stands for a world capable of
combating terrorism, drug-trafficking and other types of
international crime.
To make such gigantic changes possible, efforts by all
the Members of the United Nations will be required. There
is no room for either soloists or supernumeraries.
Naturally, we cannot do without new relations between
the two major nuclear Powers. I am convinced that the
entire world has a vital stake in the establishment of a
strategic partnership between Russia and the United States.
I am ready for a serious and fruitful dialogue with President
Bill Clinton, who today gave an optimistic forecast of our
interaction.
Russia’s economic and foreign-policy priorities lie in
the countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS), the former Republics of the Soviet Union. Russia’s
ties with them are closer than the traditional relations of
good-neighbourliness; we have, rather, an extraordinary
blood relationship. In virtually all the CIS countries today
there is a growing desire for closer cooperation and a
genuine, rather than merely proclaimed, integration. Its
foundation will be good will and mutual benefit.
Attempts to use the contradictions between the CIS
States for selfish ends are extremely short-sighted.
Conflicts in a number of CIS countries threaten not only
the security of our State, but also security at the regional
and global levels.
We are acutely interested in the active participation
of the world community in settling these difficult
problems. However, the main peace-keeping burden in
the territory of the former Soviet Union sits is being
borne by the Russian Federation.
Our efforts have not been fruitless. A solid truce
has already been established in Moldova. The peace
process in Georgia is developing; hope of stopping the
bloodshed in Nagorny Karabakh is already emerging and
initial agreements on Tajikistan have also been reached.
Everybody knows how difficult life is for millions of
Russians in newly independent States; it is not a time for
complacency. Once they were in their own home, but
now they are guests - and not always welcome ones.
We cannot remain indifferent to the fate of our
countrymen. I an not referring to special rights or
privileges. But the people in Russia will not understand
if I do not state here and now that the democratic States
have to prove through their actions that guaranteeing
human rights is indeed the cornerstone of their foreign
policy. And in this area neither a selective approach nor
double standards are permissible.
Two years ago the General Assembly adopted the
Declaration on the rights of national minorities. At this
session we propose to come to an agreement on the
principles of that Declaration being embodied in the
legislation of all United Nations Member States.
Russia makes no distinction between settling its
problems and the problems of others. That is why we
particularly highly value what is done within the United
Nations.
The world is now at a crossroads. The tragedy of
the struggle of two opposing blocs is finally over. The
delicate balance based on power, fear and mutual
intimidation has disappeared for ever.
But the world is still not stable. The changes that
are taking place entail not only hopes for a better future,
but also profound anxieties.
It is not only Russia that is trying to respond to the
emerging challenges. To a certain degree, the united
Germany, Japan, the United States and other countries of
the West face the same problem. The same applies
equally to many countries in Asia, Africa and Latin
America.
2


The fundamental changes in international relations are
accompanied by the emergence of new problems. More
and more countries see strengthening the effectiveness of
inter-State structures as the solution. At the same time, this
does not always prevent an increase in the activity of those
who hold separatist and nationalist aspirations.
A veritable floodgate of regional and local conflicts,
national, tribal and religious enmity and economic, social
and political confrontations has been opened wide. The
bleeding wound in Bosnia has not healed. It is a tragic
paradox that in the wake of the cold war in Europe hotbeds
of war have flared up there anew.
The unprecedented tragedy in Rwanda resounds
painfully in the hearts of all people. This has proved to be
a defeat for us all.
But let us look around. Are there not other parts of
the world where more refined and civilized unlawful actions
are being taken against national and cultural minorities?
Are their rights and their security not threatened? Have
racism and anti-Semitism disappeared? Is there no longer
any discrimination against those who are categorized as
non-indigenous?
When aggressive nationalism is made into State policy
it is a grave danger for all mankind.
These problems are all the more urgent today because
the threat of local conflicts has not waned.
Each of these conflicts could cause a veritable
avalanche of geopolitical changes all over the world.
The cold war is over, but its material infrastructure -
the mountains of arms and the military-industrial complexes
of the developed countries - still remain. The spread of
nuclear weapons could make them into instruments of
terror. Huge amounts of weapons have been dumped onto
international markets. Unfortunately, vested interests
frequently prevail over the awareness of the danger implicit
in this process. In fact, this is nothing but an arms race
that has simply been transferred to the developing countries
through the market.
The worsening ecological crisis and the proliferation
of AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome) and other
dangerous diseases are also realities at the close of this
twentieth century.
The lessons of history can be learned only with great
difficulty. Obsession with the idea of supremacy is
extremely dangerous. The pathological failure to accept
something different has time and again resulted in
numerous ethnic and religious problems and conflicts.
The fear of open political territory wind up once again
with a "cordon sanitaire" or "iron curtain".
Let us be honest: equality, partnership, mutual
benefit and cooperation still remain, to a large extent,
words used to cover State egotism. Such a situation
indicates an urgent need to develop a solid system of
security on the basis of principles and mechanisms of
cooperation on the part of everyone, and a need for the
reform of international institutions. Such a system should
be in keeping with the new conditions that now prevail
and should function under the auspices of the United
Nations.
As a specific contribution towards the establishment
of such a system, I would propose the following
measures.
First, we must speed up the negotiations on the
conclusion of a comprehensive nuclear test-ban treaty.
Russia advocates the signing of this treaty next year,
when we celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the United
Nations. We should also give thought to further steps to
limit Russian and American strategic nuclear weapons in
order to make it possible eventually to renounce the
inherited "balance of terror" based on mutual nuclear
deterrence.
Secondly, we must extend non-proliferation measures
to cover weapons of mass destruction. Next spring, when
the Conference of the States Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons takes place, it is
essential to adopt a decision to the effect that the treaty
should be open-ended and of unlimited duration. No one
has the right to deny this. In this context, we believe that
the non-nuclear-weapon States will need to be given
additional and more precise security assurances. We
propose the holding in the near future of a special
meeting of the Security Council, at the Foreign Minister
level, to coordinate and adopt a new resolution on
so-called "positive" security assurances.
Thirdly, we should launch a multilateral debate on
the issues with regard to the regulation of the
international traffic in weaponry and military equipment.
Moreover, there is an urgent need for all nuclear-weapon
States to participate in the process of the control and
3


limitation of nuclear weapons. We propose that a treaty on
nuclear security and strategic stability be elaborated by the
five nuclear-weapon States. Such a treaty could provide for
cessation of the production of fissionable materials for
military purposes, for prohibition of the recycling of
fissionable materials for weapons purposes and for further
elimination of nuclear weapons and the reduction of their
means of delivery.
Fourthly, it would be advisable to open discussions on
regional programmes to strengthen peace and security.
Regional security systems are being formed even now: I
am thinking particularly of the treaty on collective security
between the members of the Commonwealth of Independent
States (CIS) of the former Soviet Union. We believe that
at the present stage that the United Nations could direct its
efforts towards coordinating the process of building up
regional security systems.
Finally, the experience of recent years demonstrates
that the renunciation of the arms race is a complicated and
highly expensive process. Conversion of the military
industry gives rise to extremely difficult economic and
social problems that have to be dealt with, particularly as
they relate to the elimination of chemical and
bacteriological weapons. In this context, it is important to
pool the efforts of the international community. Such
cooperation among States would help to enhance the level
of mutual trust. In 1996, it might be possible to hold a
conference, under the auspices of the United Nations, on
international cooperation in the field of conversion.
Implementation of these measures will enable us to
substantially stabilize the situation in the world. However,
from the long-term point of view, these measures will not
be sufficient.
The former purely military understanding of the
concept of "security" has today become obsolete. The
range of problems faced by mankind is much wider than it
was. The modern definition of security is inseparable from
the notion of stable development.
The world is urgently in need of a strategy for the
twenty-first century - a strategy of mutual responsibility.
The most important points of reference for such a strategy
could be defined as follows:
- Stable economic and social development, not
only for individual regions and States but,
indeed, for the entire planet as a single entity.
People themselves must assume the
responsibility of carrying out this immense task;
- The renunciation of diktat by the powerful
vis-à-vis the weak. Any country, whether large
or small, should be aware of its responsibility
for the maintenance of order based on law and
morality;
- The unconditional recognition of human rights,
including the rights of national minorities. In
view of the great diversity of cultures,
traditions and the historical experience of
countries and peoples, fundamental human
rights are a universal value and we cannot
permit them to be devalued;
- Strengthening the ecological security of
mankind. The world is now facing a most
serious crisis because of the deficit of
resources, deterioration of the natural
environment, and many other negative trends.
Common sense and the instinct for survival tell
us to stop exploiting our depleting resources to
the detriment of nature, society and mankind.
Russia supports the programme on Global
education and observation to preserve the
environment. Moreover, this programme is
entirely consistent with the strategy of shared
responsibility. We intend to participate
actively in its implementation.
At the same time, I should like to emphasize that
only a profound understanding, on the part of each
participant in international cooperation, of his or her
individual responsibility can engender a common sense of
responsibility for the world situation.
To paraphrase a well known expression we could
say that the United Nations is a good idea whose time has
finally come. I should like in particular to note the great
personal contribution of the United Nations Secretary-
General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, to the cause of
advocating peace and settling regional conflicts.
If the United Nations is to achieve maximum
effectiveness in the twenty-first century, it must undergo
a well-thought-out reform.
Obviously, changes will be required both at
Headquarters and in the functioning of the specialized
agencies. Also, it will be impossible to avoid changes in
4


the Security Council, which should remain sufficiently
compact and an effective functioning body. This is
especially important because, according to the Charter, the
Security Council bears primary responsibility for supporting
and maintaining world peace and security.
We have to strike a new balance of law, morality and
force in world politics. The United Nations could play a
decisive role in these efforts in accordance with the Charter.
Russia stands ready, as provided in Article 43 of the
Charter, to enter into an agreement with the Security
Council to make available national military contingents for
United Nations operations. If a sufficient number of other
States follows this lead, then it could be possible to go
ahead with the realization of the concept of United Nations
stand-by forces.
The Military Staff Committee has already been
formally in existence for several decades. According to the
Charter its function is "to advise and assist the Security
Council on all questions relating to the Security Council’s
military requirements". Let them finally do just that.
The pertinent task now will be to work out a strategy
of peace-keeping, conflict and crisis prevention and, if
necessary, operations on peace enforcement.
Through specific actions, Russia has shown support
for United Nations efforts aimed at setting up efficient
mechanisms of response to humanitarian emergencies. We
stand ready to cooperate with all countries anxious to
reinforce the capability of the world community to produce
a rapid humanitarian response.
Because the problems we are increasingly
encountering are multifaceted, they require adequate
solutions. The question is not about who should enjoy
more rights - the United Nations, the regional structures or
States. The future world system can be truly durable only
if it is possible to find efficient and effective mechanisms
to address problems at all levels - national, regional and
global. Sharing responsibility will make it possible for the
United Nations to remain flexible and a pragmatic and
effective structure and enable it to focus its efforts on the
solution of the genuinely key problems faced by mankind.
Russia believes that these are all fundamental issues
that have a direct bearing on the fate of the world
community. Both the authority of the United Nations and
the future of world politics as a whole will depend on the
way these issues are dealt with.
People have always sought stability, happiness and
prosperity. But history provides evidence of the fact that
these goals cannot be achieved with the help of brute
force alone. Once again we become acutely aware of this
fact now that we are approaching a sacred date for
mankind: the fiftieth anniversary of the end of the
Second World War and the restoration of peace.
Let us remember with gratitude those who gave their
lives for this great victory. Let 1995 become the
universal year of commemoration of the victims of the
Second World War.
For the sake of those living and those who have not
yet been born, we must preserve peace and establish
stability on our planet. Mankind should finally feel that
it is at home, a home which is both kind and reliable.
Our civilization has always been varied. It is
precisely in the variety of cultures, traditions and values
that the possibility of development is basically found.
At this time, we have reached a stage when different
interests and aspirations of peoples can be achieved only
through cooperation among them.
The world community should make every possible
effort to ensure that its policies are embodied in the new
thinking about the influence of States, national pride and
patriotism.
The United Nations is a child of the world. Fifty
years ago when the Second World War was in progress,
it became abundantly clear that the future of mankind is
to be found in the realm of cooperation and tolerance
rather than aggression and hatred.
Cooperation and tolerance are prerequisites for the
next century.
This is the most important condition for there to be
a worthy future for our planet.
This is a unique opportunity that has been given to
the human race.
I believe that the United Nations, in fulfilment of its
general responsibility, will not allow us to pass it up, and
I hope that the great dream of peace to which all peoples
and States aspire to will take its due place in the life of
our planet.
Let me first congratulate you, Mr.
President, on your election as President of the General
Assembly for its forty-ninth session. The American people
look forward to working with you to celebrate the United
Nations fiftieth anniversary.
We meet today at a time of great hope and change.
The end of the cold war, the explosion of technology and
trade and enterprise have given people the world over new
opportunities to live up to their dreams and their God-given
potential. This is an age of hope -yet in this new world,
we face a contest as old as history.
It is a struggle between freedom and tyranny; between
tolerance and bigotry; between knowledge and ignorance;
between openness and isolation. It is a fight between those
who would build free societies governed by laws and
those who would impose their will by force.
Our struggle today - in a world more high-tech,
more fast-moving, more chaotically diverse than ever - is
the age-old fight between hope and fear.
Three times in this century - from the trenches of the
Somme to the island of Iwo Jima to the shattered Wall in
Berlin - the forces of hope were victorious. But the
victors of the First World War squandered their triumph
when they turned inward, bringing on a global depression,
and allowing fascism to rise and reignite global war.
After the Second World War, the Allies learned the
lesson of the past. In the face of a new totalitarian threat
and the nuclear menace, great nations did not walk away
from the challenge of the moment. Instead they chose to
reach out, to rebuild and to lead. They chose to create the
United Nations and they left us a world stronger, safer
and freer.
Our generation has a difficult task: the cold war is
over. We must secure the peace. It falls to us to avoid
the complacency that followed the First World War -
without the spur of the imminent threat to our security
that followed the Second World War.
We must ensure that those who fought and found the
courage to end the cold war - those from both East and
West who loved freedom - did not labour in vain. Our
sacred mission is to build a new world for our children -
more democratic, more prosperous, more free of ancient
hatreds and modern means of destruction.
That is no easy challenge; but we accept it with
confidence. After all, the walls that once divided nations
in this very Hall have come down. More nations have
chosen democracy than ever before. More have chosen
free markets and economic justice. More have embraced
the values of tolerance and liberty and civil society that
allow us all to make the most of our lives.
But while the ideals of democracy and free markets
are ascendant, they are surely not the whole story.
Terrible examples of chaos, repression and tyranny also
mark our times. The twentieth century has proved that
the forces of freedom and democracy can endure against
great odds; our job is to see that in the twenty-first
century these forces triumph.
6


The dangers we face are less stark and more diffuse
than those of the cold war, but they are still formidable:
the ethnic conflicts that drive millions from their homes;
the despots ready to repress their own people or conquer
their neighbours; the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction; the terrorists wielding their deadly arms; the
criminal syndicates selling those arms, or drugs, infiltrating
the very institutions of fragile democracies; a global
economy that offers great promise but also deep insecurity,
and in many places declining opportunity; diseases like
AIDS that threaten to decimate nations; the combined
dangers of population explosion and economic decline,
which prompted the world community to reach the
remarkable consensus at the Cairo Conference; global and
local environmental threats that demand that sustainable
development become a part of the lives of people all
around the world; and, finally, within many of our nations,
high rates of drug abuse and crime and family breakdown,
with all their terrible consequences. These are the dangers
we face today.
We must address these threats to our future.
Thankfully, the end of the cold war gives us a chance to
address them together. In our efforts, different nations may
be active in different situations in different ways, but their
purposes must be consistent with freedom and their
practices consistent with international law. Each nation will
bring to our common task its own particular strengths -
economic, political or military.
Of course, the first duty of every Member of the
United Nations is to its own citizens, to their security, their
welfare and their interests. As President of the United
States, my first duty is to the citizens of my country.
When our national security interests are threatened, we will
act with others when we can, but alone if we must. We
will use diplomacy when we can, but force if we must.
The United States recognizes that we also have a
special responsibility in these common endeavours that we
are undertaking, the responsibility that goes along with
great power and also with our long history of democracy
and freedom. But we seek to fulfil that responsibility in
cooperation with other nations. Working together increases
the impact and the legitimacy of each of our actions, and
sharing the burdens lessens everyone’s load. We have no
desire to be the world’s policeman, but we will do what we
can to help civil societies emerge from the ashes of
repression, to sustain fragile democracies, to add more free
markets to the world, and of course to restrain the
destructive forces that threaten us all.
In every corner of the globe, from South Africa to
Asia, to Central and Eastern Europe, to the Middle East
and Latin America, and now to a small island in the
Caribbean, ordinary citizens are striving to build their
own future. Promoting their cause is our generation’s
great opportunity, and we must do it together. A
coalition for democracy is good for America.
Democracies, after all, are more likely to be stable, less
likely to wage war; they strengthen civil society and can
provide people with the economic and political
opportunities to build their futures in their own homes -
not to flee their borders.
Our efforts to help build more democracies will
make us all more secure, more prosperous and more
successful as we try to make this era of terrific change
our friend, and not our enemy. In my nation, as in all of
your nations, there are many people who are
understandably reluctant to undertake these efforts
because often the distances are great or the cultures are
different. There are good reasons for the caution that
people feel. Often, the chances of success or its costs are
unclear. And, of course, in every common endeavour
there is always the potential for failure and often the risk
of loss of life.
And yet our people - as we have seen in the
remarkable global response to the terrible crisis in
Rwanda - genuinely want to help their neighbours around
the world and to make some effort in our common cause.
We have seen that progress can be made as well. The
problem is deciding when we must respond and how we
shall overcome our reluctance. This will never be easy.
There are no simple formulas. All of us will make these
decisions in part based on the distance of the problem
from our shores, the interests of our nation, the difference
we think we can make, the costs required, or the threat to
our own citizens in the endeavour.
Hard questions will remain, and cannot be erased by
some simple formula. But we should have the confidence
that these efforts can succeed, whether they are efforts to
keep people alive in the face of terrible tragedy, as in
Rwanda, or our efforts to avert a tragedy, as in the Horn
of Africa, or our efforts to support processes that are
literally changing the future of millions. History is on
our side. We should have confidence about this. Look
at the march of freedom we have seen in the last year
alone. Who, a decade ago, would have dared predict the
startling changes in South Africa, in the Middle East and
in Ireland; the stunning triumph of democracy and
majority rule and the redemption of the purpose of Nelson
7


Mandela’s life; the brave efforts of Israel and its Arab
neighbours to build bridges of peace between their peoples;
the earnest search by the people of Northern Ireland and
Great Britain and Ireland to end centuries of division and
decades of terror? In each case, credit belongs to those
nations’ leaders and their courageous people. But in each
instance the United States and other nations were privileged
to help in these causes.
The growth of cooperation between the United States
and the Russian Federation also should give us all great
cause for confidence. This is a partnership that is rooted in
democracy, a partnership that is working, a partnership of,
not complete agreement, but genuine mutual respect. After
so many years of nuclear terror, our two nations are taking
dramatic steps to ease tensions around the world. For the
first time since the Second World War, foreign troops do
not occupy the nations of Central and Eastern Europe. The
Baltic nations are free. Russian and American missiles no
longer target each other’s people. Three of the four nuclear
members of the former Soviet Union have agreed to
remove all nuclear weapons from their soil. And we are
working on agreements to halt production of fissile
materials for nuclear explosives; to make dismantling of
nuclear warheads transparent and irreversible; and further
to reduce our nuclear weapons and delivery vehicles.
The United States and Russia also recognize that we
must cooperate to control the emerging danger of terrorists
who traffic in nuclear materials. To secure nuclear
materials at their sources, we have agreed with Russia to
stop plutonium production by the year 2000; to construct a
storage facility for fissile materials and buy up stocks of
weapons-grade fuel; and to combat the criminals who are
trying to smuggle materials for nuclear explosives. Our
two nations and Germany have increased cooperation and
engaged in joint anti-terrorist training. Soon, under the
leadership of our Federal Bureau of Investigation, we will
open a law enforcement training academy in Europe, where
police will learn how to combat more effectively trafficking
of nuclear weapons components, as well as the drug trade,
organized crime and money laundering.
The United States will also advance a wide-ranging
non-proliferation agenda: a global convention to halt
production of fissile materials; efforts to curb North
Korea’s nuclear ambitions; transparent procedures for
dismantling nuclear warheads; and our work to ban testing
and to extend the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. And today I am proposing a first step
toward the eventual elimination of a less visible but still
deadly threat: the world’s 85 million anti-personnel land-
mines - one for every 50 persons on the face of the earth.
I ask all nations concerned to join with us and conclude
an agreement to reduce the number and availability of
those mines. Ridding the world of those often hidden
weapons will help to save the lives of tens of thousands
of men, women and innocent children in the years to
come.
Our progress in the last year also provides
confidence that in the post-cold-war years we can adapt
and construct global institutions that will help to provide
security and increase economic growth throughout the
world. Since I spoke here last year, 22 nations have
joined the Partnership for Peace of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO). The first joint exercises
have been conducted, helping to give Europe the chance
to become a more unified continent in which democratic
nations live within secure borders. In Asia, security talks
and economic cooperation will lead to further stability.
By reducing nations’ fears about their borders and
allowing them to spend less on military defences, our
coalition for democracy can give nations in transition a
better chance to offer new freedoms and opportunities to
their own people. It is time that we think anew about the
structures of this global economy as well, tearing down
walls that separate nations instead of hiding behind them.
At the Group of Seven meeting at Naples this year
we committed ourselves to this task of renewal, to re-
examining the economic institutions that have served us
so well in the past. In the interests of shared prosperity,
the United States actively promotes open markets.
Though still in its infancy, the North American Free
Trade Agreement has dramatically increased trade
between the United States and Mexico and has produced
in the United States alone an estimated 200,000 new jobs.
It offers a model to nations throughout the Americas
which we hope to build on. And this week I will send
legislation to the Congress to implement the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), the largest
trade agreement in all of history. GATT - and its
successor, the World Trade Organization - holds the
promise for all of us of increased exports, higher wages
and improved living standards. In the months and years
to come we will work no less to extend the reach of open
markets, starting with the Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation Council and the Summit of the Americas
later this year.
Here at the United Nations we must develop a
concrete plan to meet the challenges of the next 50 years
even as we celebrate the last 50 years. I believe we
8


should declare next year’s fiftieth anniversary not just a
year of celebration but a year of renewal. We call on the
Secretary-General to name a working group so that by the
time we meet next year we will have a concrete action plan
to revitalize the obligations of the United Nations to address
the security, economic and political challenges ahead -
obligations we must all be willing to assume.
Our objectives should include ready, efficient and
capable United Nations peace-keeping forces, and I am
happy to report that, as I pledged last year and thanks to
support in the United States Congress, $1.2 billion is now
available from the United States for this critical account.
We must also pledge to keep United Nations reform
moving forward so that we do more with less, and we must
improve our ability to respond to urgent needs. Let me
suggest that it is time for the members of the Assembly to
consider seriously President Menem’s suggestion for the
creation of a civilian rapid-response capability for
humanitarian crises.
And let us not lose sight of the special role that
development and democracy can play in preventing
conflicts once peace has been established. Never before
has the United Nations been in a better position to achieve
the democratic goals of our founders. The end of the cold
war has freed us from decades of paralysing divisions. And
we all know that multilateral cooperation is not only
necessary to address the new threats we face but possible
to succeed.
The efforts we have undertaken together in Haiti are
a prime example. Under the sponsorship of the United
Nations, American troops, now being joined by the
personnel of an ever-growing international coalition of over
two dozen nations, are giving the people of Haiti their
chance at freedom. Creative diplomacy, the influence of
economic power and the credible threat of military force -
all have contributed to this moment of opportunity.
Essential civil order will be restored. Human rights
violations will be curbed. The first refugees will be
returning within hours, on this day. The military leaders
will step down. The democratic Government will be
restored. President Aristide will return. The multinational
mission will turn its responsibilities over to the United
Nations mission, which will remain in Haiti throughout
1995, until a new president is elected. During this time a
multinational development effort will make available more
than $1 billion to begin helping the Haitians rebuild their
country. In the spirit of reconciliation and reconstruction,
President Aristide yesterday called for the immediate easing
of sanctions so that the work of rebuilding can begin
immediately. Accordingly, I intend to act expeditiously,
within Security Council resolutions 917 (1994) and 940
(1994) to enable us to restore health care, water and
electrical services, construction materials for humanitarian
efforts, and communications, agricultural and educational
materials.
Today I am also announcing that the United States
will suspend all unilateral sanctions against Haiti except
those that affect the military leaders and their immediate
supporters. This will include regularly scheduled air
flights when the airport becomes available, financial
transactions and travel restrictions. I urge all other
nations to do the same.
In Haiti, the United States has demonstrated that it
would lead a multinational force when our interests are
plain, when the cause is right, when the mission is
achievable and the nations of the world stand with us.
But Haiti’s people will have to muster the strength and
the patience to travel the road of freedom. They have to
do this for themselves. Every new democratic nation is
fragile. But we will see the day when the people of Haiti
fulfil their aspirations to liberty and when they are once
again making genuine economic progress.
United Nations actions in Bosnia, like those in Haiti,
demonstrate that progress can be made when a coalition
backs up diplomacy with military power. For the first
time ever, NATO has taken, since we met last year,
military actions beyond the territory of its members. The
threat of NATO air power helped to establish the
exclusion zone around Sarajevo and to end the Bosnian
Serbs’ spring offensive against Gorazde. NATO’s
February ultimatum boosted our mediation efforts, which
helped to end the war between the Bosnian Government
and the Bosnian Croats and forged a federation between
those two communities. To that extent the situation in
Bosnia has improved, but in recent weeks the situation
around Sarajevo has deteriorated substantially, and
Sarajevo once again faces the prospect of strangulation.
A new resolve by the United Nations to enforce its
resolutions is now necessary to save Sarajevo, and NATO
stands ready to act.
The situation in Bosnia is yet another reminder of
the greatest irony of this century we are leaving. This
century, so full of hope and opportunity and achievement,
has also been an age of deep destruction and despair. We
cannot help but remember the millions who gave their
lives during two world wars and the half century of
9


struggle by men and women in the East and West who
ultimately prevailed in the name of freedom.
But we must also think of our children and the world
we will leave them in the twenty-first century. History has
given us a very rare opportunity - the chance to build on
the greatest legacy of this century without reliving its
darkest moments. And we have shown that we can carry
forward humanity’s ancient quest for freedom to build a
world where democracy knows no borders but where
nations know their borders will always be secure, a world
that gives all people the chance to realize their potential and
to live out their dreams.
It surely must be one of the
great ironies of our age that this Assembly is being
addressed, for the first time in its 49 years’ history, by a
South African Head of State drawn from among the
African majority of what is an African country.
Future generations will find it strange in the extreme
that it was only so late in the twentieth century that it was
possible for our delegation to take its seat in the
Assembly, recognized both by our people and by the
nations of the world as the legitimate representative of the
people of our country.
It is indeed most welcome that the Organization will
mark its fiftieth anniversary next year with the apartheid
system vanquished and consigned to the past. That
historic change has come about not least because of the
great efforts in which the United Nations engaged to
ensure the suppression of the apartheid crime against
humanity. Even as it was still in the process of
establishing its institutions, the United Nations was
confronted by the challenge of the accession to power of
the party of apartheid domination in our country.
Everything that that system stood for represented the very
opposite of all the noble purposes for which the
Organization was established. Because apartheid reduced
and undermined the credibility of the United Nations as
an effective international instrument to end racism and
secure the fundamental human rights of all peoples, the
establishment and consolidation of apartheid constituted
a brazen challenge to the very existence of the
Organization.
6
General Assembly 14th meeting
Forty-ninth session 3 October 1994
The United Nations was born out of the titanic
struggle against nazism and fascism, with their pernicious
doctrines and practices of racial superiority and genocide.
It therefore could not stand by while, in South Africa, a
similar system was being established by a Government
which also had the temerity to claim representation within
the United Nations.
We believe that it was indeed of great importance to
the universal efficacy of, and respect for, the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and the United Nations
Charter that the United Nations should have spurned the
pleas of the apartheid regime that the gross violation of
human rights in South Africa was a domestic matter of no
legal or legitimate concern to the world body.
We stand here today to salute the United Nations and
its Member States, both singly and collectively, for joining
forces with the masses of our people in a common struggle
that has brought about our emancipation and pushed back
the frontiers of racism.
The millions of our people say "Thank you" and
"Thank you again, because the respect for your own dignity
as human beings inspired you to act to ensure the
restoration of our dignity as well".
We have together traversed a course which we are
convinced has strengthened human solidarity in general and
reinforced the bonds of friendship between our peoples and
the nations of the world. This dates back to the early days
when India put the question of racism in South Africa on
the Assembly’s agenda, to the moment when the world
community, as represented here, could adopt consensus
resolutions against apartheid with none dissenting.
It was therefore with great joy that at our inauguration
as President of our Republic we received, among others,
such high and distinguished officials of the Organization as
the Secretary-General, the President of the General
Assembly and the Chairman of the Special Committee
against Apartheid. Their presence reaffirmed the
incontrovertible truth that the victory over apartheid, the
success of the cause of democracy, non-racialism and non-
sexism in our country belongs as much to our people as it
does the United Nations.
And so we have embarked on the road to the remaking
of our country, basing ourselves both on the democratic
Constitution, which came into force on 27 April this year,
and on the Reconstruction and Development Programme,
which has become the property of all our people.
Clearly, these documents would have no life unless
the people gave them life. The words printed in them
must inspire common ownership by all our people and
their common allegiance to the process and the results
which these documents intend. For this to happen, as we
propagate the vision these documents contain we must at
the same time engage in a historic effort of redefinition
of ourselves as a new nation.
Our watchwords must be justice, peace,
reconciliation and nation-building in the pursuit of a
democratic, non-racial and non-sexist country. In all that
we do we have to ensure the healing of the wounds
inflicted on all our people across the great dividing line
imposed on our society by centuries of colonialism and
apartheid.
We must ensure that colour, race and gender become
only a God-given gift to each one of us, and not an
indelible mark or attribute that accords a special status to
any.
We must work for the day when we as South
Africans see one another and interact with one another as
equal human beings and as part of one nation united,
rather than torn asunder, by its diversity.
The road we shall have to travel to reach this
destination will by no means be easy. All of us know
how stubbornly racism can cling to the mind and how
deeply it can infect the human soul. Where it is sustained
by the racial ordering of the material world, as is the case
in our country, that stubbornness can multiply a
hundredfold.
And yet, however hard this battle may be, we will
not surrender. Whatever the time it may take, we will not
tire. The very fact that racism degrades both the
perpetrator and the victim commands that, if we are true
to our commitment to protect human dignity, we fight on
until victory is achieved.
We firmly believe that we who have particular
experience of the destructive and anti-human force of
racism owe it to ourselves to centre our transformation on
the creation of a truly non-racial society. Because we
know racism so intimately, we must stand a good chance
of developing and nurturing its opposite.
It will perhaps come to be that we who have
harboured in our country the worst example of racism
since the defeat of nazism will make a contribution to
7
General Assembly 14th meeting
Forty-ninth session 3 October 1994
human civilization by ordering our affairs in such a manner
that we strike an effective and lasting blow against racism
everywhere.
Some of the steps that we have already taken -
including the establishment of a Government of National
Unity, the orderly transformation of the institutions of State
and the cultivation of a national consensus on the major
issues of the day - have started us off on a correct footing
with regard to continuing the processes leading to the
creation of the just society we have been speaking of.
Our political emancipation has also brought into sharp
focus the urgent need to engage in the struggle to secure
our people’s freedom from want, from hunger and from
ignorance. We have written this on our banners: that the
society we seek to create must be a people-centred society;
all its institutions and its resources must be dedicated to the
pursuit of a better life for all our citizens. That better life
must mean an end to poverty, joblessness, homelessness
and the despair that comes of deprivation. This is an end
in itself because the happiness of the human being must, in
any society, be an end in itself.
At the same time, we are intensely conscious of the
fact that the stability of the democratic settlement itself and
the possibility actually to create a non-racial and non-sexist
society depend on our ability to change the material
conditions of life of our people so that they not only have
the vote but have bread and work as well.
We therefore return to the United Nations to make the
commitment that, as we undertook never to rest until the
system of apartheid was defeated, so do we now undertake
that we cannot rest while millions of our people suffer the
pain and indignity of poverty in all its forms.
At the same time, we turn once more to this world
body to say "We are going to need your continued support
to achieve the goal of the betterment of the conditions of
life of our people." We are pleased and inspired that both
the Secretary-General and the specialized agencies of the
United Nations have taken up the development challenge in
South Africa with the enthusiasm that they have shown.
We believe that it is in the common interest that we
sustain the common victory that we have scored in South
Africa, and take it further by achieving success not only in
politics but also in the socio-economic sphere.
It is perhaps common cause among us that everywhere
on our globe there is an unmistakable process leading to the
entrenchment of democratic systems of government. The
empowerment of the ordinary people of our world freely
to determine their destiny, unhindered by tyrants and
dictators, is at the very heart of the reason for the
existence of this Organization.
But it is equally true that hundreds of millions of
these politically empowered masses are caught in the
deathly trap of poverty, unable to live life in its fullness.
Out of all this are born social conflicts which
produce insecurity and instability, civil and other wars
that claim many lives, millions of desperate refugees and
the destruction of the little wealth that poor countries are
able to accumulate. Out of this cauldron are also born
tyrants, dictators and demagogues who not only take away
or restrict the rights of the people but also make it
impossible to do the things that must be done to bring
lasting prosperity to the people.
At the same time, the reality can no longer be
ignored that we live in an interdependent world which is
bound together to a common destiny. The very response
of the international community to the challenge of
apartheid confirmed this very point that we all
understood - that so long as apartheid existed in South
Africa, so long would the whole of humanity feel
demeaned and degraded.
The United Nations understood very well that racism
in our country could not but feed racism in other parts of
the world as well. The universal struggle against
apartheid was therefore not an act of charity arising out
of pity for our people, but an affirmation of our common
humanity. We believe that that act of affirmation requires
that this Organization should once more turn its focused
and sustained attention to the basics of everything that
makes for a better world for all humanity.
The elaboration of a new world order must, of
necessity, centre on this world body. In it we should find
the appropriate forum in which we can all participate to
help determine the shape of the new world.
The four elements that will need to be knit together
in fashioning that new universal reality are the issues of
democracy, peace, prosperity and interdependence.
The great challenge of our age to the United Nations
is to answer the question "Given the interdependence of
the nations of the world, what is it that we can and must
8
General Assembly 14th meeting
Forty-ninth session 3 October 1994
do to ensure that democracy, peace and prosperity prevail
everywhere?"
We are aware of the fact that the United Nations is
addressing these questions in many ways; yet there can be
no gainsaying the fact that such progress as we have made
has been made more by stealth than in the bold and
determined fashion that the world crisis demands today.
Perhaps a new and forceful initiative is required. Such
an initiative should inspire all of humanity because of the
seriousness of its intent. It should also have a chance to
succeed because it will have been underwritten by the
commitment of the masses of the people in each member
country to join hands with other nations, to address together
the related issues of democracy, peace and prosperity in an
interdependent world.
We are aware of the fact that the dictates of realpolitik
militate against the speedy realization of such an initiative.
But we do believe that the reality of life and the realism of
policy will, at some point, bring to the fore the fact that the
delay we impose on ourselves today will serve only to
increase the pressure on all of us to incorporate, within
what we consider possible, a sustainable vision of a
common world that will rise or fall together.
Undoubtedly, to inspire greater confidence in itself
among all the member nations and to reflect better the
impulse towards the democratization of international
relations, the United Nations will have to continue looking
at itself to determine what restructuring of itself it should
effect. This process must naturally affect, among others,
the structure and functioning of the Security Council and
the peacemaking and peace-keeping issues raised by the
Secretary-General in "An Agenda for Peace".
Democratic South Africa rejoins the world community
of nations determined to play its role in helping to
strengthen the United Nations and to contribute what it can
to the furtherance of its purposes. Among other things, we
have this morning acceded to the covenants and
conventions adopted by this Organization, which address
various matters such as economic, social and cultural rights,
civil and political rights, and the elimination of all forms of
racial discrimination, to say nothing of our irrevocable
commitment to the realization of the objectives contained
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
We are determined to play our full part in all
processes that address the important question of the
non-proliferation and elimination of weapons of mass
destruction. Our Government has also decided to become
a signatory to the Convention on prohibition and
restrictions on the use of certain conventional weapons.
In a similar vein, we shall not be found wanting in
the quest for sustainable development that is in keeping
with the Rio de Janeiro Declaration on Environment and
Development as well as with Agenda 21.
Equally, our own national interest dictates that we
join forces with the United Nations and all its Member
States in the common struggle to contain and end the
traffic in narcotics.
Even in constitutional terms, we are committed to
the advancement of the objective of the emancipation of
women through the creation of a non-sexist society.
Apart from anything else, we are therefore actively
engaged in the preparations for what we are convinced
will be a successful Beijing Conference.
We are part of the region of southern Africa and the
continent of Africa. As members of the Southern African
Development Community and the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), and an equal partner with other Member
States, we will play our role in the struggles of these
organizations to build a continent and a region that will
help to create for themselves and all humanity a common
world of peace and prosperity.
Ours must become a continent free of such tragedies
as those that have afflicted our own country as well as
Rwanda, Somalia, Angola, Mozambique, the Sudan and
Liberia. Happily, the OAU is actively addressing the
issues of peace and stability on our continent.
We are greatly encouraged that the countries of our
region, faced with a crisis in Lesotho, acted together
speedily and, with the cooperation of the Government and
the people of that country, succeeded in demonstrating
that together we have the will to defend democracy, peace
and national reconciliation.
Furthermore, as members of the Non-Aligned
Movement and the Group of 77, we are committed
especially to the promotion of South-South cooperation
and to the strengthening of the voice of the poor and
disadvantaged in the ordering of world affairs.
We would like to take this opportunity to express
our appreciation to the members of the General Assembly
for the speed and readiness with which they accepted the
9
General Assembly 14th meeting
Forty-ninth session 3 October 1994
credentials of democratic South Africa, enabling us to
participate in the work of the last General Assembly. We
are pleased to note that this same spirit characterized the
approach of other international organizations towards our
new democracy, including the Commonwealth and the
European Union.
We would like to close by congratulating you, Mr.
President, on your election to your high post, and we
express our confidence that you will guide the work of the
Assembly with the wisdom and sense of purpose for which
we admire you.
The millions across our globe who stand expectant at
the gates of hope look to this Organization to bring them
peace, to bring them life, to bring them a life worth living.
We pray that the new South Africa, which the General
Assembly helped bring into being and so warmly welcomed
among the community of nations, will, in its own and in the
wider interest, make its own contribution, however small,
to the realization of those hopes.
Our common humanity and the urgency of the knock
on the door of this great edifice demand that we must
attempt even the impossible.
