Mr. President, please allow me, first of all, to
warmly congratulate you on your election to the
presidency of the current session of the General
Assembly. I am convinced that with your remarkable
ability and rich experience, you will admirably fulfil this
mission. I would also like to express my appreciation and
thanks to Mr. Amara Essy for the important contribution
he has made during his presidency.
I wish to avail myself of this opportunity to extend
my welcome and congratulations to the Republic of Palau,
which was admitted into the United Nations after the last
session.
This year marks the fiftieth anniversary of the end of
the Second World War and the founding of the United
Nations. Over the past 50 years, the United Nations has
stood the test of the vicissitudes in the international
situation, grown steadily, scored remarkable achievements
and made major contributions to the peace and prosperity
of mankind. Its membership has increased from 51 at its
founding to today’s 185. The status and role of the United
Nations, the most universal and authoritative
intergovernmental organization of sovereign States today,
is irreplaceable by any other international organization.
The United Nations has traversed a tortuous and
uneven path over the past fifty years, just like the
development of anything else. On the occasion of the
fiftieth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations,
it is time to review the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter, earnestly summarize the positive
and negative experience, and introduce appropriate and
necessary reforms so as to revitalize the United Nations
and usher it into the new century with a new look to meet
the challenge of the times. This is the call of all peoples
and a lofty mission of the times.
The United Nations, which was founded in the
triumph of the world war against fascism, reflects the
ardent desire and determination of the world’s people to
avert the scourge of war forever, safeguard world peace
and security, carry out friendly international cooperation
9


and achieve common development. History has repeatedly
proved that adherence to the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter will enable the United Nations to
play a positive role in safeguarding peace and promoting
development, while violation of and departure from the
purposes and principles of the Charter will impair the
dignity and image of the United Nations and weaken its
role. Therefore, to continue to uphold and carry forward the
purposes and principles of the Charter is an unshirkable
responsibility of all United Nations Members and a basic
principle guiding the reform of the United Nations.
The core of the United Nations Charter is the principle
of equality between sovereign States and non-interference
in each other’s internal affairs. All sovereign States,
whether they are big or small, rich or poor, strong or weak,
are equal members of the international community. The
internal affairs of a country should be managed by its own
people. Major world affairs should be addressed by
countries through consultations on the basis of equality and
mutual respect. In international relations, to bully the small,
oppress the poor, override the weak, impose one’s own
social system, ideology and values on others or interfere in
other countries’ internal affairs all run counter to the spirit
of the United Nations Charter. Some people are publicly
clamouring for “containment” of other countries, which
shows that the cold war mentality still refuses to quit the
stage of history. But it will ultimately be discarded by
history. The post-war period of half a century proves that
in handling State-to-State relations, “hot war”, “cold war”
or “bloc politics” do not work. Strict observance of the
principles of mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial
integrity, mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each
other’s internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit and
peaceful coexistence are the only way for States to live in
amity with each other and achieve common development.
Since the last session of the General Assembly, thanks
to the joint efforts of various quarters, the tendency towards
the peaceful settlement of disputes through negotiations has
grown and international economic cooperation has gained
momentum. However, there still remain many destabilizing
and uncertain factors in the international situation.
Hegemonism and power politics continue to hold out. Peace
and development, the two major tasks of the world today,
still face grave challenges.
Armed conflicts and catastrophic wars in some parts
of the world remain unabated, which has not only inflicted
heavy losses of life and property on the countries and
peoples concerned, but also casts a shadow over regional
peace and stability and that of the whole world. All this
cannot but cause concern and distress among the world’s
people. As the background and causes behind these
conflicts are complicated, to seek a just, fair and
appropriate solution to them would call for tremendous
and concerted efforts by all the parties concerned, the
United Nations and the international community as a
whole. We maintain that the parties concerned should, in
the fundamental and long-term interests of the people,
seek just and fair solutions through negotiations, taking
into full account both history and reality as well as the
reasonable interests and positions of all sides. Where
consensus cannot be reached immediately, the parties
concerned should exercise restraint and patience so as to
prevent contradictions from intensifying and at the same
time try to create conditions and an atmosphere for an
eventual peaceful settlement.
United Nations peace-keeping operations in recent
years have played a useful role in settling international
disputes peacefully. They have both accumulated
successful experience and learned lessons from setbacks.
We believe that, to ensure a healthy development of
United Nations peace-keeping operations and activities in
other related fields such as preventive diplomacy, the
following guidelines should be established and followed:
Observation of the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter, in particular the principle of
respect for State sovereignty and non-interference in the
internal affairs of other countries;
Settlement of disputes through peaceful means such
as good offices, mediation and negotiations instead of
resort to frequent mandatory actions. Even humanitarian
operations should not resort to military means;
Opposition to double standards and the imposition of
the policies and views of one or a few countries on the
Security Council. Some countries should not be allowed
to carry out military intervention in the name of the
United Nations;
For peace-keeping operations, adherence to the
principles that have proved effective, such as obtaining
prior consent from the parties concerned, observing strict
neutrality and the non-use of force except for self-
defence;
Adoption of a realistic approach and confining the
operation within one’s capability. Peace-keeping
operations should be launched only when conditions are
ripe and should refrain, in whatever circumstances, from
10


becoming a party to a conflict in deviation from the
fundamental orientation of such operations.
It has been demonstrated time and again that United
Nations peace-keeping operations, if divorced from these
guidelines, would, contrary to our wishes, fail to achieve
their desired objectives and might even go astray.
Last May, the Review and Extension Conference of
the States Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) adopted the decision to renew the
NPT indefinitely. This serves the interests of all signatories,
helps to strengthen the international non-proliferation
regime and is conducive to the maintenance of world peace
and security. China believes that nuclear non-proliferation
is only an interim step towards the ultimate goal of the
complete prohibition and total destruction of nuclear
weapons. The indefinite extension of the NPT must not be
construed as an indefinite license for the nuclear-weapon
States to perpetuate their prerogatives.
One year ago, also from this rostrum, on behalf of the
Chinese Government I called for the conclusion of a
convention on the complete prohibition of nuclear weapons
and put forward a series of complete and interrelated
proposals on nuclear disarmament. We are pleased to note
that the negotiations on a comprehensive test-ban treaty
have produced some gratifying progress. China supports the
conclusion of such a treaty no later than 1996 and will
continue to work with other countries to this end. Once the
treaty enters into force, China will stop its nuclear testing.
China’s possession of a limited nuclear capability is
entirely for self-defence and for deterring the nuclear threat
against it. The Chinese Government has from the very
beginning unilaterally undertaken not to be the first to use
nuclear weapons at any time and under any circumstances
and not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against
non-nuclear-weapon States. China’s nuclear weapons
therefore do not constitute a threat to any country. We
strongly urge other nuclear-weapon States to respond
positively to China’s initiative by immediately starting
negotiations aimed at concluding a treaty on mutual non-
first-use of nuclear weapons and an agreement on the non-
use or non-threat of use of nuclear weapons against non-
nuclear-weapon States and nuclear-free zones.
It has become a trend in today’s world that when
countries formulate their domestic and foreign policies they
accord top priority to the economy and pay close attention
to national economic development. The worldwide tendency
towards economic integration, regionalization and the
formation of economic groupings has accelerated, and
competition among States in the economic, trade,
scientific and technological fields has further intensified.
Under such circumstances, the developing countries are
faced with a formidable challenge as they strive for
economic growth and higher living standards for their
people.
Furthermore, over 1 billion people on this planet
remain in abject poverty; this constitutes one of the world
community’s most acute problems. Given much-needed
support to the developing countries as they reactivate their
economies and creating a favourable external environment
for them are not only important conditions for the shared
economic growth and common prosperity of all countries,
but also a crucial guarantee for lasting peace and stability
throughout the world. Given the present situation, the
United Nations should ask itself to pay at least as much
attention to development as to peace, effectively perform
its duties under the Charter and play a more dynamic role
in galvanizing economic growth and development in the
developing countries. The reform of the United Nations
must result in the strengthening, not the weakening, of its
role in the area of development.
True, fairly rapid economic growth in the developing
countries must depend primarily on their own efforts.
However, it is also important for the international
community, and the developed countries in particular, to
take practical and effective measures to open markets,
provide development funds, transfer technology, increase
development aid and reduce the debt burden in favour of
the developing countries. International economic
cooperation should be guided by the principle of mutual
opening-up, equality and mutual benefit. Such practices as
implementing protectionist policies of one form or another
and attaching political strings to economic assistance to
developing countries are obviously misguided.
Profound changes have taken place in China amid
the surging tide of change and development across the
world. The 17 years that have elapsed since the beginning
of reform and opening-up in China have been
unprecedented in terms of the economic growth rate and
the improvement of the people’s living standards. At
present, China enjoys political stability, economic
prosperity, ethnic harmony and vigorous advances in
democracy, legality and community undertakings. China’s
exchanges and cooperation with the rest of the world have
reached a level unprecedented in both scope and depth.
Although there may still be many difficulties and
challenges along the road ahead, we are confident that,
11


through several generations of hard work, our people will
lift China out of economic and cultural backwardness and
turn it into a highly prosperous and democratic modern
country.
The Chinese people are peace-loving people. China’s
history for over a century following the Opium War was
one of tears, blood and humiliation in which the Chinese
nation was subjected to repeated aggression, suppression
and plunder at the hands of the big Powers. Do unto others
as you would have others do unto you. The Chinese people
treasure their hard-won independence and freedom and will
never commit aggression or intervene against others. China
is opposed to hegemonism and power politics of any kind
and will never seek hegemony for itself. With a population
of 1.2 billion, China will remain a low-income developing
country for a very long time and the steady improvement of
our people’s living standards will remain our objective,
towards the attainment of which no effort will be spared.
Even when China grows stronger, it will continue firmly to
pursue its independent foreign policy of peace and will live
in amity with other nations. A stable and prosperous China
is a positive factor for peace and development in Asia and
the world at large. This is a conclusion that people of
vision around the world have come to share.
The Chinese people have waged heroic and unyielding
struggles to resist external aggression and oppression and to
defend the sovereignty, independence and unity of the
country. There is but one China in the world. The
Government of the People’s Republic of China is the sole
legal Government of China. It is the sole representative of
China at the United Nations, and Taiwan is an inalienable
part of China. The peaceful reunification of the two sides
of the Taiwan Straits represents the unshakable will and
determination of the entire Chinese people, including our
compatriots in Taiwan. Proceeding from this reality, the
Chinese Government has put forward the correct proposal
on peaceful reunification within the framework of the
concept of “one country, two systems” and a series of
realistic and practicable policies and measures. The past
few years have seen a steady expansion and deepening of
exchanges and contacts between the two sides in various
fields. Any attempt to obstruct peaceful reunification and to
split Taiwan from China is doomed to failure. Should
anyone try to do so, he would be lifting a stone only to
drop it on his own toes.
History moves on. Mankind is progressing. In four
years we will usher in a new millennium. The future is full
of promise. Let us join hands and make concerted efforts to
bring about a better world in which there are peace and
cooperation, justice and equality, mutual respect and
common development, a world of universal prosperity and
continuous progress.
Please accept my warm
congratulations, Sir, on your election as President of the
General Assembly at its fiftieth session. At the same time,
I wish to thank your predecessor, Ambassador Essy, for
his successful work.
The United Nations 50 years on — that makes this
session of the General Assembly an event of extra-special
significance. The people of the world have high
expectations. We must take stock, but in so doing we
must, above all, look to the future.
The representatives of 50 nations who assembled in
San Francisco in the year 1945 were intended to be, as
President Truman put it, “the architects of a better world”.
What has become of their blue-print?
Today the family of nations has 185 members.
Millions of people all over the world owe their lives, their
freedom and their health, their jobs and their homes, to
the United Nations and its specialized agencies.
Decolonization has been completed, apartheid has been
overcome, and respect for human rights is no longer an
internal affair. In the field of disarmament a historic
breakthrough has been achieved: in May of this year the
proliferation of nuclear weapons was halted. That
constitutes a big step towards making the world safe for
mankind.
All these are considerable achievements which many
critics of the United Nations have overlooked in this
jubilee year, achievements on which you, in particular,
Mr. Secretary-General, and your staff are to be
congratulated. Indeed, the United Nations, in spite of
some unjustified criticism, can take pride in what it has
done for the cause of peace, freedom and human dignity.
Especially worthy of our gratitude and appreciation
are the more than 68,000 United Nations troops currently
4


serving on missions in all regions of the world. When
servicemen from Asia, Africa or Latin America attend to
the basic needs of refugees in Europe, in the former
Yugoslavia, and keep the beleaguered people from starving,
then that is, I believe, a marvellous indication that the “one
world” is a reality. Lest we forget: nearly 5,000 of those
troops, the Blue Helmets, have been killed or wounded in
the line of duty. The Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel must be put into effect as
soon as possible. This we owe to all those who serve the
United Nations.
As we recap the events of the past year, we also have
to consider the huge problems now confronting the world
Organization. The ability to safeguard peace: that is the
world’s main criterion when judging the United Nations.
And here we have reached a critical point.
Somalia, Rwanda and Bosnia: these countries stand for
disappointment and setbacks as well. However, I should
like to make it very clear that in such cases the culprit is
quickly found, too quickly. Nothing is more convenient
than to point to the alleged inefficiency of the United
Nations. And nothing could be further from the truth.
When it has not been possible to help people, when
United Nations troops have been humiliated in the former
Yugoslavia, it has in nearly every instance not been the
fault of the United Nations. The problems have lain in its
unsatisfactory mandate, in the lack of political will on the
part of Member States, and, unfortunately, in the shortage
of funds. It is we, the Members, who cause the difficulties.
Following the holding of United Nations troops as
hostages, the atrocities in Zepa and Srebrenica, and the
terrible second bloodbath in Sarajevo’s market place, the
community of nations has demonstrated that there is a limit
to the amount of brutality and contempt for international
law it will tolerate. And there has to be a limit.
The resolve of the United Nations and the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) has paid off — not
only for the people of Sarajevo, who for three years have
been starving and freezing and kept under constant fire, but
also for the peace process.
Yesterday, here in New York, the parties to the
conflict had another meeting with the Contact Group, of
which Germany is a member. Another step forward was
achieved on the constitutional issue following the result
achieved in Geneva, and I believe this step to be a decisive
one. For the first time since the conflict began there is a
realistic prospect of a negotiated peace settlement.
But I should like to warn against being over-
euphoric. A lot has still to be done. We shall have to put
one stone on top of another stone in order to finish this
building. This time none of the participants should leave
the conference table until an agreement has been
reached — a peaceful agreement at the negotiating table,
and not an agreement on the basis of military actions.
Anyone who continues to prefer bloodshed, to prefer
military actions, will be taking a great responsibility upon
himself.
From the beginning, Germany has played an active
part in these efforts. We have never taken sides, nor did
we ever want to take sides, against one party; rather, we
have always taken up the cause of the victims, those who
have been tormented and driven from their homes.
To date, the German Government’s humanitarian aid
in the region amounts to more than 1 billion Deutsche
marks. And I should like to stress strongly that we have
no double standards, nor should we have double
standards. In the short time since August, we have
provided more than 6 million marks to help Serbian
refugees from Krajina.
My country has contributed in various ways to all
peace-keeping operations. By sending medical personnel
to Split and deploying Tornado fighters for the first
time — fighters which we have made available in
Piacenze, Italy — in a United Nations peace-keeping
mission, we have also shown that we do not merely talk
about taking on more responsibility, but that we act to do
so.
We will also meet our responsibility when it comes
to implementing the terms of a peace settlement — and
I hope that this settlement will come soon. The
reconstruction of Bosnia’s economy requires a genuinely
international cooperative effort, an effort on the part of
the international community. The European Union — and
Germany, of course, as a member of the European
Union — will play its part.
What lessons can and must we learn from what has
happened in Somalia, Rwanda and Bosnia?
First, the United Nations must confine itself to doing
what is feasible. Its resources are obviously being strained
beyond the limit. It cannot take on every responsibility. It
5


cannot solve all the problems that the world is confronted
with.
Secondly, the extent and duration of the commitment
of the United Nations must be more precise, the political
and military objectives must be clearly defined, and there
must be a realistic and, above all, coherent mandate.
Thirdly, if the world Organization is going to
intervene, then it must act consistently and resolutely. There
must be no repetition of what happened in Rwanda or Zepa
or Srebrenica.
Fourthly, cooperation between the United Nations and
other organizations such as NATO must from the outset be
planned in such a way that maximum speed and, above all,
efficiency are assured.
Fifthly, we believe that the regional organizations must
play a larger role than they have done so far. Not every
problem must go straight to the United Nations. In Europe,
for instance, and in other places of the world too, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) could assume much greater responsibility.
However, we have to enable it to do so.
Still, let there be no illusions. Peace-keeping is not just
a fair-weather exercise. Such missions will always be apt to
create problems for the world Organization.
And, in view of the hundreds of thousands of lives
that have been saved in Somalia and Bosnia, who can argue
with an easy conscience that the United Nations should not
have intervened? And many of these people have already
been forgotten. What is required here is an increased peace-
keeping capacity — constructive help, not destructive
criticism.
And to those who over and over again have called into
question the actions of the United Nations and its peace-
keeping operations, I would like to address the following
question: Is there an alternative? Who could take the place
of the United Nations? Indeed, Europe has not been able to
cope with this tragedy in its own house as well as we all
hoped it would.
But nor should we forget the European Union’s
achievements in the former Yugoslavia. It paved the way
for the Contact Group’s ongoing peace efforts.
To my mind, the conflict in the former Yugoslavia
emphasizes how important and right it was for Western
Europe to embark on a new course after the Second
World War, a course that was directed against nationalism
and against the use of force. For four decades, as a result
of the East-West conflict, not all European nations were
able to follow that route of the European Community,
today’s European Union.
The European Union is now striving to correct that
terrible aberration and bridge the gulfs that separate it
from Central and Eastern Europe. The goal is one Europe,
a Europe in which the old big-Power politics and
hegemonic aspirations can never again take root.
That Europe must have a legitimate place for Russia,
but for Ukraine as well. The European house does not
consist solely of the European Union: it has many rooms.
Neither of these two nations, Russia or Ukraine, should
be left outside. To our Russian and Ukrainian partners
and friends I say: Europe needs your contribution and it
does so also in bringing peace to the former Yugoslavia.
Here their new partnership with the European Union and
NATO must — and, I add, will — prove its value.
Many feared that when the East-West confrontation
disappeared Europe would focus exclusively on its own
affairs. That has not been the case. The European Union
is intensifying its political, economic and cultural
cooperation with the other regions of the world.
In Asia, Africa and Latin America it is already a
model for peace, prosperity and regional integration. In
the United Nations the European Union is the principal
partner for dialogue with the developing countries.
The European Union and Germany have been
particularly active in promoting peace and economic
recovery in the Middle East. The recent agreement on the
West Bank worked out by Yassir Arafat and Shimon
Peres is another important milestone on the road to lasting
peace in that region. I congratulate both sides on their
courage and on their far-sightedness. The United States is
playing a major part in this process in this region. We are
grateful to them for that. Egypt has rendered an important
contribution as an intermediary.
Increasing the peace-keeping capacity of the United
Nations also involves reforming the Security Council.
There is now a global consensus, I believe, that this is
necessary.
The first steps towards reform have already been
taken. More changes have been made to the Council’s
6


methods of work and more transparency achieved in the
past two years than in the whole of the previous four
decades.
Like many other Member States, Germany considers
that the Council should have more permanent and non-
permanent members. The nations of Asia, Africa and Latin
America need wider representation and I think we owe it to
them. They have deserved it. The same applies to several
countries with an important global role.
Germany, with the support of many Member States,
has announced its interest in permanent membership of the
Security Council. Our willingness to assume greater
responsibility, also within this framework, is for us the
logical and consistent extension of our commitment to the
United Nations. This commitment is consistent with the
fundamental principle of our foreign policy, which is to
give priority to multilateral cooperation. We have abided by
that principle in pursuing European integration, and we
believe that that same principle would help us play a useful
role in the Security Council.
The world finds itself faced with many new conflicts
and challenges. It is crucial that in dealing with them we
should focus our efforts more than we have done so far on
conflict prevention. A political solution must remain the
first option. That requires wider use of human rights
observers, improvements in the United Nations early
warning system, the promotion of democratization and the
observation of election processes, as successfully done
recently in Mozambique.
We have provided a list of experienced intermediaries
for the tasks of preventive diplomacy. The example of
Macedonia shows what the preventive deployment of
United Nations Blue Helmets can achieve. I am very happy
about the agreement that has been achieved between Greece
and Macedonia on this extremely important issue.
Preventing fire can save countless lives and in any case it
is cheaper than putting fires out. On my recent visit to
Rwanda I was deeply shocked, in the truest sense of the
word, by the atrocities that have been perpetrated there by
human beings on other human beings. If the United Nations
had intervened at an early stage and resolutely, many lives
could have been saved.
Germany has set up a substantial emergency aid
programme for Rwanda. We are trying in particular to do
something about the awful prison conditions. I myself
visited prisons, in Kigali for example, and I must tell you
that I have never seen anything like that in all my life.
Urgent remedies are needed here to ensure that one
injustice is not followed by another. I travelled to Burundi
too, and I returned deeply saddened and concerned. We
must not make the same mistakes in Burundi.
Disarmament, arms control and confidence-
building — these are some of the main components of
conflict prevention. In recent years we have made the
kind of progress that no one would have believed possible
at the height of the arms race 15 years ago. The task of
buttressing this breakthrough and building on the
achievements has acquired great political significance.
A few weeks ago we commemorated the fiftieth
anniversary of the first atomic bomb explosions over
Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Nuclear weapons must never,
never, be used again. They must be eliminated
completely, as required by article VI of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. That aim was
reaffirmed by the nuclear Powers at the New York
Conference extending the Treaty.
Never has the door to a ban on every kind of
nuclear-test explosion been wider open than today. We
must now direct all our efforts to the achievement of this
goal. The Geneva negotiations must produce such a
comprehensive ban by the autumn of 1996 at the latest.
Anti-personnel mines, too, are “weapons of mass
destruction”. Day in, day out, they are taking a terrible
toll on human life, and many of the victims are women
and, above all, innocent children. If any kind of weapon
must be outlawed, then this one should be.
Eliminating this scourge is a task of the highest
priority, particularly in Nicaragua, Angola, Mozambique,
Afghanistan, Georgia and Cambodia. Germany, together
with its European partners, will continue the initiative in
this direction during this session of the General
Assembly.
At the First Review Conference of the Convention
on certain conventional weapons, which opened in Vienna
the day before yesterday, tougher export restrictions will
have to be agreed on and a strict ban imposed on the use
of anti-personnel mines.
I appeal to all Members of the United Nations: In
the name of humanity, accede to the Convention on
certain conventional weapons as quickly as possible.
7


There are good reasons why the work of the United
Nations began with the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. The United Nations is more than a mere gathering
of sovereign States. It is based on the common belief in the
dignity and worth of every human being, and it is my view
that this must remain the focal point of all political activity.
Universal Children’s Day, celebrated a week ago,
reminded us of the awful fate to which these, the weakest
members of society, are often exposed. The United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) therefore needs the support of
every one of us.
The task of helping those people all over the world
who have been persecuted and deprived of their rights must
remain at the top of the political agenda. Pressure from the
international community, the media, non-governmental
organizations and private citizens must be maintained.
Those who torture people and who treat human rights with
contempt should not be able to sleep peacefully. To this
end, the High Commissioner’s position will have to be
strengthened and the Centre for Human Rights better
equipped. People who commit war crimes must know that
they will be prosecuted under international criminal law.
Hence, Germany strongly urges the establishment of a
permanent international court of justice.
But above all, stronger measures to protect minorities
are called for. “Ethnic cleansing” is no basis for peaceful
coexistence, either in Europe or anywhere else.
More than 27 million people are today on the move.
This is one of the most dramatic events of our time. The
cause is not only hunger and distress, but, in most cases,
unfortunately, ethnic and religious fanaticism. Diversity of
culture and tradition is one of the world’s greatest assets,
and no one should seek to impose a particular model of
society on others.
The fact that there exists a core of human rights which
everyone has to respect is quite a different matter. This was
reaffirmed at the Vienna Conference and should not be
challenged by anyone.
Today the dialogue of cultures is central to the quest
for peace. I have invited leading representatives of the
Islamic world to come to Germany in November to
participate in such a dialogue. My feeling is that we have
to learn to understand each other better. I have also urged
that the Bosnia Contact Group closely coordinate its efforts
with the Islamic Contact Group.
In Germany, two and a half million Muslims are
living harmoniously with the local community. In my
view, it is extremely important that we should develop
cooperation and mutual trust at the international level as
well, and I am speaking as the German Foreign Minister.
Islam cannot be equated with terrorism or
fundamentalism. No new enemy stereotypes must be
allowed to develop. I think that we should be happy that
we have been able to do away with the old ones.
Peace and development are inseparable. Any reform
of the United Nations worthy of that name should
therefore encompass economic and social matters as well.
This fiftieth anniversary is a unique opportunity to create
a modern framework for a new development in
partnership. Work on the Agenda for Development must
therefore be completed as soon as possible.
Apart from improving and simplifying the finance
regime for United Nations development activities, the
chief concern is to coordinate and efficiently implement
the results of the world conferences on the environment,
social problems, population growth and women —
especially the Conference on Women that has just ended
in Beijing.
These are the main interrelated issues of our time as
we pursue the goal of peace. The planet Earth must
remain habitable for future generations as well. Progress
is possible only through equal and fair partnership
between North and South. Germany will continue to exert
every effort to this end.
None of this can be done unless we can come to
grips with the biggest crisis confronting the United
Nations: that of its financial situation. There is no reason
to deny that it has assumed dramatic proportions; one has
to be quite frank about this. This crisis can be overcome
only if all contributors, and especially the main ones,
meet their obligations punctually. Germany is the third
largest contributor to the United Nations, and we pay our
bills. We cannot allow a situation to continue where those
who pay their contributions on time are also burdened
with the arrears of wealthier Members. Unless decisive
action is taken very soon, whole areas of activity could
grind to a halt.
I very much welcome the confirmation by the
American Secretary of State that the United States stands
by the obligations arising from its membership. The
United Nations needs an America that fulfils its
8


leadership role, just as the United States needs a world
Organization capable of, and willing to undertake, reform.
How can we overcome this financial crisis? First, we
must restore the balance between the budgets for peace-
keeping operations and the regular budget of the United
Nations. We cannot allow resources for such operations to
be used up to the point of depletion while at the same time
funds for urgent programmes of economic or social
development are either non-existent or have to be cut back.
Secondly, it is time we found a scale of assessments
that reflects Members’ actual ability to pay. You,
Mr. Secretary-General, have made great efforts to
rationalize the Organization’s work, to ensure budgetary
discipline and to reduce staff. I appeal to all Member States
to give Under-Secretary-General Paschke the support he
needs for his difficult job.
The United Nations is indispensable to the task of
maintaining global order and as a forum and instrument for
international cooperation, today no less than in the era after
the Second World War. No other organization has the same
ability to focus the interests and energies of the world’s
nations, which we believe is necessary.
The United Nations is not “the others”, but us, the
Members. And this Organization is only as strong and as
united as we, its Members, make it.
Hence my appeal today to the Assembly: let us stop
our constant vacillation between euphoria and
disappointment regarding the United Nations. Let us stop
apportioning blame, which leads nowhere. Let us rather
merge vision and pragmatism, solidarity and responsibility
for our own actions into a rational and realistic international
partnership under the aegis of the United Nations. Let us
give this world Organization more clout and make it more
efficient and economical. Yes, we will have to slim down
the United Nations. It has to save money. Let us do these
things in a constructive spirit, together with, and on behalf
of, the United Nations. Let us give the United Nations what
it needs — including paying our dues.
That is what the world community expects of us now,
and rightly so. That is the task facing the family of nations
on the threshold of the new millennium. If the reforms fail,
there will be only losers.
“Hope is the pillar of the world”, they say in South
Africa. Fifty years ago, such a pillar of hope for mankind
was erected in San Francisco. Let us do everything to
ensure that this pillar will continue to support the hopes
of mankind in the next 50 years as well. Germany will
continue to play its part.
Mr. President, I should like to say first how
pleased France is to see you personally presiding over the
work of the General Assembly. Beyond your personal
merits, which I acknowledge with pleasure, your election
underscores the important contribution to the activities of
the Organization of Portugal, a member of the European
Union with which France feels particularly close.
The United Nations is 50 years old. As the Heads of
State and Government of the European Union solemnly
emphasized in Cannes last June, the collective work since
the Second World War has been considerable. The
European Council on that occasion paid tribute to the
major contribution of the United Nations to this collective
work and gave some examples: decolonization, the
maintenance of international peace and security,
disarmament, development, humanitarian aid and, of
course, the protection of human rights.
But the successes of the Organization do not belong
solely to history. This year has shown the vitality of the
United Nations. In Copenhagen, the social dimension of
development, the struggle against exclusion and for
productive employment, which are both major challenges
for all our societies, are now within the domain of our
Organization. In Beijing, the principle of strict equality
between men and women and the right of women to
decide freely about their lives in all matters have finally
been endorsed once and for all as universal values. In
New York, the United Nations has begun preparatory
work towards the establishment of a world criminal court.
This project signals decisive progress for international
humanitarian law.
In Vienna, at this very moment, a conference on the
scourge of inhumane weapons is being held. France is
working in particular to eradicate the scourge of the
spread of anti-personnel mines. In 1993, it decided upon
a unilateral moratorium on the export of these mines.
Now the time has come to go one step farther.
Accordingly, I wish to confirm that France has decided to
adopt a unilateral moratorium on the production of all
categories of anti-personnel mines. It is therefore
12


imposing upon itself a ban on the manufacture of such
weapons. France also pledges from this point on to destroy
gradually its stock of anti-personnel mines. I call on all
Member States to join with us and do the same thing.
This year has also been marked by the success of the
New York Review and Extension Conference of the States
parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. This success was a major step towards
disarmament. France proposes that this coming year should
be a time for further progress in this domain: disarmament
should be our common goal and it should encompass all
aspects of disarmament. France calls upon the States that
have not yet adhered to this Treaty to do so without further
delay. The struggle against the proliferation of nuclear
weapons must be universal. I suggest that all the States
which have already signed this Treaty multiply concerted
efforts to persuade the States which have not yet signed to
join them.
In addition, it is important to follow through on the
new objectives decided by the review Conference of the
Non-Proliferation Treaty in May. Among these, the most
important is the conclusion, no later than 1996, of the
comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty now being negotiated
in Geneva. The President of the French Republic,
Mr. Jacques Chirac, most solemnly reaffirmed on 13 June
1995 France’s determination to achieve this goal and to
ensure that the ban is total. France is pleased that other
nuclear Powers have in turn made the same commitment.
It calls on all nuclear Powers to ensure, together with all
the Member States of the Organization, that this pledge is
duly confirmed in the text of the future treaty and that the
negotiation of the treaty is completed before the autumn of
1996.
I take this opportunity to recall the reasons that led
France to complete the programme of nuclear tests that was
temporarily suspended in 1992. The final series of tests
now under way has no other purpose than to enable us to
sign the treaty banning nuclear tests definitively. There
were some who imagined and others who wished to make
believe that we might reconsider such a decision. This will
not happen. Once again I repeat, this is a final test series,
limited to what is strictly necessary and held under
conditions that have been proved to be harmless. It will
enable us to adhere as early as possible to the future treaty
banning tests definitively.
The disarmament effort must of course be directed
towards reducing existing stockpiles of nuclear weapons.
Substantial progress has been achieved over the past few
years with the destruction of a significant number of
warheads by the two main Powers. I would recall that
France for its part, although it has never contributed to
nuclear overarmament, reduced the nuclear warheads it
had deployed by 15 per cent between 1991 and 1995.
Disarmament, however, does not apply solely to
nuclear weapons. With regard to chemical weapons, I call
upon all the Member States to ratify, or for those which
have not yet done so to adhere to, the 1992 Convention
banning chemical weapons. I regret that France is the
only permanent member of the Security Council that has
ratified this Convention. I hope that the other permanent
members will do so in the coming months.
We must continue the effort to reduce conventional
forces in Europe. France took its full part in the
agreement on conventional force reductions in Europe. It
proposes that the conference which will be held in May
1996 to examine the implementation of this agreement
should focus on compliance by all States with a treaty
that is the keystone of security in Europe. This conference
should also be the occasion for further progress.
There remains the highly sensitive issue of the
Convention banning biological weapons. A serious
verification system has to be set up. I hope that the
working group responsible for this matter in Geneva
quickly establishes such a system.
My country cannot accept the argument put forward
by some that the Organization has failed in its task. We
reject the accusations of passivity and helplessness that
are sometimes made against it. Nevertheless, we cannot
hide the fact that the celebration of the fiftieth anniversary
will not be as joyful and as optimistic as we would have
liked. The image of the Organization in public opinion is
confused, even negative at times. We should try together
and with a clear head to identify the reasons for such a
situation. I am convinced they have nothing to do with
any disaffection with the Organization. Never have the
aspirations of our peoples, especially the youth of the
world, so matched the objectives of the Charter: peace
and disarmament, environmental protection, solidarity
with the very poor, aid to those who suffer, the promotion
of democracy, of liberty and basic human rights, and the
collective struggle against the major scourges of the end
of the century, namely drugs, terrorism and AIDS. In the
last few years, we have witnessed the emergence of a
body of common values on a world scale. These are the
values which the United Nations, like France, upholds;
they are the values of peace.
13


In Europe we built with our neighbours a Community
and then a European Union, and in doing so we turned a
page of a history that had so often led us to confrontation
with each other. Since 1945 Europe has known a period of
unparalleled peace. The European Union is on the verge of
being enlarged again. France warmly welcomes the
forthcoming membership of its neighbours in Central,
Eastern and Mediterranean Europe, and will do everything
to make it a great success. In this way, the unity of our
continent is gradually being organized.
The extension of the boundaries of the European
Union does not lead it to close in on itself. Quite the
contrary, Europe is opening up to nearby neighbours from
the South, as the Euro-Mediterranean Conference in
Barcelona will demonstrate. I should like to emphasize the
fundamental importance of that Conference. Europe also
wants to develop its relations with Asia; in this regard, the
first Europe-Asia Summit, scheduled for March 1996, will
be a clear illustration. Lastly, Europe is deepening its
partnership with Russia as well as enhancing its close ties
with the United States and other partners.
I would like to insist on the fact that the European
Union, under the impetus of the French presidency, has
confirmed its privileged relationship with the African,
Caribbean and Pacific countries in the context of the Lomé
Convention and its special place in North-South relations as
the leading donor of development assistance.
In all those areas, Europe has set the example.
These values of peace are also at work in the Middle
East. France welcomes the important results that have
already been achieved under the peace process. I am
thinking of the Declaration of Principles of 13 September
1993 and the Jordanian-Israeli peace treaty of 26 October
1994. But, above all, I am pleased to see that the principles
agreed upon in Oslo have at last borne fruit with the long-
awaited initialling of the interim agreement this Sunday.
With this, a major turning-point, manifested by the
declaration of principles, has been given concrete form. The
Israeli-Palestinian peace process is now irreversible. I also
hope that the talks between Israel and Syria will soon
resume and that negotiations will start between Israel and
Lebanon so that a just and lasting peace, in accordance with
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and
425 (1978), be guaranteed throughout the region.
As the French President, Mr. Jacques Chirac, stated at
the celebration of the fiftieth anniversary at Geneva, the
world needs the United Nations. And it knows it, as proved
by the increasing number of tasks Member States have
entrusted to the Organization.
Therefore, today’s doubts have another origin. I see
two major causes. First, the United Nations is not shown
sufficient respect, probably because of a lack of political
will and resources. Secondly, the Organization has yet to
demonstrate its ability to reform itself.
Let me speak of respect first. One will never be able
lay sufficient stress on the devastating effect of the sight
of the Blue Berets of the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR) held hostage last spring, in chains and
humiliated in their dignity as men and soldiers. In
Somalia, in Rwanda prior to Operation Turquoise, in the
former Yugoslavia since the outbreak of the conflict, the
soldiers of peace had already found themselves in
situations that the United Nations accepted but that no
Member State would ever have tolerated. It is not
surprising that the image of the Organization has thereby
suffered.
I want to make myself clear. It is not a matter of
questioning the enormous work that has been
accomplished by the United Nations peace-keeping forces
since the end of the cold war: Namibia, Cambodia,
Mozambique, El Salvador and Haiti owe to those forces
progress that would have been impossible without the
United Nations. In Somalia, the United Nations saved
thousands of lives. Its intervention in the countries of the
former Yugoslavia made it possible to prevent the war
from spreading to Macedonia, to contain and dampen the
conflict within central Bosnia and Croatia, and, above all,
to ensure the survival of the populations in certain safe
areas, in Sarajevo in particular, for three years. However,
we have been helpless witnesses to unacceptable
suffering, to shameful operations of so-called “ethnic
cleansing” and to crimes against humanity, which the
international community was unable to prevent and before
which it remained passive.
These tragic events have shown the dangers of
mixing humanitarian and military missions and the risks
incurred when the mission conferred by the United
Nations is lacking in clarity. The Organization needs to
make itself respected when it intervenes in a conflict. Last
spring, France proposed to its partners that the time to
react had come at last. It suggested a change in attitude
and policy, with the formation of a powerfully armed
Rapid Reaction Force. We have since begun, in liaison
with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO),
decisive action to lift the siege of Sarajevo. This has
14


enabled the United Nations to recover the respect of all
parties.
This strengthening of the United Nations capacities for
action has no other objective than to place force at the
service of law. Only a political solution can truly settle the
conflicts brought about by the dissolution of the former
Yugoslavia.
That is why France, together with its partners in the
European Union and within the Contact Group, has taken
a clear position in favour of a settlement based on two
main principles, namely, respect for international law and
the support of the settlement by all the populations
concerned.
Respect for international law entails a rejection of any
solution which, imposed by force, would mean breaking
with the founding principles of our Organization. Bosnia
and Herzegovina is a recognized State and a Member of the
United Nations. Its territorial integrity and sovereignty must
be preserved. There is nothing to discuss or negotiate on
those two matters.
Those who have chosen to break the law and who
have committed the crimes of which we are all aware will
be held responsible individually. The International Criminal
Tribunal, whose creation was proposed by France in 1992,
must fully exert its jurisdiction.
It is also important that all the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina should be able to assert their specific character
through representative entities. Let each entity have direct
management of its own affairs and even be able to maintain
special relations with States whose populations share the
same affinities. All this is legitimate so long as the
management of common interests and the exercise of the
functions of sovereignty are not brought into question.
The agreement on the principles of a settlement
proposed to the protagonists in this conflict by the Contact
Group at Geneva on 8 September of this year and accepted
by their representatives, meets these two criteria. This is
why France has welcomed it, approves it and will support
it. The agreement and subsequent actions represent an
encouraging step, but they are only a first step. The extent
of what remains to be done to end the tragedy of Bosnia
clearly shows the major role that the United Nations will
have to take. In that mission, it can rely on France’s
unwavering support. It must also rely on the support of the
international community. Peace will be the work of all.
The decline in the respect shown the Organization is
evident in another domain that also affects its survival,
namely, its financing. It is not normal for the Secretary-
General of the world’s largest Organization, faced with
the threat of imminent bankruptcy, to have fewer avenues
of recourse in dealing with his debtors than the smallest
of our businesses. It is not acceptable for Member
States — and I am not thinking here only of those that
are experiencing real economic difficulties — to show
such scant respect for the Organization by ignoring the
legal obligations they have freely accepted.
France would like to see the United Nations stronger
and more respected. For this to occur, however, it is also
essential that the Organization be reformed and adapted.
The Secretary-General has spared no effort to open
the way to reform. Under his aegis, significant progress
has been made in the management of the Organization.
All the debates in these past few years were undertaken
at his initiative and have been based on his proposals in
the Agenda for Peace and the Agenda for Development.
France is awaiting with the greatest interest the Agenda
for Democracy, which will complete this triptych in a
field in which the United Nations is called on to take the
leading role. The Organization has need, more than ever,
of its Secretary-General in order to adapt to the demands
of the twenty-first century.
However, it also requires the political will of its
Member States, and this is not sufficiently in evidence. At
the opening of this fiftieth session, my wish is a simple
one. Let us concentrate on the projects that have already
been begun so that they can be completed soon, within
the coming year. France will contribute to this, and I
should like in this respect to submit a few proposals.
One of our main objectives will be to reach an
agreement on enlarging the Security Council. Enlargement
will be successful only if the Council continues in a
lasting way to be representative of the community of
nations through a reasonable increase in the number of its
members.
I should like to reaffirm this today: the Security
Council will have to welcome Germany and Japan as
permanent members, as well as some major States of the
developing world. It would also be desirable, naturally,
for the Council simultaneously to be opened to some new
non-permanent members.
15


The negotiation on the enlargement of the Security
Council now can and should be concluded quickly. Let us
wait no longer. It is equally imperative for the discussion
on United Nations financing to produce results in the next
few months.
But we must be honest with ourselves. This
negotiation depends in part on the response to the United
States’ request for a reduction in its assessed contribution
to the budget for peace-keeping operations. I shall not try
to disguise France’s genuine doubts as to the legitimacy of
this request.
None the less, for the higher interests of the
Organization, my country is ready to examine this question
without any a priori conclusions. It does, however, set
certain imperative conditions. The first condition is that any
new scale must respect fully the real capacity of Member
States to pay. On this point I should like once again to pay
tribute to your country, Mr. President. Portugal decided this
year, of its own accord, to increase its contribution to the
budget for peace-keeping operations. The second condition
is that the agreement must make it possible for the
Organization to start off again on sound bases. All existing
arrears will therefore have to be paid up. The third
condition is that automatic sanctions should be applied to
those who do not pay appropriately in order to prevent a
recurrence of the current crisis.
This is the modest price of enabling the United
Nations to devote itself less nervously to its two principal
missions: peace-keeping and development.
Peace-keeping is the domain of the Security Council,
the only body empowered to decide on the use of force and
to determine the principles and mandate of operations
carried out in the interest of international peace and
security.
We have to learn the lessons of the experiences of
recent years. Aside from traditional peace-keeping, the
United Nations may find itself obliged, in accordance with
the mandate entrusted to it by the Security Council, to
resort to force, within the limitations of its means, in order
to preserve whatever can be preserved. United Nations
military action is often the sole recourse available to the
international community.
It is therefore essential to increase the efficiency of the
United Nations in the service of peace. Among the most
pressing matters, I wish to underline the need to set up
capacities for rapid intervention, in the framework of the
vital process begun two years ago concerning stand-by
forces. I wish also to mention the need to improve the
command of operations and the interest in a still greater
use of preventive diplomacy.
I would like to say a few words about a situation
that is of grave concern to France and that calls
specifically for urgent action in preventive diplomacy on
a large scale. I am referring to the situation in the Great
Lakes region of Africa.
Since the assassination of Burundi’s President,
Mr. Ndadaye, and the unprecedented tragedy that struck
Rwanda, this entire region has been deeply destabilized.
More than 2 million Rwandans and Burundis are living
outside their country in terrible conditions, with the
difficulties that all this entails for the host countries. The
absence of lasting political solutions, the climate of
insecurity and fear that is kept alive by all the extremists,
the suspicion reigning on all sides, the risk of new
tragedies — all this compels us to address together and in
depth the fundamental problems in this area, taking into
account their extreme complexity and the trauma caused
by the genocide that has plunged Rwanda into mourning.
France remains convinced that only a comprehensive
regional approach that is political in character will make
it possible to do this. The principle of a conference on
peace, stability and security in the Great Lakes region is
now accepted, and we welcome the recent appointment of
a Special Representative by the Secretary-General. But
time is of the essence.
This conference must be carefully prepared, with the
active participation of the States most directly involved
and interested in its success, and it must lead to the
establishment of a stability pact for the African Great
Lakes region. There are three elements that I believe to
be essential in this respect: first, the adoption of
principles for the return of the refugees and for national
reconciliation, along with a commitment by States not to
tolerate any activity hostile to their neighbours on their
territory; secondly, the conclusion of bilateral or
multilateral agreements among the States concerned to
enshrine these principles and commitments and to give
them substance; and, finally, the organization of a follow-
up mechanism under the aegis of the Security Council.
France holds the conviction that development
assistance is the second, or perhaps the first, raison d’être
of the United Nations. Here, too, the balance sheet invites
reflection. How can we not have questions about the
16


feebleness of results, the persistence of extreme poverty, or
at times even famine, these crises that erase all prospects of
development and bring indescribable suffering to
populations? How can we not have questions about the
reduced contributions of the world’s richest countries?
These failures have gone onto the record. Now we
must act, reform and take the best advantage of the
experience we have acquired. The institutions of the United
Nations and their network of representatives in the field are
strong points. The development agencies have to refocus
their activity specifically on their objectives. They have to
set real priorities aimed at addressing real needs — in other
words, first and foremost the needs of the least developed
countries.
But it would be shocking if, as I sometimes predict
will happen, reform were boosted for the sole purpose of
reducing still further the contribution of the richest States
in the struggle against human poverty.
France, together with its partners in the European
Union, hopes to bring about, through An Agenda for
Development a mobilization for development on new
foundations. The situation is too disturbing to set the
interests of the States of the North and South in opposition
to each other. We are all bound by a higher duty: the global
struggle against poverty.
If, before this session comes to a close, we are able to
enlarge the Security Council, to place United Nations
financing on solid bases, to give the Organization the
means to intervene rapidly and effectively to maintain peace
and, finally, to modernize the modalities and institutions for
development assistance, we will truly have celebrated the
fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations, above and
beyond all the speech-making, in a fitting manner: by our
actions.
Allow me finally to mention a project that is
particularly dear to me: to re-establish, on the occasion of
this anniversary, the universality of our Organization, which
is reflected in the diversity of cultures and languages
manifested here.
Linguistic pluralism is essential. It reflects the right of
each Member State to understand the others, but also its
duty to make itself understood. A draft resolution on this
subject will be submitted to the Assembly; it will deal with
the use of languages in the Assembly’s deliberations and in
the Secretariat, and I hope it will enshrine the need to retain
sufficient resources to ensure the provisions of translation
and interpretation services. I am convinced that we will
reach a consensus in this regard.
Our Organization has deliberately taken its actions
for the long term. Recent events may obscure
achievements that are nevertheless solid, the results of
collective, patient, courageous work. But the gains are
there. It is up to each of us to make them known and
consolidate them so that the United Nations may continue
to fulfil the indispensable role entrusted to it 50 years
ago.
May I first
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
in this most important year for the United Nations.
It is nearly half a century since the General Assembly
of the United Nations first met, in London. King George VI
told the visiting representatives of 50 countries that no more
important meeting had ever taken place there. The founders
of the United Nations had taken on themselves a heavy
responsibility and a noble work.
Today we must pay tribute to those founders and
their efforts. Earlier models of collective security had
soon crumbled. The League of Nations collapsed after
less than two decades. The United Nations has proved
more durable. Over 50 years it has helped spread peace
in place of war. It has worked to push back hunger and
disease and to advance democracy and human rights.
Without the United Nations we would have a bleaker
world.
I am delighted to add Britain’s voice to these
celebrations at the fiftieth session of the General
Assembly. After five decades it is timely to recall what
the United Nations has achieved. At the start of a new
half-century it is right to weigh the lessons of past
experience.
The United Nations is a means to an end. Its value
lies not simply in the shared principles and ambitions
enshrined in the Charter, but in practical results. Its
successes are real.
The United Nations has been a force for peace.
From Korea in the 1950s to Kuwait in the 1990s, it has
helped check and reverse the tides of aggression. In the
Near East and Cyprus, United Nations troops have
worked for decades to sustain a measure of stability. In
Cambodia the United Nations mounted its most complex
operation ever to rebuild a country shattered by 13 years
of war. In Mozambique United Nations peace-keepers
have helped demobilize 100,000 combatants, allowing
democratic elections and the creation of a unified army.
The United Nations has been a source of relief from
suffering. Since 1951 the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has provided
food, shelter, medicine and education for over 30 million
refugees. United Nations programmes have immunized 80
per cent of the world’s children against disease. United
Nations sanitation and nutrition projects have halved child
mortality in developing countries.
The United Nations has been a motor for democracy
and sustainable development. It has given electoral help
to over 40 countries. Its charters and covenants set
international standards of human rights. It has brokered
agreements to conserve world forests and fish stocks.
9


The United Nations has done good work for five
decades. My country, the United Kingdom, has been at its
heart from the start. From the drafting of the Charter, as the
first host, in London, of the General Assembly and of the
Security Council, we have been a staunch supporter of the
United Nations. From the first stirrings of environmental
concern in the 1960s, to the fight against AIDS since the
1980s, through to management innovation and financial
reform in the 1990s, Britain has been a driving force for the
changing agenda of the United Nations. In 1947 we were
a party to the first case to come before the International
Court of Justice. This year a British judge became the
Court’s first ever woman member.
Even before the end of the cold war, British forces
had served the United Nations cause for decades. For 30
years the United Nations operation in Cyprus has depended
on British troops and logistics. In the last five years British
forces have served in Kuwait, Cambodia, Rwanda, Angola,
Georgia and, of course, Bosnia. Today Britain commits
more troops to United Nations peace-keeping than any other
Member State — with 10,250 out of a total of 69,000.
Near the end of its first half-century, the end of the
cold war opened a new chapter for the United Nations.
After years of super-Power stalemate, it again became
possible to take effective action in the Security Council,
including by authorizing the use of force to reverse
aggression. Almost immediately a rash of ethnically based
regional disputes began to break out, from the former
Yugoslavia in the West to Central Asia in the East.
Early experience brought a sense of exhilaration.
When Saddam Hussein made his foolish miscalculation and
sought to wipe Kuwait off the map, the United Nations was
the means chosen to stop him, and it worked. Talk of a
new world order did not seem empty.
Five years on, the record looks more diffuse. The
international community could do little to halt disintegration
in Somalia or to avert bloody collapse in Rwanda. The wars
of secession in the former Yugoslavia have dragged on for
four years.
But those who speak of United Nations failure are
wrong. The pendulum that swung too far towards euphoria
after the Gulf War has swung too far towards despair. Look
at the facts.
Alongside the torment of Bosnia and Rwanda are the
democratic revolutions that have swept South Africa, South
America and Central and Eastern Europe. We live in a
post-apartheid world, with a Europe of free nations and
the Middle East peace process a reality rather than a
slogan. The United Nations has helped bring about peace
in Namibia, Cambodia, El Salvador, Mozambique and at
last, perhaps, in Angola. Even in Bosnia, the real good
the United Nations has done has been obscured by unreal
expectations. The reality of the past five years is not one
of spreading world disorder, but of painstaking, steady
efforts to build peace.
Compare this record to the grim setting for the first
General Assembly meeting in 1946, when whole regions
lay in ruins after five years of world war. The truth is that
the history of serious attempts at international cooperation
is still quite young. The United Nations is by far its most
successful expression. There is today no one country or
group of countries ready and able to cope with new world
disorder all alone, and since regional instability and
economic dislocation affect all our interests, we need a
strong and effective United Nations.
This is not to deny the need for change. But it is no
good simply blaming the Organization. We, the United
Nations Members, must meet our obligations to help
improve the system. We have done much in recent years.
The United Nations is better able now to plan, mount and
conduct missions. Britain and others have seconded
military officers to New York to develop the planning and
operational capability and funded secondments by other
nations. Last year Britain helped launch a new initiative
on African peace-keeping. That is bearing fruit now, in
United Nations regional training, in closer cooperation
between African countries and the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) Conflict Resolution Mechanism and
in products like the Anglo-French Peace-keeping
Glossary, developed by the Ghanaian Staff College.
The process of reform must continue. The more
seriously the United Nations addresses issues like pre-
planning, logistic support and command and control, the
more confidence troop contributors will have, the more
forces will be put at the disposal of the United Nations
and the more effective the operations will be.
Changing procedures is not enough. We must learn
to be more realistic in what we ask of the United Nations.
That means not setting aspirations we cannot provide the
means to meet. Sometimes a declaratory statement is
useful to put the international community’s views on
record, to underpin a consensus. At other times it may be
better for the Security Council to remain silent than to
issue unrealistic pronouncements.
10


Bosnia and Somalia have shown the limits of peace-
keeping. They offer a clear lesson. The United Nations is
not yet suited to fight wars. Peace enforcement is better
left, perhaps, to a coalition of the willing acting under
United Nations authority. We must not send in the United
Nations to keep a peace which does not exist and then
blame the United Nations for failure, nor send it in
mandated and equipped to keep the peace and then blame
it because it does not enforce the peace.
Whatever the blemishes of recent years, there is
greater scope today for effective international action than
ever before. The United Nations should be the centre-point
of such work. I suggest we should focus greater effort in
future on two areas.
First, preventive action is better than cure. Far better
than containing or extinguishing a fire is stopping it from
igniting. Bosnia is the most tragic example. Today the
prospects for peace look a little stronger. I commend the
efforts of Dick Holbrooke, supported by the Contact Group,
to mediate between the parties, and the agreement reached
in Geneva on 8 September. Many hard choices lie ahead for
all sides before a final settlement is achieved. But we have
made a start. It is vital that all parties seize this chance for
peace. Only political negotiations, not military force, can
secure that.
But the war has dragged on for three and a half years
now. Tens of thousands of people have been killed;
millions more have been made homeless. It will take years
for the wounds inflicted on that country to heal. Certainly
the suffering would have been many times worse without
a United Nations presence. When I was in Sarajevo last
week, the Bosnian Government told me how much it values
the work done by British and other forces to help the
people of Bosnia. But how much better for all these people
if war had been avoided from the start. Perhaps much of
the damage and destruction might have been prevented by
closer international attention to the problems and tensions
arising from the breakup of Yugoslavia in the early 1990s.
We have started to learn that lesson. The early
deployment of a small United Nations force in The Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has helped to stop
conflict from spreading there. Elsewhere the quiet
diplomacy of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe has helped defuse tension in Ukraine and
Albania; has nudged adversaries toward peace talks in
Georgia, Moldova and Chechnya. There are few headlines
for successes that avert fighting and save lives. But the
headlines of war carry a heavy price. Preventive action is
a wiser investment.
Many routes exist. Britain and France have sketched
out one model: to use the skills of diplomats, of soldiers,
of academics and others to defuse tension and promote
dialogue. The presence of aid workers, human rights
monitors, or United Nations envoys can help contain a
brewing crisis; and all credit to the United Nations
representative doing that in Burundi. We strongly support
the efforts of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) to
work with the United Nations in preventive diplomacy
and conflict resolution. The initiative on African peace-
keeping will help.
So many different actors can play a part. The crucial
point is not who acts but when. Early warning of a crisis
and prompt action by the international community are the
real key to avoiding further tragedy of the kind we have
seen in Bosnia.
My second proposal is for a new approach to peace-
building. To provide lasting security requires more than
diplomacy and military force. To build real peace we
must bridge the gap between our humanitarian work and
our long-term development work.
Aid workers have grown used to coping with the
debris of war. In the past five years the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) has given help to millions fleeing conflict:
Rwandans in Tanzania and Zaire, Afghans in Iran and
Pakistan, Liberians in Côte d’Ivoire and in Guinea. But
too often we treat short-term humanitarian needs in
isolation. Huge sums have been spent in humanitarian
efforts in Rwanda, for example. But Rwanda’s long-term
stability depends on rebuilding the structures of society
and on civil rights; helping local communities to help
themselves, in areas from health and housing through to
an effective judiciary.
I suggest that two elements are key to a new
approach.
First of all, we must adopt a longer-term perspective
in tackling immediate crises. Even when a cease-fire is
holding, or elections have taken place, if the framework
of society is shaky, a continued international presence can
offer it stability until a government can cope. An abrupt
end to a mission, by contrast, can be very destabilizing.
In El Salvador, for example, a small human rights team
stayed on after the United Nations troops had left, to
11


provide further advice and monitoring. Peace-keepers
themselves can help begin the work of reconstruction. The
United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) and the aid
agencies have been doing that for over a year in central
Bosnia, underpinning reconciliation between Muslim and
Croat communities by rebuilding roads and hospitals and
schools.
I strongly support the thesis of the Secretary-General’s
recent report: that we must go beyond electoral assistance,
to preparing the social and institutional ground in which
democracy and civil society can put down firm roots. The
task of rebuilding Bosnia could be a model for the future.
Secondly, we need far better coordination in what we
do. If funds are to be gathered and used quickly and
effectively, donors themselves must make a greater effort
to meet their promises of help. Before operations begin, as
planning gets under way, the international financial
institutions must be involved from the start, as they were in
Cambodia. All the actors in the United Nations system must
be working together, military and political, humanitarian
and development, crossing the traditional boundaries
between rival baronies. Such a coalition of interests could
plug the gap we see too often now, until the major
reconstruction programmes can begin.

My proposal is to build on these principles in United
Nations programmes for stabilization and transition. There
are many areas where international expertise can help
restore a society; creating judicial systems; training an
army; developing a finance ministry or a diplomatic service.
To fulfil these needs, we should be prepared to loan our
experts to countries emerging from conflict, as Britain’s
Know-How Fund does for countries in Central and Eastern
Europe emerging from communism. United Nations
programmes for stabilization and transition could be the
greatest contribution we could make to international
security.
The demands on the United Nations have grown
enormously. To meet them the United Nations needs
change at the centre too. I welcome work under way to cut
costs and reduce waste in New York. The whole United
Nations system must learn from that example. We need
better planning and budgeting, an end to fraud and
mismanagement. More subcontracting can help, using non-
governmental organizations, even private companies, for
tasks like mine clearance and logistics in Angola. And there
is still too much duplication between the United Nations
agencies. Rhetoric is not enough. Reform has to be real,
and it has to be soon.
This is not a side issue. It is not a narrow interest.
If we are to do the United Nations work effectively —
peace-keeping, aid or humanitarian — we must use its
resources better. No one, G-7 or G-77, benefits from
waste. Recent experience has shown the United Nations
is in some ways ill-fitted for its tasks; under-powered in
some areas, like peace-keeping and preventive diplomacy;
but, however, still bloated in other parts of the system.
United Nations Members must pay their dues. But the
United Nations must justify those funds, and get the most
from them, by hard decisions on duplication and over-
staffing, and diverting resources to the top priorities.
Britain supports enlargement of the Security Council
to broaden its base without reducing its effectiveness.
Permanent membership is the key issue. Permanent
members of the Security Council must be both willing
and able to make a significant contribution through the
United Nations to international security. That is what the
Security Council is about. That is what it must remain if
it is to be effective. Germany and Japan are playing an
increasing part across the range of United Nations
business, and are among the top three financial
contributors. It is right that they should benefit from an
expansion of the permanent membership, with the wider
rights that entails, but also with the wider responsibilities
to contribute to security and peace-keeping. Broad
geographical balance in an enlarged Council also needs to
be maintained.
But the United Nations system will never work if we
do not fund it properly. The United Nations is on the
verge of financial collapse. It is owed over $3.7 billion in
unpaid contributions. Troop contributors are owed nearly
$1 billion. Last year 39 countries failed to pay at all. The
United Kingdom favours tightening of penalties for non-
payment, including the charging of interest on late
payments. We find unacceptable cross-funding of regular
budget deficits from the peace-keeping budget. Perhaps an
appropriate policy could best be entitled: No
Representation without Taxation!
The financing arrangements must change. Some
members pay too much. Others, like the new economic
giants of the developing world, now pay less than they
should. We need a scale that is simpler and reflects a
country’s real capacity to pay, and without the additional
anomalies and distortions of the present system. Britain
12


and Sweden have put forward ideas. We need progress
soon.
But the problem is not solved by turning the tap off.
This year we have all reaffirmed our support for goals and
work of the United Nations. But empty words will not pay
bills.
The final lesson from the last 50 years may be the
most important: the case for a strong, effective United
Nations.
In conclusion, may I say that the United Nations today
faces a crisis of confidence. United States Congressmen
may be the most vocal sceptics. They are not alone. The air
of optimism, of a fresh start after the cold war, is overtaken
in some quarters by gloom at the instability and
fragmentation around us, and pessimism at our ability to
cope. This despair is dangerous.
Multilateral action is not an add-on to national policy.
It gives wider legitimacy to principles we value, such as
human rights and democracy. It spreads the cost of aims we
share, such as freeing Kuwait from invasion or restoring
democracy in Haiti. It lets us work with others to fight
common threats, such as greenhouse-gas emissions or the
international drug trade.
The price is not high. The bill for all United Nations
peace-keeping, all aid and development work last year, was
slightly over 3.5 per cent of the United States’ defence
budget, or less than the United Kingdom spends on police
and public administration. One day of Operation Desert
Storm cost as much as all that year’s United Nations peace-
keeping. The price of disengagement and disorder would be
greater. Public support is there. Even in the United States,
polls are clear: people support the United Nations, and they
support international peace-keeping. We have a duty to our
electorates to continue the United Nations work.
It is easy to forget the United Nations successes over
50 years. It is easy to turn away from disorder and chaos.
But the world is too small. Crises in distant countries affect
us too; our commerce, our citizens overseas, our
neighbour’s security — ultimately it is our own. It is in our
interest to play what part we can to build a more decent
world. If the United Nations were not here to help do that,
we would have to invent something else.
The experience of five decades offers lessons for the
future. I know the Secretary-General is committed to
change. Getting the United Nations we need for the twenty-
first century requires the support and participation of all
Member States. The United Kingdom has played a full
part in the United Nations for 50 years, and we will
continue to do so.
It gives me great pleasure to
congratulate Mr. Freitas do Amaral on his election as
President of the General Assembly at its fiftieth session,
during which he will guide our discussions on what the
future of the United Nations should be. May I also convey
my thanks to the President of the General Assembly at its
forty-ninth session, Mr. Amara Essy, who, as it were, tilled
the ground which the new President will sow.
A fiftieth anniversary is a climacteric, usually joyous
but not necessarily so. In ancient India, this was around the
time in a man’s life that he would be expected to withdraw
into a forest, to spend the rest of his days in contemplation
of past and future, it being the assessment of our ancestors
that anything a man could usefully do he would have done
by then. No such drastic measures are needed for the
United Nations, not least because it has spent much of its
first 50 years meditating in a concrete jungle. And the
shadow of the woods of Bretton always loom over it. I do
think, however, that as we celebrate, which we should, the
survival of the United Nations, we should judge what it has
done and what it now needs to do. The United Nations
system has had remarkable success in helping to defeat
colonialism and apartheid, on social issues like universal
health care and women’s rights, and in banning, through
global, non-discriminatory treaties, two of the three
weapons of mass destruction. These are considerable
achievements. But a clear pattern emerges from them.
Whenever the United Nations has acted on principle,
responding to the felt needs and priorities of the majority of
its membership, it has done well. When it has pursued
narrow agendas or succumbed to special pleading, it has
not.
If we were setting out tasks for the United Nations
today, what would be the major trends and challenges we
would expect it to address? The first is the international
economy, transformed by global movements of trade,
capital and labour; driven by forces which can break
developing economies; regulated — if they can be at all —
in forums outside the United Nations, which is therefore
marginalized in this most momentous of contemporary
developments. The second is an opening up of political
systems, with democracy the norm of national
governance. The United Nations welcomes this and urges
the recalcitrant to change, but is itself sapped by
undemocratic systems and institutions. The third is the
scourge of war increasingly replaced by the scourge of
terrorism, which, for the countries that sponsor it, is war
by other means. The United Nations, set up to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war, ignores
it, as the League of Nations, to its fatal peril, ignored the
threat of xenophobia.
These are complex and titanic forces. We, therefore,
cannot accept, either as a statement of fact or as a basis
of policy, the view that all this meant was that the days
of absolute sovereignty were over. Sovereignty has never
been absolute. Most Members of the United Nations
joined immediately after emerging from colonial rule,
with their economies destroyed, and dependent on foreign
languages for communication, on imperial capitals for
support and on donors for subsistence. This is hardly the
stuff on which absolute sovereignty is built. It was, in
fact, one of the great virtues of the United Nations that it
gave fledgling nations space to exercise the sovereignty
so cruelly circumscribed elsewhere. Therefore, the United
Nations should not claim a unilateral right to intervene in
the affairs of its Members. Sovereignty can be diluted
only with the voluntary consent of nation States accepting
obligations that are non-discriminatory or, in exceptional
circumstances, where State authority has collapsed. Far
from enfeebling sovereignty, it is the task of the United
Nations to nurture it in a world that has made the
powerful more dominant and the weak increasingly
powerless. We must never forget that this Assembly is an
assembly of our nations united. The United Nations rests
on the commitment to it of sovereign nations.
There is clearly an enormous need for global action
to deal with complex issues which have no territorial
limits or borders. This is the task of the United Nations.
Developing countries which represent the majority of the
United Nations, obviously want it to focus on the issues
of most pressing concern to them. That is not only fair:
that would be the democratic thing to do. For us, the
single most important task is development, and we expect
this to be the highest priority on the international agenda,
as it is on our domestic agendas. Sadly, it is not. The
Agenda for Development looks lamentably like an
appendix. Can we, at this session, pledge ourselves to
honour the commitments, freely negotiated but never
implemented, which will make development possible in
13


the South and make the world, for all of us, a better and
more peaceful place?
It is just as important for the United Nations to have
a say in the decisions that guide the international economy.
Chapter IX of the Charter gave it the task to promote
higher standards of living, solutions of international
economic, social, health and related problems, and universal
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms. Like
the United Nations, the World Trade Organization gives
equal weight to the votes of all its members, but it would
be a pity if the World Trade Organization cut even the
tenuous links between the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade (GATT) and the United Nations and, decided
instead that global economic policies would in the future be
coordinated between it, the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund, where the system of weighted
voting makes the voice of the developing countries
irrelevant. At the same time, several studies commissioned
to coincide with this anniversary claim that the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD)
no longer has a useful purpose. This can either mean that
the problems UNCTAD addresses — development
strategies, poverty alleviation, resource transfers and debt,
and the transfer of technology — have been settled, or are
now irrelevant. Neither is true. These continue to be
burning issues for developing countries, and if the United
Nations chooses to ignore them it will not serve the needs
of its Member States.
The United Nations must assume its Charter
responsibility to supervise and coordinate global economic
policies. In the World Trade Organization efforts have been
made to link trade to environment and labour standards.
The World Bank, in its World Development Report 1995,
warns about
“the proliferation of protectionist demands, many of
them under the guise of demands for fair trade and a
level playing field”.
If, indeed, there is a genuine interest in protecting the
environment and the interests of labour in developing
countries, why are the United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP) and the International Labour
Organization (ILO) being sidelined in this exercise? The
answer must be that there is no provision in these bodies
for the coercive, retaliatory action which would be available
under the sanctions regime of the World Trade
Organization.
However, the industrialized countries say that
environmental and labour standards must be harmonized
upwards, because otherwise transnational corporations
would go where these standards were the lowest. This of
course implies that transnational corporations have an
appalling and exploitative standard of behaviour, but
when, in the 1970s and 1980s, the United Nations tried to
develop a code of conduct for transnational corporations,
we were told that transnational corporations were models
of virtue. How do these two views cohere?
The problem posed by these global economic forces
is enormous. Trade is the oxygen of our economies, but
cross-border trade between transnational corporations
constitutes one third of world trade and almost 15 per
cent of gross global product. No developing country, or
group of developing countries, can match this commercial
strength, augmented, of course, by the enormous weight
of financial flows, which can make or break a country’s
financial structure.
The third element in the trinity of mobility in the
international economy is migration. At present 125
million people live outside their countries, but more than
half of them move between developing countries; this is
not, therefore, as it has so often been misrepresented, only
a problem for the developed world. It is disturbing,
however, that those who insist on unfettered and truly
global flows of capital and trade also insist on restrictions
being placed on the movement of labour. Economic
arguments are given to justify this, but there are also
claims that large migrations disturb the way a society
thinks of itself as a unified cultural or ethnic entity.
The President returned to the Chair.
It would be honest to recognize these fears as racist.
India is a model of how these fears can be overcome. On
the one hand, over the past decade several million illegal
immigrants have come into India. We know to our cost
the political, economic and social strain this causes.
However, we do not accept a racial basis for
discriminating against legal migrants. We do not accept
that nationhood is based on race, any more than it is
based on religion or any other exclusive attribute. The
waves of migration that have washed over India have
made us a multi-ethnic society; we have been culturally
enriched, not impoverished. We urge the international
community not to let the forces of xenophobia rise again.
Sovereignty has never been threatened by fresh blood
freely welcomed; it has been threatened by the forces of
racist intolerance.
14


This brings me naturally to the other force that now
threatens the sovereignty of so many nations. Terrorism is
the black plague of our times and it has been made more
dangerous by the mystique with which the media has
endowed it. It is argued sometimes that one man’s freedom
fighter is another man’s terrorist. This is specious logic. In
1922 Mahatma Gandhi suspended for several years the
freedom struggle in India because, in an incident in the
small village of Chauri Chaura, a mob burnt some
policemen to death. In Gandhi’s view, the view of the
ultimate freedom-fighter, the means must sanctify the ends.
What ends could possibly justify the barbarism of
taking an innocent foreigner in India hostage and beheading
him in cold blood? Foreign mercenaries did this to the
Norwegian Hans Christian Ostro last month. An empire of
terror is being built up with arms and money sent across
borders; its foot soldiers are drawn from the bigoted, its
leadership from ruthless, unprincipled men and, regrettably,
some women.
At every summit in recent years, whether of the non-
aligned, the Group of Seven, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), or the Commonwealth,
Heads of State and Government have reaffirmed their
resolve to defeat all forms of terrorism. However, in the
United Nations, where we are all represented, we have been
unable to speak in such forthright terms. We must do so at
this fiftieth anniversary. To appease terrorism now will be
as dangerous as appeasing xenophobia was in the 1930s and
ultimately as destructive of both peace and democracy,
because terrorism, as I said earlier, is war by other means.
Whether it tries to violate the territorial integrity of a
country, as in India, in our State of Jammu and Kashmir, or
to unseat duly constituted Governments, as in Afghanistan,
the acts of States sponsoring terrorism are, in fact, acts of
war.
Democracies, as open societies, are particularly
vulnerable to terrorism. The United Nations welcomes the
global trend that has made democracy the norm of
governance, but has done nothing to defend democracies
from extremist and other threats. Instead, it comforts itself
with the mantras that democracy is development, and
democracies do not wage war. These neatly package all the
world’s problems and absolve the United Nations of any
further responsibility: establish democracy everywhere and,
automatically, development and peace will follow.
Both propositions are historically untrue. Democracies
that developed in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries
either suppressed democratic rights until they became rich,
or grew rich on the ruthless exploitation of colonies.
When they shed their empires after the Second World
War democracy became development in Europe only in
the uniquely generous embrace of the Marshall Plan. The
myth that democracies do not wage war is destroyed by
the history of colonial rule and its wars, leading to the
conflagration of the First World War. The United Nations
should, therefore, take these propositions as objectives,
not as givens. Democracy should lead to development;
democracies should be peaceful.
I want to touch briefly upon two other global issues
which affect our lives — disarmament and human rights.
After Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Mahatma Gandhi said that
the use of the atom bomb for the wholesale destruction of
men, women and children was the most diabolical use of
science. We were therefore appalled that, instead of
stepping back from the road to nuclear ruin, the nuclear-
weapon States sped faster and faster down it. As they
accelerated, India tried unsuccessfully to put on the
brakes. In 1954 we called for an end to nuclear testing. In
1965 we proposed principles for a non-proliferation
treaty. In 1982 we called for a convention to ban the use
of nuclear weapons and for an end to the production of
fissile material for nuclear weapons. In 1988 we proposed
to the United Nations a comprehensive action plan for a
world free of nuclear weapons.
Our goal — shared, I believe by most of us here —
is a world from which nuclear weapons have been
eliminated. The nuclear-weapon States claim to share this
goal, but their present objective is to retain nuclear
weapons while making sure others do not get them.
The logic of this is hard to understand. It cannot be
argued that the security of a few countries depends on
their having nuclear weapons and that that of the rest
depends on their not having them. What makes the NPT
such a pernicious document is that it legitimizes this
illogicality, and now that it has been made permanent it
has made the possession of nuclear weapons by the
nuclear-weapon States immutable and has made the goal
of global nuclear disarmament that much more difficult.
It is useful to recall that when India and other
developing countries proposed the NPT, a global balance
of responsibilities was envisaged. Those who did not have
nuclear weapons would not seek to acquire them; those
who had them would not try either to refine or develop
them or to increase their arsenals. This balance was never
honoured, with the result that 25 years after the signing
of the NPT the world is a much more dangerous place,
15


made so by the proliferation of nuclear weapons in the
arsenals of the nuclear-weapon States.
I recall this background because two years ago the
international community at last agreed to negotiate a
comprehensive test-ban treaty. We are glad that negotiations
are in progress, but we also note that nuclear-weapon States
agreed to a comprehensive test-ban treaty only after
acquiring the know-how to develop and refine their arsenals
without the need for tests. In our view, the comprehensive
test-ban treaty must be an integral step in the process of
nuclear disarmament. Developing new warheads or refining
existing ones after a comprehensive test-ban treaty is in
place, using innovative technologies, would be as contrary
to the spirit of the comprehensive test-ban treaty as the
NPT is to the spirit of non-proliferation. The comprehensive
test-ban treaty must contain a commitment binding on the
international community, especially the nuclear-weapon
States, to take further measures within an agreed
time-frame towards the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free
world.
The existence of nuclear weapons poses a threat to
peace and security. Only global nuclear disarmament can
guarantee that there will never be a nuclear war. Therefore,
despite the unfortunate legitimization of nuclear weapons
through the indefinite extension of the NPT, India will
continue to work with like-minded countries for the early
elimination of all nuclear weapons. We hope that at this
session the Assembly will finalize dates for the fourth
United Nations special session on disarmament, in 1997.
Human rights have always been a preoccupation of the
United Nations, but their protection and promotion of such
rights in each country is the primary responsibility of the
government. The universality and interdependence of all
human rights are also beyond question. That is precisely
why the United Nations system cannot promote and protect
human rights by a unilateral prioritization of individual
freedoms or a proliferation of intrusive mechanisms, or by
diverting funds from development activities to human rights
activities. The priorities of nations will differ. The United
Nations must balance the promotion of all human rights —
civil, cultural, economic, political and social — preserve
and propagate the values of every society and promote
tolerance for diversity and cross-cultural interaction.
Politicizing the human-rights agenda and using it to target
countries is undesirable.
The United Nations will become responsive to these
global issues and effective and efficient only if it also
becomes more democratic in its functioning. Developing
countries find it hard to identify with the agendas and
priorities of the United Nations; they feel that it now
represents the privilege of a few rather than the interests
of the many. If the majority of its Members become
disenchanted with it, what role can the United Nations
effectively play? For the United Nations to be more
effective, the General Assembly must be given new life
and breathe that life into the other bodies of the system.
The legitimacy and effectiveness of the Security Council
must be enhanced. An expansion of both permanent and
non-permanent members is a must if the Council is to
become a truly representative body acting on behalf of the
Members of the United Nations for the maintenance of
peace and security.
The members of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries have put forward a comprehensive proposal for
the reform and restructuring of the Security Council. India
believes that, to truly reflect the expanded membership of
the United Nations, developing countries must be included
as permanent members. New permanent members should
be chosen not arbitrarily, but on objective criteria. In the
League of Nations it was argued that one country had a
special right of entry into the Supreme Council. When
that was forced through, one or two of the other aspirants
left the League, starting its decline. We should not repeat
that tragedy. On objective criteria, some countries will
clearly qualify for permanent membership. We believe
India will be among them.
The United Nations has in recent years devoted itself
almost exclusively to peace-keeping, which is important,
but not the central issue of our times. It is judged,
naturally, by its record in these operations. There have
been successes and failures, and both provide the reason
and the need for introspection. India believes that United
Nations peace-keeping operations must be based on the
principles evolved over the last 50 years. Operations
guided by these principles have usually done well. Where
these have been abandoned, failure has been common.
Over the past year this truth has gained broad acceptance,
and the Special Committee on Peace-Keeping Operations
is now trying to collate these principles. It would be
desirable for the General Assembly at this fiftieth session
to agree on them. India will contribute to this work.
India has consistently supported the peace-keeping
activities of the United Nations. Indian troops have
participated in all major peace-keeping operations, ranging
from the Congo to Cambodia, Somalia and Mozambique.
We are currently participating in United Nations
peace-keeping operations in Rwanda, Angola, Haiti,
16


Liberia and Kuwait. We have also offered a brigade of
troops to the United Nations stand-by arrangement. India
will continue to contribute to United Nations efforts to
maintain international peace and security.
If the United Nations is to become a leading player on
the world scene, it must be given the means needed to do
the job we entrust to it. Clearly, setting out on a second 50
years with a crippling financial crisis is not the best way to
do so. In India we make considerable efforts to pay our
contributions promptly and in full. We believe that all
Members must pay their assessed contributions in full and
on time. Further, those in arrears must announce a schedule
for settlement. There can be no progress in the on-going
efforts for financial reform unless this is done.
The fiftieth session of the General Assembly is a
historic one. It is our responsibility to rejuvenate the United
Nations, give it the tasks we want it to do, and the means
with which to do them. We set up the United Nations
because we felt that all of us stood to gain from it. In the
dark days of the cold war and in the friction between North
and South, we seem to have lost this vision.
Since the inception of the United Nations, India has
been committed to the principles and objectives of the
Charter. In the last five decades we have played an
important role in shaping the United Nations agenda, taking
the lead on the crucial issues of decolonization,
disarmament, human rights and environment, among others.
On this historic occasion we pledge our continuing
commitment to the United Nations efforts to chart a new
course for the collective benefit of all humanity. As we
attempt to do so, I am reminded of Jawaharlal Nehru’s
speech to the General Assembly in November 1948, in
Paris. He said:
“The objectives are clear; your aim is clear; and yet,
in looking at that aim, we lose ourselves often, if I
may venture to say so, in smaller matters and forget
the main objective that we were looking at. Sometimes
it seems that the objective itself gets a little clouded”.
(Plenary Verbatim Records, Third Session, General
Assembly, 154th meeting, p. 16)
We must ensure that we set aside smaller matters, that
we do not allow the objective to get clouded and that we
move forward together in harmony and for the benefit of all
the people of the world.
I should like to congratulate Mr.
Freitas do Amaral on his election to the presidency of the
General Assembly. We are glad that a representative of
Portugal, a nation for which Israel has high regard, was
elected to that distinguished post.
I would like to express to the Secretary-General, Mr.
Boutros Boutros-Ghali, a man of our region and a man of
peace, our deepest appreciation for his contribution to world
peace in general and to the Middle East peace in particular.
Tomorrow, the Jewish people will pray on the day of
Yom Ha-Kippurim:
(spoke in Hebrew; English text furnished by the delegation)
“In the Book of Life: blessings, peace, a good
livelihood, good decrees, salvation and consolation.
May you be remembered and inscribed.”
(spoke in English)
We pray for all humanity, for the whole world.
For us, the United Nations is not just a place of prayer
and surely not a platform for speeches. We come here to
state our convictions and to announce our commitments. In
our address in 1987, I stated on behalf of the State of
Israel:
“We have found President Mubarak of Egypt to
be a builder of a better life for his people and of
bridges for a comprehensive peace in the region.”
(Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-
second Session, Plenary Meetings, 17th meeting,
p. 23-25)
Today, under the leadership of President Mubarak,
Egypt is becoming a centre for regional development on the
way to hosting the first regional bank of development.
In the same address, we stated:
“An international conference is the door to direct
negotiations. Once convened it should lead
immediately to face-to-face bilateral negotiations.”
(Ibid., p. 26)
On 30 October, 1991, the Madrid Conference took place.
In 1992, again we declared:
“The opportunity to select, through democratic
political elections, the Palestinian administrative
council will enable the Palestinian people to exercise
a double measure of freedom: the freedom to govern
their own lives and to do so ... democratically.”
(Ibid., Forty-seventh Session, Plenary Meetings,
20th meeting, p. 48)
Last week, we achieved what we promised.
Lastly, in 1993, we declared again from this rostrum:
“Geographically speaking, we live side by side
with the Jordanian Kingdom, and what is so obvious
geographically must become clear politically [so
that] we can offer the people of both sides of the
river full peace, that the Dead Sea can become a
spring of new life.” (Ibid., Forty-eighth Session,
Plenary Meetings, 6th meeting, p. 22)
In October 1994, just one year later, Jordan and Israel
signed a peace treaty.
Last year, we said here:
“All countries of the Middle East face a choice:
to remain politically divided and economically
stagnant or to become economically advanced and
politically just.
“... We shall try to establish instruments for
development: a regional bank, channels for private
investment and a framework for regional planning.”
(Ibid., Forty-ninth Session, Plenary Meetings,
10th meeting, p. 16)
In October 1994, the first Middle East-North African
economic summit was held in Casablanca under the
splendid presidency of His Majesty King Hassan II. At
the end of this month, a second summit will be held in
Amman under the auspices of His Majesty King Hussein.
At the end of November, the first ground-breaking Euro-
Mediterranean conference will be held in Barcelona.
Three years, five promises: all of them fulfilled. I
would like to use this occasion to turn to the Syrians and
to turn to the Lebanese and ask them to stop hesitating,
to stop wandering. They have to look at this record and
come in and follow up. The President of Syria has said
that from experience he has learned that only through
military negotiations and making security the major
agenda item can one achieve peace. Sorry: Experience has
4


shown that through negotiation on all levels, embracing all
issues without timidity, without fatigue, we can achieve
peace. If leaders meet and are not successful at the first
meeting, they will have another meeting. How can it be
wrong for them to work day and night, ceaselessly, with
new ideas and new approaches? They are not wasting the
leaders’ time; they are wasting the time of the people —
their fortunes, their happiness, opportunities for the younger
generation.
We also tell all the countries of the Middle East, not
that we want to have a new Middle East, but that we want
the Middle East to join in a new age — for the good of
their people, not for the good of Israel. Israel is in good
shape because we are no longer living in a world where
there are empires of power and colonies of poverty. Poverty
and oppression are home-made, not imposed by others. The
choice is before every country to become free and
prosperous and democratic, like so many nations have done
in a relatively short time in Asia, Latin America and in
some countries of Africa. It is their choice, their
opportunity not just to build a different world but to
introduce the new world to their own people.
For us, the United States is not an empire of power.
We are not afraid of the United States. For us, the United
States is an empire of peace. We need the United States.
For us, Russia is going through a process of change. Russia
will remain great but will become something different. For
us, we welcome the European contribution to other
countries east and south of them and the convening of the
Barcelona conference to offer the Mediterranean peoples
funds and experience to build a new life. We are glad that
Japan is expanding its economic horizons and understanding
and contributing so that other nations can do so. And we
hope that other well-to-do countries in the Middle East,
including Arab countries, will help the needy parts of our
own region.
May I say that in my best judgement the greatest
danger is a combination of high technology and deep
hatred, of modern instruments and feudalistic views, and
the greatest hope for all of us is a double effort to respect
human values and modern education.
Israel itself is in good shape. We are strong militarily:
I do not deny it. We have an excellent economy — an
economy of brains, not of material resources. We have
absorbed a very large immigration of white and black Jews,
white Jews from Russia and black Jews from Ethiopia, and
nobody can understand what put Israel in such a relatively
good position.
What brought this about is, first of all, the return to
the moral choice. By the end of this year — at the latest
at the beginning of next year — not one Palestinian will
remain under our control. For the first time in the history
of the Palestinian people, they are educating their children
without intervention by us or anybody else. Nobody
forces us to do so. We are not weak. We are not poor.
We are not under pressure. We have had to take serious
risks because terror still continues. The Arab boycott is
still intact.
In our own country there is strong opposition to
what we are doing. We have had to spend a great part of
our budget to make peace — and yet, despite all this, we
decided to make a moral choice: not to dominate another
people. We stated in this Assembly that that was our
intention. Now we have done it and even politically, as
difficult as it may be at home — because, as a party, we
may win historically but we may also lose politically —
but then, winning peace is in our eyes more important
than winning elections. Why should you be elected if you
do not use the mandate of the people to change the course
of your history in a reasoned, moral way?
We believe that the strength of ethical judgement is
as important as military exercises or triumphs. We gave
up land and produced instead an economy of brains.
Today Israel is making out of its brains more than some
other countries in our vicinity are making out of oil.
And what we actually expect from the Palestinians
is for them to become democratic, to be prosperous, to
fight violence and terror, and we are giving our
neighbours a simple message: What we can do,
everybody can do.
For many years there was a legend that only the
North, which is white and wealthy and permanent, is a
success story, whereas the South is condemned to
backwardness, to poverty, to lagging behind. What has
happened in Asia, where the most vibrant economic
endeavours are taking place today, and what is happening
in Latin America show that the economy has nothing to
do with geographical location or the colour of the skin.
Make the right choice: serve your people and create a
new future.
What we are offering to anyone who is interested is
our experience — open, in a comradely way. We do not
want to dominate anybody and certainly not anybody’s
economy. We did not give up the domination of people
to gain domination of markets. And we are suggesting to
5


our neighbours — and we are happy that they have
accepted — is that the new frontiers — say, between
Jordan and Israel — will not be frontiers of mines and
hostile fences, but an occasion for joint ventures.
The whole rift of Africa, the whole valley which is a
desert that separates the Jordanians and us will become,
with God’s help, a source for work, for development. We
will build hotels and schools and desalination plants and
parks, and people will be free to move from one side to the
other, competing without hating, cooperating without
dominating.
We want to do the same about the dividing line
between us and the Palestinians: we want to build alongside
the line on the West Bank and Gaza eight industrial parks
so that the Palestinians will not have to cross the border
and go through Israel’s checkpoints: instead, work will
come to them, and together we shall invest and together we
shall develop.
A better economy is the best guarantee of peace.
Actually, there cannot be economic cooperation without
political understanding. Recently, while we were negotiating
we created three zones of security sensibility on the West
Bank — zone A, zone B and zone C. Then we turned to
water and electricity and we asked the water and the
current to submit to our political wisdom, but the electricity
and the water people said that they did not distinguish
between A, B and C. Water flows according to nature and
not according to artificial agreements, and electric current
does not stop at A or B or C. They serve everybody.
Today in the Middle East as elsewhere, the distinction
is no longer ideological or religious or national. There is
just one distinction between an old, poor, backward
economy and a new age where economies are based on
technology and science and where the natural resource is
schools for the children and not the mines of the Gulf.
Everybody can postpone the choice but nobody can escape
it.
Our aim is to have peace so as to serve our people; to
have education so as to equip our children to take
advantage of the new age, to be equal to others and to
compete with other children. It cannot remain a peace
between leaders: it must become a peace for the people,
now and in the future.
I started by showing what has happened in three or
four short years. It is a revolution. It is a beginning. We
should not stop in the middle. Let everybody pray to the
Lord in the language he is used to. Let everybody respect
his own tradition, his own heritage. Let everybody respect
the special experience of a people, of a nation. But let all
of us give up unnecessary hatred, untold suspicion. Let us
give up barricading ourselves behind old dogmas and
terrible prejudices. Let us help the people and the future.
Then the 50 years of the United Nations will offer not
just 50 years without war but the coming 50 years with
peace and prosperity.
May I first take this
occasion to congratulate Ambassador Diogo Freitas do
Amaral of Portugal on his election to the presidency of
the Assembly in this important fiftieth anniversary year.
I should also like to offer a special welcome to
Palau as the one hundred eighty-fifth Member. Palau’s
accession does signal honour to us as a fellow Pacific
State.
Here today I want to talk about making our global
neighbourhood a safer place for all of us; the progress
that has been made in the years since the end of the cold
war, and what still needs to be done. Memories are short;
it is hard to recall the degree of mutual suspicion that
coloured global politics just a few years ago.
We have made great strides in recent times. The
world community has achieved much in its efforts to
make the world safer, and more stable. But we need to
move on to reinforce our achievements in controlling,
reducing and abolishing the horrific weapons of mass
destruction. We have yet to see the dividend we all
expected to flow from the end of the cold war.
The transition to a post-cold-war world is not easy.
We are painfully aware of that. In recent years though,
we have been encouraged to believe that a new world
order was achievable. One of the reasons for this hope,
this optimism, was that the nuclear scourge had receded.
For the first time in 50 years nuclear Powers were
committed to build down rather than to build up, to
decommission and destroy rather than to commission and
construct.
However, recent events have cast a cloud over that
brief period of optimism. New Zealand does not believe
18


that continued nuclear testing, wherever it takes place,
contributes to a safer world. On the contrary, nuclear
testing sends the wrong message to States which do possess
or which aspire to the possession of nuclear weapons. It
also tells them that the development of these weapons is
still acceptable.
The nuclear tests which have taken place since the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons was
extended have disturbed the delicate balance achieved at
that Conference. New Zealand believed then, and continues
to believe, that indefinite extension was the right option.
The world needs a strong non-proliferation regime, one that
cannot be called into question by changing global
circumstances. But the Conference went further than that,
the vast majority of participants making it very clear that
they were against nuclear testing. They also wanted to
move towards the nuclear-free world envisaged in article VI
of the Treaty. The cavalier disregard, and dismissal of the
views of the many, has led to considerable disillusionment.
It will take a long time to restore the trust that had been
there.
New Zealand and the rest of the South Pacific region
have long stood tall and proud in opposition to nuclear
weapons and their testing. We abhor testing wherever it
occurs. But the decision to resume testing in what we see
as our home region has particularly angered the people of
New Zealand. The leaders of the South Pacific Forum
nations expressed their outrage at their meeting just two
weeks ago. They were able to recall the painful memories
in the region, going back to atmospheric testing conducted
between 25 and 50 years ago.
The South Pacific has not been alone in its opposition
to nuclear testing. Governments, parliamentarians and
peoples from every region of the world have spoken up in
anger, alarm and dismay. The two Governments which are
continuing to test nuclear weapons must heed the voice of
the international community. They are dancing to a tune no
one wants to hear.
In these circumstances, New Zealand, along with a
representative group of like-minded States, will submit an
appropriate draft resolution to the First Committee of this
Assembly.
Testing is a backward step, and I condemn it. It is not
too late. All that China and France need to do is listen to
international opinion and announce that their testing
programmes have ceased.
I want to welcome the commitment by three of the
nuclear-weapon States — France, the United Kingdom
and the United States — to a genuine ban on nuclear
testing: a prohibition on any nuclear explosions, no matter
how small. This is what we have always called for: a
comprehensive ban — where the word “comprehensive”
means just that. We are pleased that it is attracting serious
support.
New Zealand calls on the two nuclear-weapon States
that have not yet indicated full support for this approach
to do so quickly. Time is short. The deadline for the
negotiations is 1996, and the international community is
holding the Conference on Disarmament accountable for
meeting that deadline and producing a treaty that is
genuinely comprehensive in scope.
In this regard, the General Assembly has become
increasingly concerned about the lack of accountability in
the Conference on Disarmament. Limited and
unrepresentative membership has been a large part of the
problem. Enlargement is long overdue. New Zealand
welcomes the progress made in recent weeks in Geneva,
and we express our gratitude to Morocco for its efforts in
this regard.
However, the real test will be whether by the time
we meet here again next year the new members will have
been able to take their seats. For the moment, the
outcome is still not satisfactory. I recall that democratic
representation was once at the heart of a tea party in
Boston. Let us hope that there will not be a tea party in
New York in 1996 on membership of the Conference on
Disarmament.
I also urge the members of the Conference on
Disarmament to look beyond the conclusion of a
comprehensive test-ban treaty. New Zealand wants to see
an international agreement banning the production of
fissile material for nuclear weapons. That would be
another important step towards negotiations on the total
elimination of nuclear weapons. We urge the Conference
on Disarmament to resolve its procedural differences and
get the negotiations under way.
I should add that at the Review and Extension
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons we raised the idea of
negotiating an agreement to ban the future production of
nuclear weapons. That could take us a step closer to
eliminating the nuclear threat.
19


But it is also important to address the issues relating
to conventional weapons.
I wish, first, to address the issue of land-mines. I want
to congratulate the Secretary-General and his staff for the
way they have picked up this issue and raised public
awareness around the world. The Conference organized in
Geneva this year was most timely — but more is needed.
Both financial and technical resources need to be made
available to help dispose of the millions of treacherous life-
and livelihood-destroying mines that have already been laid.
I pledge New Zealand’s ongoing assistance in this work.
Of course, disposal alone is not the answer. Urgent
progress needs to be made to deal with these hideous
weapons, which go on claiming the lives of innocent
people — farmers, their children, shopkeepers, collectors of
wood, carriers of water — long after conflicts have ceased.
I ask all the participants at the Conference which opened
this week in Vienna, which has as its main aim the revision
of international law on land-mines, to work together to
achieve the tightest possible restrictions on these totally
indiscriminate weapons. I want to work to eliminate them
entirely from the world’s armouries.
This leads one to the broader questions of arms
transfers. We are profoundly disturbed at the unnecessary
and irrational increase in arms transfers. At a time when,
globally, resources are desperately needed for development,
for the environment, for health, why is it that even modest
measures, such as enhancing the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms are still being resisted?
Neither peace nor development is advanced if States
put increasingly scarce economic resources into the defence
sectors of their economies. Far too much of the global
economic capacity is going into armaments when the
citizens of the world desperately need better health, better
education and a better future for their children.
The widespread availability of conventional arms and
the resurgence of ethnic nationalism have, together,
produced a very dangerous cocktail, which poses a major
threat to stability in the post-cold-war era. The need for
Member States to maintain a collective approach in
addressing these challenges has never been greater.
Events in the former Yugoslavia over the past year
have presented an enormous challenge to the international
community. New Zealand fully supported the firm response
made by this Organization and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization to the murderous shelling of Sarajevo late in
August. The diplomatic efforts now under way, including
the very important constitutional agreement reached last
Tuesday, offer some prospect for bringing to an end
almost four years of a most appalling conflict.
Some have been dismissive of the achievements of
the United Nations in the former Yugoslavia. That,
however, is to overlook the saving of tens of thousands of
lives and the substantial relief of suffering. This is why
New Zealand, despite its geographical distance from the
region, has been willing to play its part. I believe that,
one day, the United Nations mission in Bosnia will enjoy
recognition of the successes it has achieved so far.
It is a little too easy to focus on the problems of the
United Nations. We need to remember its successes as
well. I think of Cambodia and Mozambique, of El
Salvador and Haiti, of Namibia and Angola and of the
contributions to peace in various parts of the Middle East
over the years. Even in Somalia, where a political
settlement proved elusive, massive famine was relieved
thanks to the United Nations.
The United Nations is unique. It is called on to deal
with the most intractable problems — the ones that others
put into the “too hard” basket. And it works under the
closest public scrutiny of Governments and the world’s
media.
New Zealand strongly supports practical steps to
improve peace-keeping management. We have, in fact,
provided additional specialist personnel to the Department
of Peace-keeping Operations at our own expense. We
have contributed to the strengthening of the Secretariat’s
capacity in the demining area. And we shall continue
these commitments because we believe that they are so
necessary. We also entered into the United Nations
stand-by arrangements earlier this year, and we hope that
these will provide a clearer focus for peace-keeping and
its planning.
We have also studied with interest the Secretary-
General’s recommendation, in his Supplement to “An
Agenda for Peace”, that the United Nations should
consider the idea of a rapid-deployment force. I wish to
commend the ground-breaking work that has already been
done by Canada, the Netherlands, Denmark and others.
My discussions yesterday with Ministers from these and
other countries were encouraging to me. Progress can and
should be made in this area.
20


At about this time last year I spoke to the General
Assembly about a number of elements that I consider
critical to the conduct of peace-keeping operations. These
included a sustainable financial system, transparent political
accountability, clear objectives, a credible legal regime that
guarantees the security of United Nations personnel and, of
course, the availability of resources so that objectives can
be met quickly and efficiently.

Progress has been made. We were especially pleased
to see the Convention on the Safety of United Nations
Personnel opened for signature during last year’s session.
We urge those that have not signed it to do so, and soon.
We owe that to the thousands who have served, and are
serving, in the United Nations operations worldwide.
The improved procedures for consultation between the
Security Council and troop contributors, initiated by
Argentina and New Zealand, have now been in place for
almost a year. Pleasing as this is, we still have some way
to go. It is up to those of us who contribute troops to
United Nations operations to ensure there is no slippage in
these procedures.
Regrettably, however, we do not appear to have a
sustainable financial system. I am gravely concerned that,
despite all the warnings here in this Assembly last year,
delegations have not made any real progress in the Working
Group addressing the financial crisis. The United
Nations — this United Nations — ran out of cash in mid-
August. The arrears of Member States in respect of the
regular and peace-keeping budgets have reached
unprecedented levels. It is nothing short of a tragedy that
on the eve of our celebration of the fiftieth anniversary, the
United Nations, this body of ours, is on the verge of
bankruptcy.
At this critical point in the United Nations history, we
need political will, not more words. “Words pay no debts”,
as Shakespeare wrote. We need new ideas, not recycled
platitudes. And, above all, Members must pay their dues,
on time, and in full.
We do stand here at a crossroads. In taking stock of
the United Nations 50 years, we have much on which to
reflect. There have been good times, and there have been
bad times. Reform and revitalization must stay on our
minds. I wish to assure you, Sir, and all other members, of
New Zealand’s commitment to help remould the
Organization to that which will be needed to work for all
of us as we head towards the twenty-first century.
First of all, allow me to congratulate my
colleague, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Portugal,
Professor Diogo Freitas Do Amaral, on the occasion of
his election to the high post of the President of the
General Assembly.
Each of the 50 sessions of the General Assembly has
been a step for the international community on a difficult
road in search of peace within itself, for the strengthening
of the indispensable role of the United Nations. The
current session will be marked as the anniversary session
by the addresses to be made by the Heads of State and
Government in late October. Russia’s views on the
prospects and difficulties of establishing partnership in a
multi-polar and interdependent world — and it is with
equal partnership that we link our national and state
interests — will be stated by the Head of the Russian
State, President Boris Nikolayevich Yeltsin.
If half a century of experience of the United Nations
teaches us anything, it teaches us first of all that only the
equality of States and respect for the diversity of cultures,
religions and national traditions can serve as the basis for
security and prosperity in the modern world. But the
formula “unity in diversity” also presupposes everyone’s
compliance with fundamental principles of international
law and order, respect for human rights and the
6


promotion of economic progress. This is the essence of the
United Nations Charter, which identifies both common
ideals and goals and equal rights and obligations for all
States without “double standards”.
They say that generals always prepare for the last war.
Politicians and diplomats have no right to prepare for the
last peace. On the contrary, it is necessary to avoid slipping
back into a bloc mentality and dividing countries into
“friends and foes”, whether in politics or in economics.
We can indeed make the next 50 years an era of the
United Nations if we accept as its basis the indivisibility of
international security and sustainable social and economic
development for all.
This question becomes more and more acute against
the background of humanitarian disasters in Africa and
other regions of the “third world”, and the social price of
the initial stage of reforms in the post-socialist countries.
No one will be able to hide from global problems behind
dividing lines of national egotism and economic
discrimination, or even expanding military alliances. Such
things will not rein in, but rather spur on the spread of
international terrorism and drugs, and whip up the flames
of local conflicts and the arms race.
One of the principles of the “Agenda for
Development” which is being formulated now should be the
early elimination of the remaining discriminatory
restrictions in the world economy, trade and technology
transfer. In particular, Russia, which is successfully
implementing unparalleled reforms, should be recognized as
an equal trade and economic partner with an economy in
transition.
Such a strategy should also provide for the promotion
of the economic rehabilitation of countries and regions
affected by armed conflicts. The United Nations, its
specialized agencies and Member States should immediately
begin to address directly the problem of the economic
rehabilitation of Bosnia and the former Yugoslavia as a
whole, whose peoples have suffered from war and
economic sanctions that have been in effect for too long.
Russia is ready to take an active part in these efforts, and
we do and will continue to contribute substantially to a
political settlement. The real chances for such a settlement
should not be sacrificed to power or unilateral approaches.
The international community should make equally
great efforts to achieve progress in all aspects of the peace
process in the Middle East and the post-conflict
rehabilitation of all States of that region. We congratulate
Israel and the Palestinians on the occasion of their
reaching an agreement in Taba, whose official signing
ceremony will take place on 28 September next in
Washington under the chairmanship of President Clinton.
We intend to continue our joint efforts with the United
States and to make our contribution to the coming
Amman summit conference.
Europe needs a new model of general and
comprehensive security, without double standards or
dividing lines.
International dialogue on this issue is already under
way. I believe that the active involvement of the United
Nations and its specialized agencies is necessary to the
efforts aimed at the development of this model.
Incidentally, the General Assembly was born in the Old
World.
A new approach is required to disarmament issues in
Europe. On the basis of the implementation of the
Conventional Armed Forces in Europe Treaty (certainly
taking into account new realities) as early as next spring
we should arrive at new major agreements based on the
unity of the vital security interests of the peoples of the
continent instead of the bloc logic of the past.
Our proposal to all nuclear-weapon States to
elaborate a treaty on nuclear safety and strategic stability
has become even more timely.
The indefinite extension of the Non-Proliferation
Treaty establishes favourable conditions for this. Our
common task is to create the necessary political
conditions for those States that have not already done so
to accede to it as non-nuclear States. We consider it
necessary, as a matter of priority, to conclude as soon as
possible, but not later than 1996, work on the
comprehensive test-ban treaty. From this rostrum, Russia
calls for a universal and permanent moratorium on
nuclear tests.
The summit of the “Political Eight” on nuclear
safety, which is to be held next spring in Moscow at the
initiative of the President of Russia and which was
approved in Halifax, will make a major contribution to
global stability.
We would like the United Nations to take urgent
measures on the prevention of illicit trafficking in light
firearms and the proliferation of anti-personnel mines. It
7


is these “light” firearms that have led to enormous human
losses in Rwanda and Angola, Liberia and Bosnia,
Tajikistan and Abkhazia. Russia has already introduced a
moratorium on the export of the most dangerous types of
anti-personnel mines. We urge other States to follow our
example.
This issue should be seriously considered in the United
Nations Disarmament Commission. While supporting the
activities of the Commission, we believe that it should
adopt a new agenda corresponding to the current scale of
cooperation in the area of security and to new threats and
challenges in this field.
The problem of global adherence to a single standard
in the area of human rights and basic democratic
institutions is very acute. Russia, approaching free,
multipartite parliamentary and presidential elections, is
making its own contribution to the establishment of these
very standards. We invite observers from foreign States and
international organizations to attend the forthcoming
elections.
It was not so long ago that dozens of agenda items of
the General Assembly were devoted to the struggle against
apartheid. Now it seems unbelievable that this problem has
been solved, owing to a large extent, to the efforts of the
United Nations. I sincerely welcome the accomplishments
of the people and the Government of South Africa, headed
by Nelson Mandela, in the democratization and creation of
a free, multiracial society.
But did we manage to overcome the danger of
violence arising through fascism, racism, and political and
religious extremism? Alas, the answer is far from
reassuring. That is why the international community has no
right to abandon its efforts in this direction and must not
tolerate the emergence of double standards.
The signing of the CIS conventions on human rights
and fundamental freedoms and on the rights of national and
language minorities was the response of the CIS States to
the United Nations recommendations on the creation of a
single humanitarian sphere in this part of the world.
However, much has yet to be done before a unitary
approach to human rights can become a norm of life for,
among others, 25 million of our compatriots in some
countries of the Commonwealth and the Baltic States. A
double standard here is unacceptable.
Russia is interested in the adoption at this session of
decisions on such issues as the struggle against racism, all
forms of xenophobia and aggressive nationalism, ensuring
the rights of minorities and the promotion of democracy
and the rule of law in countries in transition. The United
Nations should further pursue its policy of qualitative
improvement of the international human rights protection
machinery, primarily by strengthening its control and
preventive functions and enhancing its focus on specific
action. The policy of single standards must become an
incontestable rule in the sphere of peace-keeping as well.
Justice without force is powerless, while force without
justice is tyrannical.
There have been many achievements in United
Nations peace-keeping efforts. Without the Blue Helmets,
the world would be much more dangerous and dozens of
conflicts would have been much more bloody. We are
proud that approximately 20,000 Russian servicemen are
serving as peace-keepers in United Nations and CIS
operations.
However, if we want force always to go hand-in-
hand with justice in the activities of the United Nations
and those who cooperate in them, strict observance of
Security Council decisions must be ensured. Here, the
Secretary-General and his staff can always count on the
support of Russia and, I am confident, of all other
Members of the United Nations. The United Nations
should be protected from setbacks like that which has
occurred in Bosnia.
In general, it is necessary radically to improve
United Nations peace-keeping through precision of the
criteria and terms of the United Nations involvement in
areas of tension; a close linkage between peace-keeping
operations and efforts to achieve the peaceful settlement
of conflicts; the efficient operation of the whole
functional chain — peace-keeping planning, command
and control. We are for the earliest possible
implementation of the Secretary-General’s proposal on the
establishment of United Nations reserve forces.
We welcome the conclusion of the Convention on
the protection of United Nations personnel, which I
signed today on behalf of Russia. This instrument will
help to save lives of hundreds of peace-keepers in hot
spots of the world.
Peace-making activities undertaken by Russia and its
Commonwealth partners contribute to a considerable
extent to ensuring regional and international stability. We
appreciate fruitful cooperation with the United Nations in
Tajikistan and Georgia. However, the United Nations
8


support of our collective efforts sometimes unfortunately
reminds us of a saying: “Too little, too late”. Russia,
together with its CIS partners, expects the United Nations
to make a radical change in its attitude towards peace-
making problems in our part of the world.
During the 50 years of the existence of the United
Nations, sanctions have been an instrument that the
Organization has used to deal with the instigators of
conflicts. Now, the time has come to give this instrument
a more selective and precise nature. The principal criteria
in this regard are: distinct objectives underlying sanctions,
advanced coordination of conditions, and mechanisms for
lifting them once the objectives are attained.
As a newly elected member of the Executive Council
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, Russia intends to make an essential contribution
to overcoming a new global crisis, namely the tragedy of
millions of refugees. To this end, we intend to seek
practical results from the international conference on
refugees and migrants within the post-Soviet space.
At this session the General Assembly should give new
impetus to collective efforts by the international community
in combating crime, illicit drug-trafficking and terrorism.
The explosions in Oklahoma and Paris, the taking of
hostages in Budennovsk and chemical terrorist attacks in
Tokyo — these are bells tolling for us all.
Whatever agenda item we consider, we are convinced
time and again that the answers are to be found only on the
basis of a single standard: respect for the United Nations
Charter and for the purposes and principles of the United
Nations that have withstood the severe tests of the past five
decades and are lighting the way into the twenty-first
century.
It is
a privilege to speak to the General Assembly today on
behalf of the United States.
A half-century ago the General Assembly first met
here in New York, across the river in a converted skating
rink at Flushing Meadows. In those modest surroundings
our predecessors began to put in place an ambitious
framework that they hoped would keep the peace as
successfully as they had prosecuted the war.
In the years since, the United Nations has helped
bring peace, prosperity and hope to countless people
around the world. Technological change has brought
nations closer together than the founders of the United
9


Nations could possibly have foreseen. The United Nations
itself has been challenged in unforeseen ways. It has had to
manage complex humanitarian emergencies, from civil wars
to mass movements of refugees to health epidemics. This
evolution has placed great strains on the Organization and
has revealed the necessity for far-reaching changes in how
it is run.
The Clinton Administration has vigorously made the
case to our Congress and our people for continued
American leadership at the United Nations. The United
States made a commitment to the United Nations Charter
50 years ago, and we are determined to keep our
commitment, including our financial obligations.
We will always remember that for millions of people
around the world, the United Nations is far from a faceless
institution. It is, as Harry Truman once said,
“a case of food, a box of school books; it is a doctor
who vaccinates children; it is an expert who shows
people how to raise more rice and more wheat.”
To millions more around the world, it is the difference
between peace and war.
Economic and social development, as well as the
protection of human rights, remain central to the United
Nations mission. But the United Nations must change to
meet new needs more effectively. When money is wasted
in New York, Geneva or Vienna, when time is lost in
bureaucratic inertia, the people who pay the price are those
most vulnerable to famine, disease and violence.
It is time to recognize that the United Nations must
direct its limited resources to the world’s highest priorities,
focusing on the tasks that it performs the best. The United
Nations bureaucracy should be smaller, with a clear
organizational structure and sharp lines of responsibility.
Each programme must be held to a single simple standard:
it must make a tangible contribution to the freedom,
security and well-being of real people in the real world.
In the last year, under the leadership of Secretary-
General Boutros-Ghali, the groundwork for substantial
change has been laid. The United Nations has an office
with the functions of an inspector general and a mandate to
crack down on waste and fraud. Under-Secretary-General
Joe Connor has embarked on an aggressive campaign to
improve the United Nations management culture, and we
fully support his good work. The United Nations Secretariat
has moved in the right direction by submitting a budget that
begins to restrain spending, and now this momentum for
reform must accelerate.
Let me propose a brief, concrete agenda for reform.
First, we must end United Nations programmes that
have achieved their purpose, and we must consolidate
programmes that overlap, especially in the economic and
social agencies. The United Nations has more than a
dozen organizations responsible for development,
emergency response and statistical reporting. We should
consider establishing a single agency for each of these
functions. We should downsize the United Nations
regional economic commissions. We should ensure that
the functions of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development do not duplicate those of the new
World Trade Organization (WTO), and we should adopt
a moratorium on big United Nations conferences once the
present series is completed, concentrating instead on
meeting the commitments of those conferences that we
have already held.
Secondly, we need to streamline the United Nations
Secretariat to make it more efficient, accountable and
transparent. Each part of the United Nations system
should be subject to the scrutiny of an inspector general.
The United Nations must not tolerate ethical or financial
abuses, and its managers should be appointed and
promoted on the basis of merit.
Thirdly, we should rigorously scrutinize proposals
for new and extended peace-keeping missions, and we
should improve the United Nations ability to respond
rapidly when new missions are approved. We must agree
on an equitable scale of peace-keeping assessments that
reflects fully today’s economic realities. And we should
have a unified budget for peace-keeping operations.
Finally, we must maintain the effectiveness of the
Security Council. Germany and Japan should become
permanent members, and we should ensure that all the
world’s regions are fairly represented, without making the
Council too large and unwieldy.
We welcome the formation of the high-level group
on reform, initiated under the leadership of the outgoing
President of the General Assembly, Mr. Essy. Our goal
must be that of a practical blueprint for United Nations
reform and to ensure that it is adopted before the General
Assembly finishes the work of its fiftieth session next
fall. The way forward is clear; we have already seen and
10


studied countless studies and reports. Now the time has
come to act on the best proposals.
As the Assembly knows, in my country there have
been serious efforts to curtail our support for the United
Nations. The President and I, and our entire Administration,
believe it would be reckless to turn away from an
Organization that helps mobilize the support of other
nations for goals that are consistent with American and
global interests. But to sustain support for the United
Nations among the American people and among the people
of other nations, it is not enough that we defend the
institution. The best argument against retreat is further
reform. Tangible progress in that direction will help us win
the battle for United Nations support that we are waging in
the United States.
The United Nations must emerge from the reform
process better able to meet its fundamental goals, including
the preservation of peace and security. From Korea to the
Persian Gulf to Haiti, the United Nations has provided a
mandate to its Members as they carried out their
responsibilities. The United Nations own Blue Helmets
have helped nations create the basic conditions of peace in
some of the most difficult situations imaginable around the
world, even though they have not always achieved their
intended purpose.
Recently, a young Haitian father was asked what the
peace-keeping forces had achieved in his country. He
answered,
“We walk freely. We sleep quietly. There are no
men who come for us in the night.”
In Haiti, as, for example, in Cambodia, Mozambique and El
Salvador, the United Nations has shown that peace-keeping,
despite its limitations, has been an enormously useful
instrument.
One region where United Nations forces and the
international community have played a critical role is the
Middle East. Another historic milestone will be marked this
Thursday, in Washington, when Israel and the Palestinians
sign their agreement to implement phase two of the
Declaration of Principles. That agreement will bring to life
a goal first set many years ago in the Camp David accords:
to protect Israel’s security and to give Palestinians
throughout the West Bank control over their daily lives.
The international community and the United Nations must
continue to support this process, both diplomatically and
economically.
There is no question that the United Nations has
never undertaken a mission more difficult than the one in
the former Yugoslavia. The limitations of that mission are
all too well known, but we all must recognize that it has
provided relief for hundreds of thousands of people and
has saved literally thousands of lives. Today, diplomacy
backed by force has given the United States and the
international community an opportunity to move forward
on a track that is producing genuinely hopeful results. The
United Nations and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) are working effectively together to
try to bring peace to the region. On 8 September in
Geneva, the parties to the conflict accepted the
fundamental goal that the Security Council has often
expressed: the continuation of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a single State within its internationally
recognized borders. I will be meeting with the Foreign
Ministers of Bosnia, Croatia and Serbia later today, and
at that time I will urge them — implore them — to
maintain the momentum towards peace and to establish
constitutional structures for Bosnia.
The framers of the Charter of the United Nations
created this institution to meet threats to peace and
security posed by aggression and armed conflict. Those
threats are still, unfortunately, very much with us. But
today, the world also faces a new set of security
challenges, including proliferation, terrorism, international
crime and narcotics, as well as the far-reaching
consequences of damage to the environment. These have
assumed a new and dangerous scope in a more
interdependent world. As President Clinton said in San
Francisco in June, the
“new forces of integration carry within them the
seeds of disintegration and destruction”.
While, as I said earlier, new technologies have
brought us closer together, they also have made it easier
for terrorists, drug dealers and other international
criminals to acquire weapons of mass destruction, to set
up cocaine cartels and to hide their ill-gotten gains. The
collapse of communism has shattered dictatorships, to be
sure, but it has also left the political and legal institutions
of newly liberated nations even more vulnerable to those
who seek to subvert them.
Although these threats are sometimes sponsored by
States, they increasingly follow no flag. Each of us must
vigorously fight these enemies on our own, but we will
never be truly secure until we effectively fight them
together. That is the new security challenge for the global
11


community, and it must be the new security mission for the
United Nations.
There is no single area in which the United Nations
can make a more significant contribution than in that of
non-proliferation. Fifty years ago, the United States was the
only country capable of making a nuclear bomb. Today
many countries have the technology that would enable them
to turn a fist-sized chunk of plutonium into a bomb as
small as a suitcase. That is one reason why more than 170
nations agreed, at a conference held here last May and
effectively chaired by Ambassador Dhanapala, to extend for
all time the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. That is an achievement we must rejoice in but
also build on.
I should like to outline some steps in the field of
non-proliferation. First, we should have a comprehensive
test-ban treaty ready for signature by the time we meet here
next September. As President Clinton announced last
month, the United States is committed to a true zero-yield
test ban. We urge other nations to join us in that
commitment.
Secondly, we should immediately start negotiations on
a fissile material cut-off treaty. Those who have been most
vocal in calling for nuclear disarmament should recognize
that it is essential to ban future production of fissile
material for nuclear weapons.
Thirdly, we should push forward with the historic
reductions of the nuclear arsenals of the United States and
countries of the former Soviet Union. I call on the United
States Senate, as well as on the Russian Duma, to approve
the treaty on further reduction and limitation of strategic
offensive arms (START II) so that we can lock in deep cuts
in our strategic nuclear arsenals. In addition, Presidents
Clinton and Yeltsin are working together to ensure the
safety, transparency and irreversibility of nuclear-arms
reductions.
As part of this process, President Yeltsin will host a
nuclear safety and security summit in Moscow next spring.
This summit should have a very ambitious agenda,
including a declaration of principles on nuclear safety. We
look to this summit to address the worldwide problems of
nuclear-waste management, including those of ocean
dumping. The summit should also promote a plan of action
to safeguard nuclear materials, a plan that should include
new measures to prevent criminals and terrorists from
acquiring nuclear materials for use in weapons.
Finally, we should push for the earliest possible
entry into force of the Chemical Weapons Convention.
President Clinton has urged the United States Senate to
act promptly on its ratification, and to stop holding the
START II Treaty and the Chemical Weapons Convention
hostage to unrelated issues. The world has witnessed the
effects of poison gas too many times in this century — on
European battlefields during the First World War, in
Ethiopia and Manchuria during the 1930s, and against
Iranian soldiers and innocent Kurdish civilians in the
1980s. The Chemical Weapons Convention will make
every nation safer, and we need it now.
The United Nations is also playing an invaluable
role in focusing attention on pressing regional
proliferation problems. In Iraq, the United Nations Special
Commission (UNSCOM) and its Chairman, Rolf Ekeus,
continue to uncover horrific details about Saddam
Hussein’s weapons of mass destruction.
Under Saddam Hussein, Iraq developed a deadly
biological-weapons capacity hidden from view. It was
conducting research to turn some of the most toxic
substances known to man into weapons of war. We know
that Saddam succeeded in putting anthrax and botulism in
bombs and missile warheads. In December 1990, he
deployed these weapons, with every intention of using
them against the international coalition and innocent
civilians. He was dissuaded from doing so only by the
steadfast determination of the United States and the
international community.
In the light of what Ambassador Ekeus has
uncovered in Iraq, we can conclude only that for the last
four and a half years, Saddam Hussein has lied about the
full scope of Iraq’s weapons programmes. There should
be no easing of the sanctions regime against Iraq until its
Government complies with all the demands of the
Security Council and clearly demonstrates that it has
changed its ways.
The United Nations should also promote
responsibility and restraint in the transfer of conventional
weapons. At last year’s session of the General Assembly,
President Clinton proposed, and the Assembly approved,
the eventual elimination of anti-personnel mines. On my
recent trip to Cambodia, I saw the terrible damage these
hidden killers can do. This year, we will again call on
other countries to join us in putting an end to the export
of land-mines.
12


Two years ago, President Clinton called on the
international community to devise a true international
system governing the transfer of conventional weapons and
sensitive dual-use technologies. I am pleased that the
Russian Federation has joined with the United States and 26
other countries to agree on a common principle to control
the build-up of dangerous conventional arms. We hope to
activate this global regime, which is called the New Forum,
by the end of this year.
The proliferation of weapons worldwide has added a
disturbing dimension to another threat we all face: the
threat of international terrorism. Indeed, this year’s sarin
gas attack in Tokyo is a grim warning of what can happen
when terrorists acquire weapons of mass destruction.
More nations are joining the fight against those
individuals and groups that attack civilians for political
ends. The United Nations has supported this effort in
important ways. The Security Council recognized the
importance of countering State-sponsored terrorism by
imposing sanctions against Libya for the bombing of Pan
Am 103 and UTA 772.
Terrorists must be treated as criminals and there must
be no place where they can hide from the consequences of
their acts. States that sponsor terrorists should feel the full
weight of sanctions that can be imposed by the international
community. Let us not deceive ourselves: every dollar that
goes into the Government coffers of a State-sponsor of
terrorism such as Iran helps pay for a terrorist’s bullets or
bombs. Iran’s role as the foremost State-sponsor of
terrorism makes its secret quest for weapons of mass
destruction even more alarming. We must stand together to
prevent Iran from acquiring such threatening capabilities.
The United States has taken a leading role in meeting
the international terrorist threat. We have intensified our
sanctions against Iran. Last January President Clinton issued
an Executive Order prohibiting financial transactions with
terrorist groups and individuals that threaten the Middle
East peace process. We are urging our Congress to tighten
our immigration and criminal laws to keep terrorists on the
run or put them behind bars.
The United States strongly supports the counter-
terrorism measures the G-7 and Russia announced at the
Halifax Summit, and we expect the G-8 Ministerial Meeting
on Terrorism in Ottawa to produce a concrete-action plan
to implement these measures that were adopted at the
Halifax Summit.
Other kinds of international crime also threaten the
safety of our citizens and the fabric of our societies. And
globalization brings new and frightening dimensions to
crime. The threat of crime is a particular menace to
young democracies. It weakens confidence in institutions,
preys on the most vulnerable in our societies and
undermines free-market reform.
Of course, every country must take its own measures
to combat these criminal threats. The Administration that
I represent is now completing a review of our approach
to transnational crime, a review that will lead to a
stronger, more coordinated attack on this problem.
To help other States deal with criminal threats, the
United States and Hungary have created the International
Law Enforcement Academy in Budapest to train police
officers and law-enforcement officials from Central
Europe and the States of the former Soviet Union. We are
providing similar help bilaterally, and through the United
Nations International Drug Control Programme, to those
countries whose laws are challenged by international drug
cartels.
A particularly insidious form of crime and corruption
is money-laundering. All nations should work together to
implement the recommendations of the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) to
attack this insidious money-laundering. The nations of this
hemisphere should also advance the anti-money-
laundering initiative introduced at last December’s
Summit of the Americas. Together, we must work to
squeeze the dirty money out of the global financial
system.
Through the United Nations conventions on drugs
and crime the international community has set strong
standards that we must now act to enforce. We call on
Member States which have not already joined the 1988
drug Convention to do so promptly, and we call on those
countries which have approved the Convention to move
quickly to implement its important provisions.
We are also increasingly aware that damage to the
environment and unsustainable population growth threaten
the security of our nations and the well-being of our
peoples. Their harmful effects are evident in famines,
infant mortality rates, refugee crises, and ozone depletion.
In places like Rwanda and Somalia, for example, they
contribute to civil wars and emergencies that can be
resolved only by extremely costly international
intervention. We must carry out the commitments we
13


made last year at the Cairo Conference, as well as the
important commitments made at the Rio Conference three
years ago.
Never have our problems around the world been more
complex. It has never been more evident that these
problems affect all nations, developed and developing alike.
Only by working together can we effectively deal with the
new threats we all face that I have outlined here today.
That is why in this fiftieth anniversary year we must
shape the United Nations agenda as if we were creating the
institution anew. Just as the founders of the United Nations
devised a new framework to deter aggression and armed
conflict, the United Nations, in particular the Security
Council, must now assign the same priority to combating
the threat posed by proliferation, by terrorism, by
international crime, by narcotics and by environmental
pollution. We should dedicate our efforts in the United
Nations and elsewhere to turning our global consensus
against these threats into concrete and effective action. We
must renew and reform the United Nations not for its sake,
but for our own.
Mr. President, I wish to
extend to you, on behalf of the South African delegation,
my sincere congratulations on your election to the
presidency of the fiftieth session of the General Assembly.
Your election demonstrates the high regard in which the
international community holds your country. I should also
like to express our deep gratitude to your predecessor, His
Excellency Mr. Amara Essy, a brother from Africa and the
Foreign Minister of Côte d’Ivoire, who presided over the
forty-ninth session with great wisdom. I should also like to
express to the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, our continued confidence in
his guidance of the Organization.
A half century ago representatives from 50 countries
met at San Francisco to draft the United Nations Charter,
the Declaration of Human Rights and the Statute of the
International Court of Justice. For the United Nations to
have survived for a period of 50 years in an imperfect
world is indeed a milestone and a tribute to the visionary
steps taken half a century ago towards the creation of a
better world.
South Africa’s involvement with the United Nations
goes back to the very conception and birth of this
illustrious body. The then-Prime Minister of South Africa,
Field Marshal J. C. Smuts, helped to draft the Preamble
to the Charter of the United Nations. In the Preamble
many lofty ideas were expressed, among which were the
following:
“to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in
the dignity and worth of the human person, in the
equal rights of men and women and of nations large
and small”.
How ironic that those in power in South Africa since
then, and until last year, acted in a precisely contrary
spirit. The United Nations contributed significantly in
bringing about change in South Africa. Through
perseverance and commitment, the United Nations
assisted us in our struggle to achieve democracy. Our
General Assembly 22nd plenary meeting
Fiftieth session 13 October 1995
reward is its reward. I should like again to express the
gratitude of both the people and the Government of South
Africa for its foresight and courage.
Just over a year ago, on 23 June 1994 to be precise,
I had the honour to address the Assembly on behalf of the
people and the Government of the Republic of South
Africa. On that occasion, which marked South Africa’s
resumption of its participation in the work of the General
Assembly of the United Nations, we were filled with joy
and pride at the peaceful transition of South Africa into a
united, non-racial, democratic and non-sexist society.
In the intervening months I have travelled to many
countries, visited with many foreign ministers and met with
several Heads of State or Government. We spoke of the
miracle that is South Africa. We shared our thoughts and
experiences on the road to that miracle. In that context, we
continue to encourage those who seek change for a better
life to stand fast in their belief.
As the representative of a Member of the United
Nations, I should like to reassure you of our belief in and
support for the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
Organization.
The events in April 1994 in South Africa marked a
break with the past as well as a commitment to the future,
placing a heavy burden on us. As a young democracy, we
are ready to meet the challenge. South Africa will meet this
challenge with a firm commitment to the promotion of
national welfare, prosperity and security, with a firm
commitment to the strengthening of cooperation in the
pursuit of the economic development and security of the
southern African subregion, with an active commitment to
peace, stability and good governance within the African
region and elsewhere, with a firm commitment to South-
South cooperation and with a commitment to responsible
international citizenship.
The Southern African Development Community
(SADC) was conceived in the struggle for freedom in
southern Africa and born of the courage of its leaders in
setting out to create a new reality.
The liberation of South Africa and the end of southern
Africa’s destabilization brought great opportunities for the
development of our subregion. We must now translate those
hopes into reality. In accordance with the Abuja Treaty, we
must transform the southern African region into one of the
reliable building blocks on which Africa’s economic
regeneration will be built.
Our greatest need today is to eradicate the scourge
of poverty afflicting the great mass of our people. Only
then can we fulfil the dream of Africa’s liberation in the
health, happiness and well-being of its children.
The mission of SADC reflects the reality that
southern Africa has long since passed the stage of
lamenting the privations of the past. The challenge is to
find within ourselves the resources to overcome this
legacy, with the cooperation of the international
community. We need to adapt to the demands of a rapidly
changing world economy and to develop the skills needed
to compete internationally.
South Africa’s main objective is to play a
constructive role in bringing peace and stability to the
region. We are totally committed to the utilization of
preventive diplomacy, peace-keeping and peacemaking,
through the use of regional and multilateral mechanisms.
In this context, South Africa participated with others
in the resolution of the conflict in Lesotho and provided
logistical support for the elections in Mozambique. Our
support for United Nations resolutions and actions
regarding Angola and the Western Sahara should also be
seen in that light.
As an elected member of the Central Organ of the
Conflict Resolution Mechanism of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) from June 1994 to June 1995, we
participated in several missions to Burundi. South Africa
was part of a special four-member ministerial mission
elected to assess the nature and the scope of the Burundi
conflict with a view to encouraging and assisting the
Burundians to resolve their differences and end that
conflict. We continue to participate in the Mechanism as
an invited observer.
In view of the desperate situation in the former
Yugoslavia and in Rwanda, it has become imperative for
States to cooperate as far as possible with the respective
ad hoc criminal tribunals that have been created for those
territories. In that regard, my country has made available
some of its most talented jurists to assist.
These situations have demonstrated anew the real
need for the establishment of a permanent international
criminal court. This issue has been revitalized in the past
few years, and a window of opportunity now exists to
finally bring the court into existence. It is my sincere
hope that significant progress will be made in that regard
during this session of the General Assembly.
2
General Assembly 22nd plenary meeting
Fiftieth session 13 October 1995
As we celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the United
Nations, mankind is still faced with political instability,
dictatorship, corruption, civil war, millions of refugees and
internally displaced persons, persistent economic decline
and continued impoverishment.
In the past year, the international political climate has
experienced a succession of changes which have brought
both hope and a certain measure of despair to mankind.
Hope has, however, remained a beckoning beacon bringing
about a sense of confidence in the future. We were
saddened by events in Somalia, but rejoiced at the transition
in Haiti and El Salvador. We despair at the tragedy that is
Bosnia, yet hope that the emerging signs of a solution will
come to fruition.
In this spirit, allow me to congratulate the peoples of
Israel and Palestine on having reached yet another landmark
in their journey towards a lasting settlement. We encourage
and support the Middle East peace process.
The issues of proliferation and disarmament, in
particular nuclear disarmament, are among the major
questions that have been facing the international community
in recent times. At the historic 1995 Review and Extension
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), all those present
agreed to exercise the utmost restraint pending the entry
into force of a comprehensive test-ban treaty. We are of the
view that the recent tests conducted by two nuclear-weapon
States are retrogressive steps in the international
community’s endeavour to ban nuclear testing. We believe
that these tests will negatively affect the outcome of work
on a comprehensive test-ban treaty. The South African
Government is strongly opposed to these and any further
nuclear tests being conducted, and calls upon those States
to cease testing, so as to enhance international efforts
towards non-proliferation and disarmament. We call upon
them to honour both the letter and the spirit of the
Principles and Objectives which they agreed to and helped
negotiate at the NPT Review and Extension Conference.
South Africa has dismantled its nuclear capability. South
Africa, for its part, has proven its commitment to nuclear
disarmament. Now it is the turn of others to manifest a
similar commitment.
South Africa notes with great satisfaction the progress
achieved thus far towards the establishment of an African
nuclear-weapon-free zone. We have been actively involved
in trying to find solutions to the outstanding issues, and we
trust that these hurdles can be overcome and the draft treaty
of Pelindaba can receive due consideration during this
session of the General Assembly. The draft treaty is
important as it would expand the non-nuclear-weapon
area of the globe considerably and would be a further step
towards the final goal of complete nuclear disarmament.
South Africa appeals to the nuclear-weapon States to
ensure that the draft treaty is concluded and the relevant
protocols signed.
Since the 1986 declaration of the Zone of Peace and
Cooperation of the South Atlantic, significant progress has
been made in the political, economic, scientific, technical
and cultural spheres to further the objectives of the Zone.
Only relatively few obstacles remain. We hope to advance
this endeavour when the next meeting of participating
nations takes place in Cape Town in March 1996.
On 13 September 1995 South Africa became the
thirty-seventh State party to the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling
and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction.
On the same day South Africa also acceded to the
Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of
Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed
to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate
Effects. The ratification of the chemical weapons
Convention again underlines the commitment of the
Government of National Unity to the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. South Africa’s accession to
the Convention on certain conventional weapons
underlines my Government’s commitment to the
elimination of the suffering that is caused by the scourge
of war. South Africa has, for this reason, decided to
extend its moratorium on the export of land-mines by the
introduction of a permanent ban on the export or sale of
long-lived anti-personnel land-mines. Furthermore, on
30 August 1995 the Government of National Unity
approved the draft of a new conventional-arms-control
policy. A National Conventional Arms Control Committee
has been established and will function in accordance with
predetermined guiding principles and criteria to ensure
that arms trade and transfers conform to accepted
international practice.
As previously mentioned, the principal role of the
United Nations is to safeguard international peace and
security in order to implement universal respect for
human rights and to create conditions necessary for
sustainable development. Without peace, security and
human rights, sustainable development will be difficult to
achieve. Without development and respect for human
rights, international peace and security will continually be
threatened.
3
General Assembly 22nd plenary meeting
Fiftieth session 13 October 1995
As President Mandela stated in 1992,
“Our common humanity transcends the oceans
and all national boundaries. It binds us together in
common cause against tyranny, to act together in
defence of our very humanity. Let it never be asked of
any one of us what we did when we knew that
another was oppressed.”
Mankind should learn to act against all tyranny in a
unified manner through the United Nations. This should be
our basic aim for the future.
South Africa also wishes to call attention to the
activities of mercenaries, irrespective of their origin and
objectives. Their destabilizing activities cannot be tolerated.
We call on the international community and the United
Nations to be seized of this problem of mercenaries.
The women of South Africa have lived, in varying
degrees, under three forms of oppression, relating to race,
to class and to gender. One of the first steps towards
initiating positive change in the lives of all South African
women was the entrenchment of gender rights in our Bill
of Rights. It was with much pride that the South African
delegation took their seats at the Fourth World Conference
on Women, in Beijing. That was the first time South Africa
participated in a conference on women which focused on
the eradication of poverty, and equal access to education
and to health services. South Africa is fully committed to
implementing the Platform for Action adopted at that
Conference, which will serve as the impetus for a world of
equality, development and peace for all. In addition, our
Parliament has most recently approved South Africa’s
ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women, without any
reservations.
Years of apartheid rule have bequeathed the
overwhelming majority black population with a heavy
legacy of poverty, social disintegration and political
cleavages based on colour and ethnic animosities. It
therefore became the priority task of the South African
Government of National Unity to devise a national strategy
to address this catastrophic situation. A comprehensive and
multi-pronged developmental strategy known as the
Reconstruction and Development Programme is now being
implemented. The implementation of this Programme relies
primarily on the mobilization of domestic resources through
prioritization of budgetary resources, with a view to
addressing the huge material inequalities in such areas as
education, health, housing, infrastructure development and
land reform. It is a unique people-centred and people-
driven Programme, which seeks to translate into economic
benefit the political miracle in our country. At the very
heart of this Programme is the acknowledgement of the
inextricable interdependence between the need for
transparent, accountable and democratic governance of
our society and the imperative of dynamic economic
growth and sustainable development.
South Africa will host the ninth United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD IX)
from 26 April to 11 May 1996. This is an event which all
South Africans are looking forward to with great
expectation. Indeed, it is my pleasure to announce that
our preparations are well advanced and on course.
We attach great significance to UNCTAD IX for a
number of reasons. We believe that the rapid progress of
globalization and liberalization of the world economy has
underscored the relevance and importance of UNCTAD
as a United Nations institution with a strong development
mandate and perspective. We also believe that the
successful completion of the Uruguay Round of
negotiations and the resultant creation of the World Trade
Organization not only has stressed the validity and
relevance of UNCTAD, but has also reinforced the need
to retain and strengthen UNCTAD’s mandate as a policy-
oriented global intergovernmental forum on trade and
development issues. It is a forum where a strong
partnership for development between the developed and
the developing countries can, and must, be forged. While
there may be a need to streamline certain UNCTAD
activities, this should not lead to its demise. Without
UNCTAD, our world, especially the developing world,
would be the poorer.
I would like to take this opportunity to express my
Government’s satisfaction with the intergovernmental
process at the United Nations to draw up a United
Nations Agenda for Development. We believe that the
United Nations is the appropriate forum for the
elaboration of the Agenda for Development. The Agenda
for Development could open great possibilities for
development and for partnership between the developed
and the developing countries. It is for this reason that
South Africa is taking great interest in the work of the Ad
Hoc Open-ended Working Group of the General
Assembly on an Agenda for Development.
My Government has been following with great
interest the ongoing High-level Intergovernmental
Meeting on the Mid-term Global Review of the
4
General Assembly 22nd plenary meeting
Fiftieth session 13 October 1995
Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least
Developed Countries. In this connection, I join others in
calling on the international community to devise a global
strategy to effectively address the debt question confronting
the least developed countries, and to use innovative
measures — whether it be official development aid, foreign
direct investment or multilateral financial assistance — to
arrest the decline of resources destined for the least
developed countries.
I would also like to call upon the international
community to vigorously pursue measures required to
successfully implement the United Nations New Agenda for
the Development of Africa in the 1990s. We are pleased in
that regard by the progress registered during the Economic
and Social Council’s session in Geneva, especially the high-
level segment, which was devoted to the aforementioned
Agenda. Of course, the challenge before the international
community is to find adequate resources to translate this
Agenda into tangible results. It is our hope that this issue
will be treated with the required urgency, given that next
year there will be a mid-term global review of the New
Agenda for the Development of Africa.
Recognizing the importance of cooperation between
developing States, South Africa has acceded to an
agreement establishing the South Centre. The South Centre
will effectively operate as a policy research unit for the
Non-Aligned Movement and the Group of 77, and will draft
policy-oriented position papers on issues of critical
importance to the South. It will, in addition to this basic
function, generate ideas and proposals for consideration by
Governments of the South and other institutions.
The United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development engendered a process of environmental action
and awareness centred on the relationship between
economic development and the sustainable management of
the environment. It is our duty to carry this process forward
in an integrated manner and reconfirm our commitment to
the implementation of international agreements which seek
to manage and preserve the world’s environment.
South Africa is very conscious that the capacity of
developing countries to implement sustainable
environmental strategies will have to be strengthened. The
resources pledged towards the attainment of goals set out in
Agenda 21 will have to be made available if we are to
succeed in achieving the imperatives of development,
sustainable use of the environment, and democracy in the
world.
In Africa, in particular, the ravages of drought and
the advances of desertification require urgent attention.
The global community’s concern for the environment
should be reflected in a common approach to the
manifold environmental pressures threatening our global
heritage.
The United Nations also has an important role to
play in assisting States threatened by natural or man-made
disasters. Preventive diplomacy can contribute towards
eliminating man-made disasters. However, the results of
both man-made disasters and natural disasters can be
ameliorated by effective international humanitarian
assistance coordination through the United Nations. This
will naturally require more coherent programmed delivery
and coordination by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(FAO), the World Health Organization (WHO), the
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the United
Nations Department of Humanitarian Affairs (DHA) and
other international institutions. The United Nations will
have to ensure that the necessary capacities and
mechanisms are created. Recent international action,
especially the follow-up to the Tokyo Conference, has
demonstrated that sufficient international will exists to
perform this function.
We welcome the adoption on 14 September 1995 of
General Assembly resolution 49/252, on the strengthening
of the United Nations. I wish to assure the Assembly of
our intention to work constructively with the President in
this endeavour.
The world in which we find ourselves today is
greatly changed from just 10 years ago. The cold war has
ended, the scourge of apartheid has been removed from
our common society and peace has come to Mozambique
and now Angola. We have also seen the membership of
our United Nations increase to 185, a substantial increase
since the time the Security Council’s membership was last
increased. As a result of these, and other, factors the
international community faces a window of opportunity
within which the Security Council can be successfully
restructured and reformed.
Within the overall effort to reform the United
Nations, South Africa believes that the structure and
functioning of the Security Council should be reformed to
make it more representative, democratic and transparent.
The product of these efforts must be a Security Council
that is effective and legitimate, and that reflects the
5
General Assembly 22nd plenary meeting
Fiftieth session 13 October 1995
realities of our modern world. This result can be achieved
only if reform and restructuring is dealt with as a package.
One of the products of this reform process must result in
Africa having equitable representation on any enlarged
Security Council.
It would be appropriate for me to conclude by
referring to the fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations.
The people of South Africa will celebrate this fiftieth
anniversary in concert with the rest of the world. Our
National Committee organizing the events in our country
has adopted the following as its Declaration of Intent:
“To create an awareness among the peoples of South
Africa of the role which the United nations can play
in their daily lives, and to assist the United Nations in
responding to the challenges of the twenty-first
century.”
President Mandela looks forward to joining his fellow
world leaders in a few weeks’ time to celebrate the
visionary step taken half a century ago towards the creation
of a better world. Building on the successes and victories
of the past, we now embrace the future. We can face the
challenges ahead, inspired by a vision of a new world
where peace and respect for human dignity are the standard.
Mr. President, please allow me, first of all, to
warmly congratulate you on your election to the
presidency of the current session of the General
Assembly. I am convinced that with your remarkable
ability and rich experience, you will admirably fulfil this
mission. I would also like to express my appreciation and
thanks to Mr. Amara Essy for the important contribution
he has made during his presidency.
I wish to avail myself of this opportunity to extend
my welcome and congratulations to the Republic of Palau,
which was admitted into the United Nations after the last
session.
This year marks the fiftieth anniversary of the end of
the Second World War and the founding of the United
Nations. Over the past 50 years, the United Nations has
stood the test of the vicissitudes in the international
situation, grown steadily, scored remarkable achievements
and made major contributions to the peace and prosperity
of mankind. Its membership has increased from 51 at its
founding to today’s 185. The status and role of the United
Nations, the most universal and authoritative
intergovernmental organization of sovereign States today,
is irreplaceable by any other international organization.
The United Nations has traversed a tortuous and
uneven path over the past fifty years, just like the
development of anything else. On the occasion of the
fiftieth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations,
it is time to review the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter, earnestly summarize the positive
and negative experience, and introduce appropriate and
necessary reforms so as to revitalize the United Nations
and usher it into the new century with a new look to meet
the challenge of the times. This is the call of all peoples
and a lofty mission of the times.
The United Nations, which was founded in the
triumph of the world war against fascism, reflects the
ardent desire and determination of the world’s people to
avert the scourge of war forever, safeguard world peace
and security, carry out friendly international cooperation
9


and achieve common development. History has repeatedly
proved that adherence to the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter will enable the United Nations to
play a positive role in safeguarding peace and promoting
development, while violation of and departure from the
purposes and principles of the Charter will impair the
dignity and image of the United Nations and weaken its
role. Therefore, to continue to uphold and carry forward the
purposes and principles of the Charter is an unshirkable
responsibility of all United Nations Members and a basic
principle guiding the reform of the United Nations.
The core of the United Nations Charter is the principle
of equality between sovereign States and non-interference
in each other’s internal affairs. All sovereign States,
whether they are big or small, rich or poor, strong or weak,
are equal members of the international community. The
internal affairs of a country should be managed by its own
people. Major world affairs should be addressed by
countries through consultations on the basis of equality and
mutual respect. In international relations, to bully the small,
oppress the poor, override the weak, impose one’s own
social system, ideology and values on others or interfere in
other countries’ internal affairs all run counter to the spirit
of the United Nations Charter. Some people are publicly
clamouring for “containment” of other countries, which
shows that the cold war mentality still refuses to quit the
stage of history. But it will ultimately be discarded by
history. The post-war period of half a century proves that
in handling State-to-State relations, “hot war”, “cold war”
or “bloc politics” do not work. Strict observance of the
principles of mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial
integrity, mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each
other’s internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit and
peaceful coexistence are the only way for States to live in
amity with each other and achieve common development.
Since the last session of the General Assembly, thanks
to the joint efforts of various quarters, the tendency towards
the peaceful settlement of disputes through negotiations has
grown and international economic cooperation has gained
momentum. However, there still remain many destabilizing
and uncertain factors in the international situation.
Hegemonism and power politics continue to hold out. Peace
and development, the two major tasks of the world today,
still face grave challenges.
Armed conflicts and catastrophic wars in some parts
of the world remain unabated, which has not only inflicted
heavy losses of life and property on the countries and
peoples concerned, but also casts a shadow over regional
peace and stability and that of the whole world. All this
cannot but cause concern and distress among the world’s
people. As the background and causes behind these
conflicts are complicated, to seek a just, fair and
appropriate solution to them would call for tremendous
and concerted efforts by all the parties concerned, the
United Nations and the international community as a
whole. We maintain that the parties concerned should, in
the fundamental and long-term interests of the people,
seek just and fair solutions through negotiations, taking
into full account both history and reality as well as the
reasonable interests and positions of all sides. Where
consensus cannot be reached immediately, the parties
concerned should exercise restraint and patience so as to
prevent contradictions from intensifying and at the same
time try to create conditions and an atmosphere for an
eventual peaceful settlement.
United Nations peace-keeping operations in recent
years have played a useful role in settling international
disputes peacefully. They have both accumulated
successful experience and learned lessons from setbacks.
We believe that, to ensure a healthy development of
United Nations peace-keeping operations and activities in
other related fields such as preventive diplomacy, the
following guidelines should be established and followed:
Observation of the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter, in particular the principle of
respect for State sovereignty and non-interference in the
internal affairs of other countries;
Settlement of disputes through peaceful means such
as good offices, mediation and negotiations instead of
resort to frequent mandatory actions. Even humanitarian
operations should not resort to military means;
Opposition to double standards and the imposition of
the policies and views of one or a few countries on the
Security Council. Some countries should not be allowed
to carry out military intervention in the name of the
United Nations;
For peace-keeping operations, adherence to the
principles that have proved effective, such as obtaining
prior consent from the parties concerned, observing strict
neutrality and the non-use of force except for self-
defence;
Adoption of a realistic approach and confining the
operation within one’s capability. Peace-keeping
operations should be launched only when conditions are
ripe and should refrain, in whatever circumstances, from
10


becoming a party to a conflict in deviation from the
fundamental orientation of such operations.
It has been demonstrated time and again that United
Nations peace-keeping operations, if divorced from these
guidelines, would, contrary to our wishes, fail to achieve
their desired objectives and might even go astray.
Last May, the Review and Extension Conference of
the States Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) adopted the decision to renew the
NPT indefinitely. This serves the interests of all signatories,
helps to strengthen the international non-proliferation
regime and is conducive to the maintenance of world peace
and security. China believes that nuclear non-proliferation
is only an interim step towards the ultimate goal of the
complete prohibition and total destruction of nuclear
weapons. The indefinite extension of the NPT must not be
construed as an indefinite license for the nuclear-weapon
States to perpetuate their prerogatives.
One year ago, also from this rostrum, on behalf of the
Chinese Government I called for the conclusion of a
convention on the complete prohibition of nuclear weapons
and put forward a series of complete and interrelated
proposals on nuclear disarmament. We are pleased to note
that the negotiations on a comprehensive test-ban treaty
have produced some gratifying progress. China supports the
conclusion of such a treaty no later than 1996 and will
continue to work with other countries to this end. Once the
treaty enters into force, China will stop its nuclear testing.
China’s possession of a limited nuclear capability is
entirely for self-defence and for deterring the nuclear threat
against it. The Chinese Government has from the very
beginning unilaterally undertaken not to be the first to use
nuclear weapons at any time and under any circumstances
and not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against
non-nuclear-weapon States. China’s nuclear weapons
therefore do not constitute a threat to any country. We
strongly urge other nuclear-weapon States to respond
positively to China’s initiative by immediately starting
negotiations aimed at concluding a treaty on mutual non-
first-use of nuclear weapons and an agreement on the non-
use or non-threat of use of nuclear weapons against non-
nuclear-weapon States and nuclear-free zones.
It has become a trend in today’s world that when
countries formulate their domestic and foreign policies they
accord top priority to the economy and pay close attention
to national economic development. The worldwide tendency
towards economic integration, regionalization and the
formation of economic groupings has accelerated, and
competition among States in the economic, trade,
scientific and technological fields has further intensified.
Under such circumstances, the developing countries are
faced with a formidable challenge as they strive for
economic growth and higher living standards for their
people.
Furthermore, over 1 billion people on this planet
remain in abject poverty; this constitutes one of the world
community’s most acute problems. Given much-needed
support to the developing countries as they reactivate their
economies and creating a favourable external environment
for them are not only important conditions for the shared
economic growth and common prosperity of all countries,
but also a crucial guarantee for lasting peace and stability
throughout the world. Given the present situation, the
United Nations should ask itself to pay at least as much
attention to development as to peace, effectively perform
its duties under the Charter and play a more dynamic role
in galvanizing economic growth and development in the
developing countries. The reform of the United Nations
must result in the strengthening, not the weakening, of its
role in the area of development.
True, fairly rapid economic growth in the developing
countries must depend primarily on their own efforts.
However, it is also important for the international
community, and the developed countries in particular, to
take practical and effective measures to open markets,
provide development funds, transfer technology, increase
development aid and reduce the debt burden in favour of
the developing countries. International economic
cooperation should be guided by the principle of mutual
opening-up, equality and mutual benefit. Such practices as
implementing protectionist policies of one form or another
and attaching political strings to economic assistance to
developing countries are obviously misguided.
Profound changes have taken place in China amid
the surging tide of change and development across the
world. The 17 years that have elapsed since the beginning
of reform and opening-up in China have been
unprecedented in terms of the economic growth rate and
the improvement of the people’s living standards. At
present, China enjoys political stability, economic
prosperity, ethnic harmony and vigorous advances in
democracy, legality and community undertakings. China’s
exchanges and cooperation with the rest of the world have
reached a level unprecedented in both scope and depth.
Although there may still be many difficulties and
challenges along the road ahead, we are confident that,
11


through several generations of hard work, our people will
lift China out of economic and cultural backwardness and
turn it into a highly prosperous and democratic modern
country.
The Chinese people are peace-loving people. China’s
history for over a century following the Opium War was
one of tears, blood and humiliation in which the Chinese
nation was subjected to repeated aggression, suppression
and plunder at the hands of the big Powers. Do unto others
as you would have others do unto you. The Chinese people
treasure their hard-won independence and freedom and will
never commit aggression or intervene against others. China
is opposed to hegemonism and power politics of any kind
and will never seek hegemony for itself. With a population
of 1.2 billion, China will remain a low-income developing
country for a very long time and the steady improvement of
our people’s living standards will remain our objective,
towards the attainment of which no effort will be spared.
Even when China grows stronger, it will continue firmly to
pursue its independent foreign policy of peace and will live
in amity with other nations. A stable and prosperous China
is a positive factor for peace and development in Asia and
the world at large. This is a conclusion that people of
vision around the world have come to share.
The Chinese people have waged heroic and unyielding
struggles to resist external aggression and oppression and to
defend the sovereignty, independence and unity of the
country. There is but one China in the world. The
Government of the People’s Republic of China is the sole
legal Government of China. It is the sole representative of
China at the United Nations, and Taiwan is an inalienable
part of China. The peaceful reunification of the two sides
of the Taiwan Straits represents the unshakable will and
determination of the entire Chinese people, including our
compatriots in Taiwan. Proceeding from this reality, the
Chinese Government has put forward the correct proposal
on peaceful reunification within the framework of the
concept of “one country, two systems” and a series of
realistic and practicable policies and measures. The past
few years have seen a steady expansion and deepening of
exchanges and contacts between the two sides in various
fields. Any attempt to obstruct peaceful reunification and to
split Taiwan from China is doomed to failure. Should
anyone try to do so, he would be lifting a stone only to
drop it on his own toes.
History moves on. Mankind is progressing. In four
years we will usher in a new millennium. The future is full
of promise. Let us join hands and make concerted efforts to
bring about a better world in which there are peace and
cooperation, justice and equality, mutual respect and
common development, a world of universal prosperity and
continuous progress.
Please accept my warm
congratulations, Sir, on your election as President of the
General Assembly at its fiftieth session. At the same time,
I wish to thank your predecessor, Ambassador Essy, for
his successful work.
The United Nations 50 years on — that makes this
session of the General Assembly an event of extra-special
significance. The people of the world have high
expectations. We must take stock, but in so doing we
must, above all, look to the future.
The representatives of 50 nations who assembled in
San Francisco in the year 1945 were intended to be, as
President Truman put it, “the architects of a better world”.
What has become of their blue-print?
Today the family of nations has 185 members.
Millions of people all over the world owe their lives, their
freedom and their health, their jobs and their homes, to
the United Nations and its specialized agencies.
Decolonization has been completed, apartheid has been
overcome, and respect for human rights is no longer an
internal affair. In the field of disarmament a historic
breakthrough has been achieved: in May of this year the
proliferation of nuclear weapons was halted. That
constitutes a big step towards making the world safe for
mankind.
All these are considerable achievements which many
critics of the United Nations have overlooked in this
jubilee year, achievements on which you, in particular,
Mr. Secretary-General, and your staff are to be
congratulated. Indeed, the United Nations, in spite of
some unjustified criticism, can take pride in what it has
done for the cause of peace, freedom and human dignity.
Especially worthy of our gratitude and appreciation
are the more than 68,000 United Nations troops currently
4


serving on missions in all regions of the world. When
servicemen from Asia, Africa or Latin America attend to
the basic needs of refugees in Europe, in the former
Yugoslavia, and keep the beleaguered people from starving,
then that is, I believe, a marvellous indication that the “one
world” is a reality. Lest we forget: nearly 5,000 of those
troops, the Blue Helmets, have been killed or wounded in
the line of duty. The Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel must be put into effect as
soon as possible. This we owe to all those who serve the
United Nations.
As we recap the events of the past year, we also have
to consider the huge problems now confronting the world
Organization. The ability to safeguard peace: that is the
world’s main criterion when judging the United Nations.
And here we have reached a critical point.
Somalia, Rwanda and Bosnia: these countries stand for
disappointment and setbacks as well. However, I should
like to make it very clear that in such cases the culprit is
quickly found, too quickly. Nothing is more convenient
than to point to the alleged inefficiency of the United
Nations. And nothing could be further from the truth.
When it has not been possible to help people, when
United Nations troops have been humiliated in the former
Yugoslavia, it has in nearly every instance not been the
fault of the United Nations. The problems have lain in its
unsatisfactory mandate, in the lack of political will on the
part of Member States, and, unfortunately, in the shortage
of funds. It is we, the Members, who cause the difficulties.
Following the holding of United Nations troops as
hostages, the atrocities in Zepa and Srebrenica, and the
terrible second bloodbath in Sarajevo’s market place, the
community of nations has demonstrated that there is a limit
to the amount of brutality and contempt for international
law it will tolerate. And there has to be a limit.
The resolve of the United Nations and the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) has paid off — not
only for the people of Sarajevo, who for three years have
been starving and freezing and kept under constant fire, but
also for the peace process.
Yesterday, here in New York, the parties to the
conflict had another meeting with the Contact Group, of
which Germany is a member. Another step forward was
achieved on the constitutional issue following the result
achieved in Geneva, and I believe this step to be a decisive
one. For the first time since the conflict began there is a
realistic prospect of a negotiated peace settlement.
But I should like to warn against being over-
euphoric. A lot has still to be done. We shall have to put
one stone on top of another stone in order to finish this
building. This time none of the participants should leave
the conference table until an agreement has been
reached — a peaceful agreement at the negotiating table,
and not an agreement on the basis of military actions.
Anyone who continues to prefer bloodshed, to prefer
military actions, will be taking a great responsibility upon
himself.
From the beginning, Germany has played an active
part in these efforts. We have never taken sides, nor did
we ever want to take sides, against one party; rather, we
have always taken up the cause of the victims, those who
have been tormented and driven from their homes.
To date, the German Government’s humanitarian aid
in the region amounts to more than 1 billion Deutsche
marks. And I should like to stress strongly that we have
no double standards, nor should we have double
standards. In the short time since August, we have
provided more than 6 million marks to help Serbian
refugees from Krajina.
My country has contributed in various ways to all
peace-keeping operations. By sending medical personnel
to Split and deploying Tornado fighters for the first
time — fighters which we have made available in
Piacenze, Italy — in a United Nations peace-keeping
mission, we have also shown that we do not merely talk
about taking on more responsibility, but that we act to do
so.
We will also meet our responsibility when it comes
to implementing the terms of a peace settlement — and
I hope that this settlement will come soon. The
reconstruction of Bosnia’s economy requires a genuinely
international cooperative effort, an effort on the part of
the international community. The European Union — and
Germany, of course, as a member of the European
Union — will play its part.
What lessons can and must we learn from what has
happened in Somalia, Rwanda and Bosnia?
First, the United Nations must confine itself to doing
what is feasible. Its resources are obviously being strained
beyond the limit. It cannot take on every responsibility. It
5


cannot solve all the problems that the world is confronted
with.
Secondly, the extent and duration of the commitment
of the United Nations must be more precise, the political
and military objectives must be clearly defined, and there
must be a realistic and, above all, coherent mandate.
Thirdly, if the world Organization is going to
intervene, then it must act consistently and resolutely. There
must be no repetition of what happened in Rwanda or Zepa
or Srebrenica.
Fourthly, cooperation between the United Nations and
other organizations such as NATO must from the outset be
planned in such a way that maximum speed and, above all,
efficiency are assured.
Fifthly, we believe that the regional organizations must
play a larger role than they have done so far. Not every
problem must go straight to the United Nations. In Europe,
for instance, and in other places of the world too, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) could assume much greater responsibility.
However, we have to enable it to do so.
Still, let there be no illusions. Peace-keeping is not just
a fair-weather exercise. Such missions will always be apt to
create problems for the world Organization.
And, in view of the hundreds of thousands of lives
that have been saved in Somalia and Bosnia, who can argue
with an easy conscience that the United Nations should not
have intervened? And many of these people have already
been forgotten. What is required here is an increased peace-
keeping capacity — constructive help, not destructive
criticism.
And to those who over and over again have called into
question the actions of the United Nations and its peace-
keeping operations, I would like to address the following
question: Is there an alternative? Who could take the place
of the United Nations? Indeed, Europe has not been able to
cope with this tragedy in its own house as well as we all
hoped it would.
But nor should we forget the European Union’s
achievements in the former Yugoslavia. It paved the way
for the Contact Group’s ongoing peace efforts.
To my mind, the conflict in the former Yugoslavia
emphasizes how important and right it was for Western
Europe to embark on a new course after the Second
World War, a course that was directed against nationalism
and against the use of force. For four decades, as a result
of the East-West conflict, not all European nations were
able to follow that route of the European Community,
today’s European Union.
The European Union is now striving to correct that
terrible aberration and bridge the gulfs that separate it
from Central and Eastern Europe. The goal is one Europe,
a Europe in which the old big-Power politics and
hegemonic aspirations can never again take root.
That Europe must have a legitimate place for Russia,
but for Ukraine as well. The European house does not
consist solely of the European Union: it has many rooms.
Neither of these two nations, Russia or Ukraine, should
be left outside. To our Russian and Ukrainian partners
and friends I say: Europe needs your contribution and it
does so also in bringing peace to the former Yugoslavia.
Here their new partnership with the European Union and
NATO must — and, I add, will — prove its value.
Many feared that when the East-West confrontation
disappeared Europe would focus exclusively on its own
affairs. That has not been the case. The European Union
is intensifying its political, economic and cultural
cooperation with the other regions of the world.
In Asia, Africa and Latin America it is already a
model for peace, prosperity and regional integration. In
the United Nations the European Union is the principal
partner for dialogue with the developing countries.
The European Union and Germany have been
particularly active in promoting peace and economic
recovery in the Middle East. The recent agreement on the
West Bank worked out by Yassir Arafat and Shimon
Peres is another important milestone on the road to lasting
peace in that region. I congratulate both sides on their
courage and on their far-sightedness. The United States is
playing a major part in this process in this region. We are
grateful to them for that. Egypt has rendered an important
contribution as an intermediary.
Increasing the peace-keeping capacity of the United
Nations also involves reforming the Security Council.
There is now a global consensus, I believe, that this is
necessary.
The first steps towards reform have already been
taken. More changes have been made to the Council’s
6


methods of work and more transparency achieved in the
past two years than in the whole of the previous four
decades.
Like many other Member States, Germany considers
that the Council should have more permanent and non-
permanent members. The nations of Asia, Africa and Latin
America need wider representation and I think we owe it to
them. They have deserved it. The same applies to several
countries with an important global role.
Germany, with the support of many Member States,
has announced its interest in permanent membership of the
Security Council. Our willingness to assume greater
responsibility, also within this framework, is for us the
logical and consistent extension of our commitment to the
United Nations. This commitment is consistent with the
fundamental principle of our foreign policy, which is to
give priority to multilateral cooperation. We have abided by
that principle in pursuing European integration, and we
believe that that same principle would help us play a useful
role in the Security Council.
The world finds itself faced with many new conflicts
and challenges. It is crucial that in dealing with them we
should focus our efforts more than we have done so far on
conflict prevention. A political solution must remain the
first option. That requires wider use of human rights
observers, improvements in the United Nations early
warning system, the promotion of democratization and the
observation of election processes, as successfully done
recently in Mozambique.
We have provided a list of experienced intermediaries
for the tasks of preventive diplomacy. The example of
Macedonia shows what the preventive deployment of
United Nations Blue Helmets can achieve. I am very happy
about the agreement that has been achieved between Greece
and Macedonia on this extremely important issue.
Preventing fire can save countless lives and in any case it
is cheaper than putting fires out. On my recent visit to
Rwanda I was deeply shocked, in the truest sense of the
word, by the atrocities that have been perpetrated there by
human beings on other human beings. If the United Nations
had intervened at an early stage and resolutely, many lives
could have been saved.
Germany has set up a substantial emergency aid
programme for Rwanda. We are trying in particular to do
something about the awful prison conditions. I myself
visited prisons, in Kigali for example, and I must tell you
that I have never seen anything like that in all my life.
Urgent remedies are needed here to ensure that one
injustice is not followed by another. I travelled to Burundi
too, and I returned deeply saddened and concerned. We
must not make the same mistakes in Burundi.
Disarmament, arms control and confidence-
building — these are some of the main components of
conflict prevention. In recent years we have made the
kind of progress that no one would have believed possible
at the height of the arms race 15 years ago. The task of
buttressing this breakthrough and building on the
achievements has acquired great political significance.
A few weeks ago we commemorated the fiftieth
anniversary of the first atomic bomb explosions over
Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Nuclear weapons must never,
never, be used again. They must be eliminated
completely, as required by article VI of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. That aim was
reaffirmed by the nuclear Powers at the New York
Conference extending the Treaty.
Never has the door to a ban on every kind of
nuclear-test explosion been wider open than today. We
must now direct all our efforts to the achievement of this
goal. The Geneva negotiations must produce such a
comprehensive ban by the autumn of 1996 at the latest.
Anti-personnel mines, too, are “weapons of mass
destruction”. Day in, day out, they are taking a terrible
toll on human life, and many of the victims are women
and, above all, innocent children. If any kind of weapon
must be outlawed, then this one should be.
Eliminating this scourge is a task of the highest
priority, particularly in Nicaragua, Angola, Mozambique,
Afghanistan, Georgia and Cambodia. Germany, together
with its European partners, will continue the initiative in
this direction during this session of the General
Assembly.
At the First Review Conference of the Convention
on certain conventional weapons, which opened in Vienna
the day before yesterday, tougher export restrictions will
have to be agreed on and a strict ban imposed on the use
of anti-personnel mines.
I appeal to all Members of the United Nations: In
the name of humanity, accede to the Convention on
certain conventional weapons as quickly as possible.
7


There are good reasons why the work of the United
Nations began with the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. The United Nations is more than a mere gathering
of sovereign States. It is based on the common belief in the
dignity and worth of every human being, and it is my view
that this must remain the focal point of all political activity.
Universal Children’s Day, celebrated a week ago,
reminded us of the awful fate to which these, the weakest
members of society, are often exposed. The United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) therefore needs the support of
every one of us.
The task of helping those people all over the world
who have been persecuted and deprived of their rights must
remain at the top of the political agenda. Pressure from the
international community, the media, non-governmental
organizations and private citizens must be maintained.
Those who torture people and who treat human rights with
contempt should not be able to sleep peacefully. To this
end, the High Commissioner’s position will have to be
strengthened and the Centre for Human Rights better
equipped. People who commit war crimes must know that
they will be prosecuted under international criminal law.
Hence, Germany strongly urges the establishment of a
permanent international court of justice.
But above all, stronger measures to protect minorities
are called for. “Ethnic cleansing” is no basis for peaceful
coexistence, either in Europe or anywhere else.
More than 27 million people are today on the move.
This is one of the most dramatic events of our time. The
cause is not only hunger and distress, but, in most cases,
unfortunately, ethnic and religious fanaticism. Diversity of
culture and tradition is one of the world’s greatest assets,
and no one should seek to impose a particular model of
society on others.
The fact that there exists a core of human rights which
everyone has to respect is quite a different matter. This was
reaffirmed at the Vienna Conference and should not be
challenged by anyone.
Today the dialogue of cultures is central to the quest
for peace. I have invited leading representatives of the
Islamic world to come to Germany in November to
participate in such a dialogue. My feeling is that we have
to learn to understand each other better. I have also urged
that the Bosnia Contact Group closely coordinate its efforts
with the Islamic Contact Group.
In Germany, two and a half million Muslims are
living harmoniously with the local community. In my
view, it is extremely important that we should develop
cooperation and mutual trust at the international level as
well, and I am speaking as the German Foreign Minister.
Islam cannot be equated with terrorism or
fundamentalism. No new enemy stereotypes must be
allowed to develop. I think that we should be happy that
we have been able to do away with the old ones.
Peace and development are inseparable. Any reform
of the United Nations worthy of that name should
therefore encompass economic and social matters as well.
This fiftieth anniversary is a unique opportunity to create
a modern framework for a new development in
partnership. Work on the Agenda for Development must
therefore be completed as soon as possible.
Apart from improving and simplifying the finance
regime for United Nations development activities, the
chief concern is to coordinate and efficiently implement
the results of the world conferences on the environment,
social problems, population growth and women —
especially the Conference on Women that has just ended
in Beijing.
These are the main interrelated issues of our time as
we pursue the goal of peace. The planet Earth must
remain habitable for future generations as well. Progress
is possible only through equal and fair partnership
between North and South. Germany will continue to exert
every effort to this end.
None of this can be done unless we can come to
grips with the biggest crisis confronting the United
Nations: that of its financial situation. There is no reason
to deny that it has assumed dramatic proportions; one has
to be quite frank about this. This crisis can be overcome
only if all contributors, and especially the main ones,
meet their obligations punctually. Germany is the third
largest contributor to the United Nations, and we pay our
bills. We cannot allow a situation to continue where those
who pay their contributions on time are also burdened
with the arrears of wealthier Members. Unless decisive
action is taken very soon, whole areas of activity could
grind to a halt.
I very much welcome the confirmation by the
American Secretary of State that the United States stands
by the obligations arising from its membership. The
United Nations needs an America that fulfils its
8


leadership role, just as the United States needs a world
Organization capable of, and willing to undertake, reform.
How can we overcome this financial crisis? First, we
must restore the balance between the budgets for peace-
keeping operations and the regular budget of the United
Nations. We cannot allow resources for such operations to
be used up to the point of depletion while at the same time
funds for urgent programmes of economic or social
development are either non-existent or have to be cut back.
Secondly, it is time we found a scale of assessments
that reflects Members’ actual ability to pay. You,
Mr. Secretary-General, have made great efforts to
rationalize the Organization’s work, to ensure budgetary
discipline and to reduce staff. I appeal to all Member States
to give Under-Secretary-General Paschke the support he
needs for his difficult job.
The United Nations is indispensable to the task of
maintaining global order and as a forum and instrument for
international cooperation, today no less than in the era after
the Second World War. No other organization has the same
ability to focus the interests and energies of the world’s
nations, which we believe is necessary.
The United Nations is not “the others”, but us, the
Members. And this Organization is only as strong and as
united as we, its Members, make it.
Hence my appeal today to the Assembly: let us stop
our constant vacillation between euphoria and
disappointment regarding the United Nations. Let us stop
apportioning blame, which leads nowhere. Let us rather
merge vision and pragmatism, solidarity and responsibility
for our own actions into a rational and realistic international
partnership under the aegis of the United Nations. Let us
give this world Organization more clout and make it more
efficient and economical. Yes, we will have to slim down
the United Nations. It has to save money. Let us do these
things in a constructive spirit, together with, and on behalf
of, the United Nations. Let us give the United Nations what
it needs — including paying our dues.
That is what the world community expects of us now,
and rightly so. That is the task facing the family of nations
on the threshold of the new millennium. If the reforms fail,
there will be only losers.
“Hope is the pillar of the world”, they say in South
Africa. Fifty years ago, such a pillar of hope for mankind
was erected in San Francisco. Let us do everything to
ensure that this pillar will continue to support the hopes
of mankind in the next 50 years as well. Germany will
continue to play its part.
Mr. President, I should like to say first how
pleased France is to see you personally presiding over the
work of the General Assembly. Beyond your personal
merits, which I acknowledge with pleasure, your election
underscores the important contribution to the activities of
the Organization of Portugal, a member of the European
Union with which France feels particularly close.
The United Nations is 50 years old. As the Heads of
State and Government of the European Union solemnly
emphasized in Cannes last June, the collective work since
the Second World War has been considerable. The
European Council on that occasion paid tribute to the
major contribution of the United Nations to this collective
work and gave some examples: decolonization, the
maintenance of international peace and security,
disarmament, development, humanitarian aid and, of
course, the protection of human rights.
But the successes of the Organization do not belong
solely to history. This year has shown the vitality of the
United Nations. In Copenhagen, the social dimension of
development, the struggle against exclusion and for
productive employment, which are both major challenges
for all our societies, are now within the domain of our
Organization. In Beijing, the principle of strict equality
between men and women and the right of women to
decide freely about their lives in all matters have finally
been endorsed once and for all as universal values. In
New York, the United Nations has begun preparatory
work towards the establishment of a world criminal court.
This project signals decisive progress for international
humanitarian law.
In Vienna, at this very moment, a conference on the
scourge of inhumane weapons is being held. France is
working in particular to eradicate the scourge of the
spread of anti-personnel mines. In 1993, it decided upon
a unilateral moratorium on the export of these mines.
Now the time has come to go one step farther.
Accordingly, I wish to confirm that France has decided to
adopt a unilateral moratorium on the production of all
categories of anti-personnel mines. It is therefore
12


imposing upon itself a ban on the manufacture of such
weapons. France also pledges from this point on to destroy
gradually its stock of anti-personnel mines. I call on all
Member States to join with us and do the same thing.
This year has also been marked by the success of the
New York Review and Extension Conference of the States
parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. This success was a major step towards
disarmament. France proposes that this coming year should
be a time for further progress in this domain: disarmament
should be our common goal and it should encompass all
aspects of disarmament. France calls upon the States that
have not yet adhered to this Treaty to do so without further
delay. The struggle against the proliferation of nuclear
weapons must be universal. I suggest that all the States
which have already signed this Treaty multiply concerted
efforts to persuade the States which have not yet signed to
join them.
In addition, it is important to follow through on the
new objectives decided by the review Conference of the
Non-Proliferation Treaty in May. Among these, the most
important is the conclusion, no later than 1996, of the
comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty now being negotiated
in Geneva. The President of the French Republic,
Mr. Jacques Chirac, most solemnly reaffirmed on 13 June
1995 France’s determination to achieve this goal and to
ensure that the ban is total. France is pleased that other
nuclear Powers have in turn made the same commitment.
It calls on all nuclear Powers to ensure, together with all
the Member States of the Organization, that this pledge is
duly confirmed in the text of the future treaty and that the
negotiation of the treaty is completed before the autumn of
1996.
I take this opportunity to recall the reasons that led
France to complete the programme of nuclear tests that was
temporarily suspended in 1992. The final series of tests
now under way has no other purpose than to enable us to
sign the treaty banning nuclear tests definitively. There
were some who imagined and others who wished to make
believe that we might reconsider such a decision. This will
not happen. Once again I repeat, this is a final test series,
limited to what is strictly necessary and held under
conditions that have been proved to be harmless. It will
enable us to adhere as early as possible to the future treaty
banning tests definitively.
The disarmament effort must of course be directed
towards reducing existing stockpiles of nuclear weapons.
Substantial progress has been achieved over the past few
years with the destruction of a significant number of
warheads by the two main Powers. I would recall that
France for its part, although it has never contributed to
nuclear overarmament, reduced the nuclear warheads it
had deployed by 15 per cent between 1991 and 1995.
Disarmament, however, does not apply solely to
nuclear weapons. With regard to chemical weapons, I call
upon all the Member States to ratify, or for those which
have not yet done so to adhere to, the 1992 Convention
banning chemical weapons. I regret that France is the
only permanent member of the Security Council that has
ratified this Convention. I hope that the other permanent
members will do so in the coming months.
We must continue the effort to reduce conventional
forces in Europe. France took its full part in the
agreement on conventional force reductions in Europe. It
proposes that the conference which will be held in May
1996 to examine the implementation of this agreement
should focus on compliance by all States with a treaty
that is the keystone of security in Europe. This conference
should also be the occasion for further progress.
There remains the highly sensitive issue of the
Convention banning biological weapons. A serious
verification system has to be set up. I hope that the
working group responsible for this matter in Geneva
quickly establishes such a system.
My country cannot accept the argument put forward
by some that the Organization has failed in its task. We
reject the accusations of passivity and helplessness that
are sometimes made against it. Nevertheless, we cannot
hide the fact that the celebration of the fiftieth anniversary
will not be as joyful and as optimistic as we would have
liked. The image of the Organization in public opinion is
confused, even negative at times. We should try together
and with a clear head to identify the reasons for such a
situation. I am convinced they have nothing to do with
any disaffection with the Organization. Never have the
aspirations of our peoples, especially the youth of the
world, so matched the objectives of the Charter: peace
and disarmament, environmental protection, solidarity
with the very poor, aid to those who suffer, the promotion
of democracy, of liberty and basic human rights, and the
collective struggle against the major scourges of the end
of the century, namely drugs, terrorism and AIDS. In the
last few years, we have witnessed the emergence of a
body of common values on a world scale. These are the
values which the United Nations, like France, upholds;
they are the values of peace.
13


In Europe we built with our neighbours a Community
and then a European Union, and in doing so we turned a
page of a history that had so often led us to confrontation
with each other. Since 1945 Europe has known a period of
unparalleled peace. The European Union is on the verge of
being enlarged again. France warmly welcomes the
forthcoming membership of its neighbours in Central,
Eastern and Mediterranean Europe, and will do everything
to make it a great success. In this way, the unity of our
continent is gradually being organized.
The extension of the boundaries of the European
Union does not lead it to close in on itself. Quite the
contrary, Europe is opening up to nearby neighbours from
the South, as the Euro-Mediterranean Conference in
Barcelona will demonstrate. I should like to emphasize the
fundamental importance of that Conference. Europe also
wants to develop its relations with Asia; in this regard, the
first Europe-Asia Summit, scheduled for March 1996, will
be a clear illustration. Lastly, Europe is deepening its
partnership with Russia as well as enhancing its close ties
with the United States and other partners.
I would like to insist on the fact that the European
Union, under the impetus of the French presidency, has
confirmed its privileged relationship with the African,
Caribbean and Pacific countries in the context of the Lomé
Convention and its special place in North-South relations as
the leading donor of development assistance.
In all those areas, Europe has set the example.
These values of peace are also at work in the Middle
East. France welcomes the important results that have
already been achieved under the peace process. I am
thinking of the Declaration of Principles of 13 September
1993 and the Jordanian-Israeli peace treaty of 26 October
1994. But, above all, I am pleased to see that the principles
agreed upon in Oslo have at last borne fruit with the long-
awaited initialling of the interim agreement this Sunday.
With this, a major turning-point, manifested by the
declaration of principles, has been given concrete form. The
Israeli-Palestinian peace process is now irreversible. I also
hope that the talks between Israel and Syria will soon
resume and that negotiations will start between Israel and
Lebanon so that a just and lasting peace, in accordance with
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and
425 (1978), be guaranteed throughout the region.
As the French President, Mr. Jacques Chirac, stated at
the celebration of the fiftieth anniversary at Geneva, the
world needs the United Nations. And it knows it, as proved
by the increasing number of tasks Member States have
entrusted to the Organization.
Therefore, today’s doubts have another origin. I see
two major causes. First, the United Nations is not shown
sufficient respect, probably because of a lack of political
will and resources. Secondly, the Organization has yet to
demonstrate its ability to reform itself.
Let me speak of respect first. One will never be able
lay sufficient stress on the devastating effect of the sight
of the Blue Berets of the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR) held hostage last spring, in chains and
humiliated in their dignity as men and soldiers. In
Somalia, in Rwanda prior to Operation Turquoise, in the
former Yugoslavia since the outbreak of the conflict, the
soldiers of peace had already found themselves in
situations that the United Nations accepted but that no
Member State would ever have tolerated. It is not
surprising that the image of the Organization has thereby
suffered.
I want to make myself clear. It is not a matter of
questioning the enormous work that has been
accomplished by the United Nations peace-keeping forces
since the end of the cold war: Namibia, Cambodia,
Mozambique, El Salvador and Haiti owe to those forces
progress that would have been impossible without the
United Nations. In Somalia, the United Nations saved
thousands of lives. Its intervention in the countries of the
former Yugoslavia made it possible to prevent the war
from spreading to Macedonia, to contain and dampen the
conflict within central Bosnia and Croatia, and, above all,
to ensure the survival of the populations in certain safe
areas, in Sarajevo in particular, for three years. However,
we have been helpless witnesses to unacceptable
suffering, to shameful operations of so-called “ethnic
cleansing” and to crimes against humanity, which the
international community was unable to prevent and before
which it remained passive.
These tragic events have shown the dangers of
mixing humanitarian and military missions and the risks
incurred when the mission conferred by the United
Nations is lacking in clarity. The Organization needs to
make itself respected when it intervenes in a conflict. Last
spring, France proposed to its partners that the time to
react had come at last. It suggested a change in attitude
and policy, with the formation of a powerfully armed
Rapid Reaction Force. We have since begun, in liaison
with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO),
decisive action to lift the siege of Sarajevo. This has
14


enabled the United Nations to recover the respect of all
parties.
This strengthening of the United Nations capacities for
action has no other objective than to place force at the
service of law. Only a political solution can truly settle the
conflicts brought about by the dissolution of the former
Yugoslavia.
That is why France, together with its partners in the
European Union and within the Contact Group, has taken
a clear position in favour of a settlement based on two
main principles, namely, respect for international law and
the support of the settlement by all the populations
concerned.
Respect for international law entails a rejection of any
solution which, imposed by force, would mean breaking
with the founding principles of our Organization. Bosnia
and Herzegovina is a recognized State and a Member of the
United Nations. Its territorial integrity and sovereignty must
be preserved. There is nothing to discuss or negotiate on
those two matters.
Those who have chosen to break the law and who
have committed the crimes of which we are all aware will
be held responsible individually. The International Criminal
Tribunal, whose creation was proposed by France in 1992,
must fully exert its jurisdiction.
It is also important that all the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina should be able to assert their specific character
through representative entities. Let each entity have direct
management of its own affairs and even be able to maintain
special relations with States whose populations share the
same affinities. All this is legitimate so long as the
management of common interests and the exercise of the
functions of sovereignty are not brought into question.
The agreement on the principles of a settlement
proposed to the protagonists in this conflict by the Contact
Group at Geneva on 8 September of this year and accepted
by their representatives, meets these two criteria. This is
why France has welcomed it, approves it and will support
it. The agreement and subsequent actions represent an
encouraging step, but they are only a first step. The extent
of what remains to be done to end the tragedy of Bosnia
clearly shows the major role that the United Nations will
have to take. In that mission, it can rely on France’s
unwavering support. It must also rely on the support of the
international community. Peace will be the work of all.
The decline in the respect shown the Organization is
evident in another domain that also affects its survival,
namely, its financing. It is not normal for the Secretary-
General of the world’s largest Organization, faced with
the threat of imminent bankruptcy, to have fewer avenues
of recourse in dealing with his debtors than the smallest
of our businesses. It is not acceptable for Member
States — and I am not thinking here only of those that
are experiencing real economic difficulties — to show
such scant respect for the Organization by ignoring the
legal obligations they have freely accepted.
France would like to see the United Nations stronger
and more respected. For this to occur, however, it is also
essential that the Organization be reformed and adapted.
The Secretary-General has spared no effort to open
the way to reform. Under his aegis, significant progress
has been made in the management of the Organization.
All the debates in these past few years were undertaken
at his initiative and have been based on his proposals in
the Agenda for Peace and the Agenda for Development.
France is awaiting with the greatest interest the Agenda
for Democracy, which will complete this triptych in a
field in which the United Nations is called on to take the
leading role. The Organization has need, more than ever,
of its Secretary-General in order to adapt to the demands
of the twenty-first century.
However, it also requires the political will of its
Member States, and this is not sufficiently in evidence. At
the opening of this fiftieth session, my wish is a simple
one. Let us concentrate on the projects that have already
been begun so that they can be completed soon, within
the coming year. France will contribute to this, and I
should like in this respect to submit a few proposals.
One of our main objectives will be to reach an
agreement on enlarging the Security Council. Enlargement
will be successful only if the Council continues in a
lasting way to be representative of the community of
nations through a reasonable increase in the number of its
members.
I should like to reaffirm this today: the Security
Council will have to welcome Germany and Japan as
permanent members, as well as some major States of the
developing world. It would also be desirable, naturally,
for the Council simultaneously to be opened to some new
non-permanent members.
15


The negotiation on the enlargement of the Security
Council now can and should be concluded quickly. Let us
wait no longer. It is equally imperative for the discussion
on United Nations financing to produce results in the next
few months.
But we must be honest with ourselves. This
negotiation depends in part on the response to the United
States’ request for a reduction in its assessed contribution
to the budget for peace-keeping operations. I shall not try
to disguise France’s genuine doubts as to the legitimacy of
this request.
None the less, for the higher interests of the
Organization, my country is ready to examine this question
without any a priori conclusions. It does, however, set
certain imperative conditions. The first condition is that any
new scale must respect fully the real capacity of Member
States to pay. On this point I should like once again to pay
tribute to your country, Mr. President. Portugal decided this
year, of its own accord, to increase its contribution to the
budget for peace-keeping operations. The second condition
is that the agreement must make it possible for the
Organization to start off again on sound bases. All existing
arrears will therefore have to be paid up. The third
condition is that automatic sanctions should be applied to
those who do not pay appropriately in order to prevent a
recurrence of the current crisis.
This is the modest price of enabling the United
Nations to devote itself less nervously to its two principal
missions: peace-keeping and development.
Peace-keeping is the domain of the Security Council,
the only body empowered to decide on the use of force and
to determine the principles and mandate of operations
carried out in the interest of international peace and
security.
We have to learn the lessons of the experiences of
recent years. Aside from traditional peace-keeping, the
United Nations may find itself obliged, in accordance with
the mandate entrusted to it by the Security Council, to
resort to force, within the limitations of its means, in order
to preserve whatever can be preserved. United Nations
military action is often the sole recourse available to the
international community.
It is therefore essential to increase the efficiency of the
United Nations in the service of peace. Among the most
pressing matters, I wish to underline the need to set up
capacities for rapid intervention, in the framework of the
vital process begun two years ago concerning stand-by
forces. I wish also to mention the need to improve the
command of operations and the interest in a still greater
use of preventive diplomacy.
I would like to say a few words about a situation
that is of grave concern to France and that calls
specifically for urgent action in preventive diplomacy on
a large scale. I am referring to the situation in the Great
Lakes region of Africa.
Since the assassination of Burundi’s President,
Mr. Ndadaye, and the unprecedented tragedy that struck
Rwanda, this entire region has been deeply destabilized.
More than 2 million Rwandans and Burundis are living
outside their country in terrible conditions, with the
difficulties that all this entails for the host countries. The
absence of lasting political solutions, the climate of
insecurity and fear that is kept alive by all the extremists,
the suspicion reigning on all sides, the risk of new
tragedies — all this compels us to address together and in
depth the fundamental problems in this area, taking into
account their extreme complexity and the trauma caused
by the genocide that has plunged Rwanda into mourning.
France remains convinced that only a comprehensive
regional approach that is political in character will make
it possible to do this. The principle of a conference on
peace, stability and security in the Great Lakes region is
now accepted, and we welcome the recent appointment of
a Special Representative by the Secretary-General. But
time is of the essence.
This conference must be carefully prepared, with the
active participation of the States most directly involved
and interested in its success, and it must lead to the
establishment of a stability pact for the African Great
Lakes region. There are three elements that I believe to
be essential in this respect: first, the adoption of
principles for the return of the refugees and for national
reconciliation, along with a commitment by States not to
tolerate any activity hostile to their neighbours on their
territory; secondly, the conclusion of bilateral or
multilateral agreements among the States concerned to
enshrine these principles and commitments and to give
them substance; and, finally, the organization of a follow-
up mechanism under the aegis of the Security Council.
France holds the conviction that development
assistance is the second, or perhaps the first, raison d’être
of the United Nations. Here, too, the balance sheet invites
reflection. How can we not have questions about the
16


feebleness of results, the persistence of extreme poverty, or
at times even famine, these crises that erase all prospects of
development and bring indescribable suffering to
populations? How can we not have questions about the
reduced contributions of the world’s richest countries?
These failures have gone onto the record. Now we
must act, reform and take the best advantage of the
experience we have acquired. The institutions of the United
Nations and their network of representatives in the field are
strong points. The development agencies have to refocus
their activity specifically on their objectives. They have to
set real priorities aimed at addressing real needs — in other
words, first and foremost the needs of the least developed
countries.
But it would be shocking if, as I sometimes predict
will happen, reform were boosted for the sole purpose of
reducing still further the contribution of the richest States
in the struggle against human poverty.
France, together with its partners in the European
Union, hopes to bring about, through An Agenda for
Development a mobilization for development on new
foundations. The situation is too disturbing to set the
interests of the States of the North and South in opposition
to each other. We are all bound by a higher duty: the global
struggle against poverty.
If, before this session comes to a close, we are able to
enlarge the Security Council, to place United Nations
financing on solid bases, to give the Organization the
means to intervene rapidly and effectively to maintain peace
and, finally, to modernize the modalities and institutions for
development assistance, we will truly have celebrated the
fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations, above and
beyond all the speech-making, in a fitting manner: by our
actions.
Allow me finally to mention a project that is
particularly dear to me: to re-establish, on the occasion of
this anniversary, the universality of our Organization, which
is reflected in the diversity of cultures and languages
manifested here.
Linguistic pluralism is essential. It reflects the right of
each Member State to understand the others, but also its
duty to make itself understood. A draft resolution on this
subject will be submitted to the Assembly; it will deal with
the use of languages in the Assembly’s deliberations and in
the Secretariat, and I hope it will enshrine the need to retain
sufficient resources to ensure the provisions of translation
and interpretation services. I am convinced that we will
reach a consensus in this regard.
Our Organization has deliberately taken its actions
for the long term. Recent events may obscure
achievements that are nevertheless solid, the results of
collective, patient, courageous work. But the gains are
there. It is up to each of us to make them known and
consolidate them so that the United Nations may continue
to fulfil the indispensable role entrusted to it 50 years
ago.
May I first
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
in this most important year for the United Nations.
It is nearly half a century since the General Assembly
of the United Nations first met, in London. King George VI
told the visiting representatives of 50 countries that no more
important meeting had ever taken place there. The founders
of the United Nations had taken on themselves a heavy
responsibility and a noble work.
Today we must pay tribute to those founders and
their efforts. Earlier models of collective security had
soon crumbled. The League of Nations collapsed after
less than two decades. The United Nations has proved
more durable. Over 50 years it has helped spread peace
in place of war. It has worked to push back hunger and
disease and to advance democracy and human rights.
Without the United Nations we would have a bleaker
world.
I am delighted to add Britain’s voice to these
celebrations at the fiftieth session of the General
Assembly. After five decades it is timely to recall what
the United Nations has achieved. At the start of a new
half-century it is right to weigh the lessons of past
experience.
The United Nations is a means to an end. Its value
lies not simply in the shared principles and ambitions
enshrined in the Charter, but in practical results. Its
successes are real.
The United Nations has been a force for peace.
From Korea in the 1950s to Kuwait in the 1990s, it has
helped check and reverse the tides of aggression. In the
Near East and Cyprus, United Nations troops have
worked for decades to sustain a measure of stability. In
Cambodia the United Nations mounted its most complex
operation ever to rebuild a country shattered by 13 years
of war. In Mozambique United Nations peace-keepers
have helped demobilize 100,000 combatants, allowing
democratic elections and the creation of a unified army.
The United Nations has been a source of relief from
suffering. Since 1951 the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has provided
food, shelter, medicine and education for over 30 million
refugees. United Nations programmes have immunized 80
per cent of the world’s children against disease. United
Nations sanitation and nutrition projects have halved child
mortality in developing countries.
The United Nations has been a motor for democracy
and sustainable development. It has given electoral help
to over 40 countries. Its charters and covenants set
international standards of human rights. It has brokered
agreements to conserve world forests and fish stocks.
9


The United Nations has done good work for five
decades. My country, the United Kingdom, has been at its
heart from the start. From the drafting of the Charter, as the
first host, in London, of the General Assembly and of the
Security Council, we have been a staunch supporter of the
United Nations. From the first stirrings of environmental
concern in the 1960s, to the fight against AIDS since the
1980s, through to management innovation and financial
reform in the 1990s, Britain has been a driving force for the
changing agenda of the United Nations. In 1947 we were
a party to the first case to come before the International
Court of Justice. This year a British judge became the
Court’s first ever woman member.
Even before the end of the cold war, British forces
had served the United Nations cause for decades. For 30
years the United Nations operation in Cyprus has depended
on British troops and logistics. In the last five years British
forces have served in Kuwait, Cambodia, Rwanda, Angola,
Georgia and, of course, Bosnia. Today Britain commits
more troops to United Nations peace-keeping than any other
Member State — with 10,250 out of a total of 69,000.
Near the end of its first half-century, the end of the
cold war opened a new chapter for the United Nations.
After years of super-Power stalemate, it again became
possible to take effective action in the Security Council,
including by authorizing the use of force to reverse
aggression. Almost immediately a rash of ethnically based
regional disputes began to break out, from the former
Yugoslavia in the West to Central Asia in the East.
Early experience brought a sense of exhilaration.
When Saddam Hussein made his foolish miscalculation and
sought to wipe Kuwait off the map, the United Nations was
the means chosen to stop him, and it worked. Talk of a
new world order did not seem empty.
Five years on, the record looks more diffuse. The
international community could do little to halt disintegration
in Somalia or to avert bloody collapse in Rwanda. The wars
of secession in the former Yugoslavia have dragged on for
four years.
But those who speak of United Nations failure are
wrong. The pendulum that swung too far towards euphoria
after the Gulf War has swung too far towards despair. Look
at the facts.
Alongside the torment of Bosnia and Rwanda are the
democratic revolutions that have swept South Africa, South
America and Central and Eastern Europe. We live in a
post-apartheid world, with a Europe of free nations and
the Middle East peace process a reality rather than a
slogan. The United Nations has helped bring about peace
in Namibia, Cambodia, El Salvador, Mozambique and at
last, perhaps, in Angola. Even in Bosnia, the real good
the United Nations has done has been obscured by unreal
expectations. The reality of the past five years is not one
of spreading world disorder, but of painstaking, steady
efforts to build peace.
Compare this record to the grim setting for the first
General Assembly meeting in 1946, when whole regions
lay in ruins after five years of world war. The truth is that
the history of serious attempts at international cooperation
is still quite young. The United Nations is by far its most
successful expression. There is today no one country or
group of countries ready and able to cope with new world
disorder all alone, and since regional instability and
economic dislocation affect all our interests, we need a
strong and effective United Nations.
This is not to deny the need for change. But it is no
good simply blaming the Organization. We, the United
Nations Members, must meet our obligations to help
improve the system. We have done much in recent years.
The United Nations is better able now to plan, mount and
conduct missions. Britain and others have seconded
military officers to New York to develop the planning and
operational capability and funded secondments by other
nations. Last year Britain helped launch a new initiative
on African peace-keeping. That is bearing fruit now, in
United Nations regional training, in closer cooperation
between African countries and the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) Conflict Resolution Mechanism and
in products like the Anglo-French Peace-keeping
Glossary, developed by the Ghanaian Staff College.
The process of reform must continue. The more
seriously the United Nations addresses issues like pre-
planning, logistic support and command and control, the
more confidence troop contributors will have, the more
forces will be put at the disposal of the United Nations
and the more effective the operations will be.
Changing procedures is not enough. We must learn
to be more realistic in what we ask of the United Nations.
That means not setting aspirations we cannot provide the
means to meet. Sometimes a declaratory statement is
useful to put the international community’s views on
record, to underpin a consensus. At other times it may be
better for the Security Council to remain silent than to
issue unrealistic pronouncements.
10


Bosnia and Somalia have shown the limits of peace-
keeping. They offer a clear lesson. The United Nations is
not yet suited to fight wars. Peace enforcement is better
left, perhaps, to a coalition of the willing acting under
United Nations authority. We must not send in the United
Nations to keep a peace which does not exist and then
blame the United Nations for failure, nor send it in
mandated and equipped to keep the peace and then blame
it because it does not enforce the peace.
Whatever the blemishes of recent years, there is
greater scope today for effective international action than
ever before. The United Nations should be the centre-point
of such work. I suggest we should focus greater effort in
future on two areas.
First, preventive action is better than cure. Far better
than containing or extinguishing a fire is stopping it from
igniting. Bosnia is the most tragic example. Today the
prospects for peace look a little stronger. I commend the
efforts of Dick Holbrooke, supported by the Contact Group,
to mediate between the parties, and the agreement reached
in Geneva on 8 September. Many hard choices lie ahead for
all sides before a final settlement is achieved. But we have
made a start. It is vital that all parties seize this chance for
peace. Only political negotiations, not military force, can
secure that.
But the war has dragged on for three and a half years
now. Tens of thousands of people have been killed;
millions more have been made homeless. It will take years
for the wounds inflicted on that country to heal. Certainly
the suffering would have been many times worse without
a United Nations presence. When I was in Sarajevo last
week, the Bosnian Government told me how much it values
the work done by British and other forces to help the
people of Bosnia. But how much better for all these people
if war had been avoided from the start. Perhaps much of
the damage and destruction might have been prevented by
closer international attention to the problems and tensions
arising from the breakup of Yugoslavia in the early 1990s.
We have started to learn that lesson. The early
deployment of a small United Nations force in The Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has helped to stop
conflict from spreading there. Elsewhere the quiet
diplomacy of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe has helped defuse tension in Ukraine and
Albania; has nudged adversaries toward peace talks in
Georgia, Moldova and Chechnya. There are few headlines
for successes that avert fighting and save lives. But the
headlines of war carry a heavy price. Preventive action is
a wiser investment.
Many routes exist. Britain and France have sketched
out one model: to use the skills of diplomats, of soldiers,
of academics and others to defuse tension and promote
dialogue. The presence of aid workers, human rights
monitors, or United Nations envoys can help contain a
brewing crisis; and all credit to the United Nations
representative doing that in Burundi. We strongly support
the efforts of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) to
work with the United Nations in preventive diplomacy
and conflict resolution. The initiative on African peace-
keeping will help.
So many different actors can play a part. The crucial
point is not who acts but when. Early warning of a crisis
and prompt action by the international community are the
real key to avoiding further tragedy of the kind we have
seen in Bosnia.
My second proposal is for a new approach to peace-
building. To provide lasting security requires more than
diplomacy and military force. To build real peace we
must bridge the gap between our humanitarian work and
our long-term development work.
Aid workers have grown used to coping with the
debris of war. In the past five years the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) has given help to millions fleeing conflict:
Rwandans in Tanzania and Zaire, Afghans in Iran and
Pakistan, Liberians in Côte d’Ivoire and in Guinea. But
too often we treat short-term humanitarian needs in
isolation. Huge sums have been spent in humanitarian
efforts in Rwanda, for example. But Rwanda’s long-term
stability depends on rebuilding the structures of society
and on civil rights; helping local communities to help
themselves, in areas from health and housing through to
an effective judiciary.
I suggest that two elements are key to a new
approach.
First of all, we must adopt a longer-term perspective
in tackling immediate crises. Even when a cease-fire is
holding, or elections have taken place, if the framework
of society is shaky, a continued international presence can
offer it stability until a government can cope. An abrupt
end to a mission, by contrast, can be very destabilizing.
In El Salvador, for example, a small human rights team
stayed on after the United Nations troops had left, to
11


provide further advice and monitoring. Peace-keepers
themselves can help begin the work of reconstruction. The
United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) and the aid
agencies have been doing that for over a year in central
Bosnia, underpinning reconciliation between Muslim and
Croat communities by rebuilding roads and hospitals and
schools.
I strongly support the thesis of the Secretary-General’s
recent report: that we must go beyond electoral assistance,
to preparing the social and institutional ground in which
democracy and civil society can put down firm roots. The
task of rebuilding Bosnia could be a model for the future.
Secondly, we need far better coordination in what we
do. If funds are to be gathered and used quickly and
effectively, donors themselves must make a greater effort
to meet their promises of help. Before operations begin, as
planning gets under way, the international financial
institutions must be involved from the start, as they were in
Cambodia. All the actors in the United Nations system must
be working together, military and political, humanitarian
and development, crossing the traditional boundaries
between rival baronies. Such a coalition of interests could
plug the gap we see too often now, until the major
reconstruction programmes can begin.

My proposal is to build on these principles in United
Nations programmes for stabilization and transition. There
are many areas where international expertise can help
restore a society; creating judicial systems; training an
army; developing a finance ministry or a diplomatic service.
To fulfil these needs, we should be prepared to loan our
experts to countries emerging from conflict, as Britain’s
Know-How Fund does for countries in Central and Eastern
Europe emerging from communism. United Nations
programmes for stabilization and transition could be the
greatest contribution we could make to international
security.
The demands on the United Nations have grown
enormously. To meet them the United Nations needs
change at the centre too. I welcome work under way to cut
costs and reduce waste in New York. The whole United
Nations system must learn from that example. We need
better planning and budgeting, an end to fraud and
mismanagement. More subcontracting can help, using non-
governmental organizations, even private companies, for
tasks like mine clearance and logistics in Angola. And there
is still too much duplication between the United Nations
agencies. Rhetoric is not enough. Reform has to be real,
and it has to be soon.
This is not a side issue. It is not a narrow interest.
If we are to do the United Nations work effectively —
peace-keeping, aid or humanitarian — we must use its
resources better. No one, G-7 or G-77, benefits from
waste. Recent experience has shown the United Nations
is in some ways ill-fitted for its tasks; under-powered in
some areas, like peace-keeping and preventive diplomacy;
but, however, still bloated in other parts of the system.
United Nations Members must pay their dues. But the
United Nations must justify those funds, and get the most
from them, by hard decisions on duplication and over-
staffing, and diverting resources to the top priorities.
Britain supports enlargement of the Security Council
to broaden its base without reducing its effectiveness.
Permanent membership is the key issue. Permanent
members of the Security Council must be both willing
and able to make a significant contribution through the
United Nations to international security. That is what the
Security Council is about. That is what it must remain if
it is to be effective. Germany and Japan are playing an
increasing part across the range of United Nations
business, and are among the top three financial
contributors. It is right that they should benefit from an
expansion of the permanent membership, with the wider
rights that entails, but also with the wider responsibilities
to contribute to security and peace-keeping. Broad
geographical balance in an enlarged Council also needs to
be maintained.
But the United Nations system will never work if we
do not fund it properly. The United Nations is on the
verge of financial collapse. It is owed over $3.7 billion in
unpaid contributions. Troop contributors are owed nearly
$1 billion. Last year 39 countries failed to pay at all. The
United Kingdom favours tightening of penalties for non-
payment, including the charging of interest on late
payments. We find unacceptable cross-funding of regular
budget deficits from the peace-keeping budget. Perhaps an
appropriate policy could best be entitled: No
Representation without Taxation!
The financing arrangements must change. Some
members pay too much. Others, like the new economic
giants of the developing world, now pay less than they
should. We need a scale that is simpler and reflects a
country’s real capacity to pay, and without the additional
anomalies and distortions of the present system. Britain
12


and Sweden have put forward ideas. We need progress
soon.
But the problem is not solved by turning the tap off.
This year we have all reaffirmed our support for goals and
work of the United Nations. But empty words will not pay
bills.
The final lesson from the last 50 years may be the
most important: the case for a strong, effective United
Nations.
In conclusion, may I say that the United Nations today
faces a crisis of confidence. United States Congressmen
may be the most vocal sceptics. They are not alone. The air
of optimism, of a fresh start after the cold war, is overtaken
in some quarters by gloom at the instability and
fragmentation around us, and pessimism at our ability to
cope. This despair is dangerous.
Multilateral action is not an add-on to national policy.
It gives wider legitimacy to principles we value, such as
human rights and democracy. It spreads the cost of aims we
share, such as freeing Kuwait from invasion or restoring
democracy in Haiti. It lets us work with others to fight
common threats, such as greenhouse-gas emissions or the
international drug trade.
The price is not high. The bill for all United Nations
peace-keeping, all aid and development work last year, was
slightly over 3.5 per cent of the United States’ defence
budget, or less than the United Kingdom spends on police
and public administration. One day of Operation Desert
Storm cost as much as all that year’s United Nations peace-
keeping. The price of disengagement and disorder would be
greater. Public support is there. Even in the United States,
polls are clear: people support the United Nations, and they
support international peace-keeping. We have a duty to our
electorates to continue the United Nations work.
It is easy to forget the United Nations successes over
50 years. It is easy to turn away from disorder and chaos.
But the world is too small. Crises in distant countries affect
us too; our commerce, our citizens overseas, our
neighbour’s security — ultimately it is our own. It is in our
interest to play what part we can to build a more decent
world. If the United Nations were not here to help do that,
we would have to invent something else.
The experience of five decades offers lessons for the
future. I know the Secretary-General is committed to
change. Getting the United Nations we need for the twenty-
first century requires the support and participation of all
Member States. The United Kingdom has played a full
part in the United Nations for 50 years, and we will
continue to do so.
It gives me great pleasure to
congratulate Mr. Freitas do Amaral on his election as
President of the General Assembly at its fiftieth session,
during which he will guide our discussions on what the
future of the United Nations should be. May I also convey
my thanks to the President of the General Assembly at its
forty-ninth session, Mr. Amara Essy, who, as it were, tilled
the ground which the new President will sow.
A fiftieth anniversary is a climacteric, usually joyous
but not necessarily so. In ancient India, this was around the
time in a man’s life that he would be expected to withdraw
into a forest, to spend the rest of his days in contemplation
of past and future, it being the assessment of our ancestors
that anything a man could usefully do he would have done
by then. No such drastic measures are needed for the
United Nations, not least because it has spent much of its
first 50 years meditating in a concrete jungle. And the
shadow of the woods of Bretton always loom over it. I do
think, however, that as we celebrate, which we should, the
survival of the United Nations, we should judge what it has
done and what it now needs to do. The United Nations
system has had remarkable success in helping to defeat
colonialism and apartheid, on social issues like universal
health care and women’s rights, and in banning, through
global, non-discriminatory treaties, two of the three
weapons of mass destruction. These are considerable
achievements. But a clear pattern emerges from them.
Whenever the United Nations has acted on principle,
responding to the felt needs and priorities of the majority of
its membership, it has done well. When it has pursued
narrow agendas or succumbed to special pleading, it has
not.
If we were setting out tasks for the United Nations
today, what would be the major trends and challenges we
would expect it to address? The first is the international
economy, transformed by global movements of trade,
capital and labour; driven by forces which can break
developing economies; regulated — if they can be at all —
in forums outside the United Nations, which is therefore
marginalized in this most momentous of contemporary
developments. The second is an opening up of political
systems, with democracy the norm of national
governance. The United Nations welcomes this and urges
the recalcitrant to change, but is itself sapped by
undemocratic systems and institutions. The third is the
scourge of war increasingly replaced by the scourge of
terrorism, which, for the countries that sponsor it, is war
by other means. The United Nations, set up to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war, ignores
it, as the League of Nations, to its fatal peril, ignored the
threat of xenophobia.
These are complex and titanic forces. We, therefore,
cannot accept, either as a statement of fact or as a basis
of policy, the view that all this meant was that the days
of absolute sovereignty were over. Sovereignty has never
been absolute. Most Members of the United Nations
joined immediately after emerging from colonial rule,
with their economies destroyed, and dependent on foreign
languages for communication, on imperial capitals for
support and on donors for subsistence. This is hardly the
stuff on which absolute sovereignty is built. It was, in
fact, one of the great virtues of the United Nations that it
gave fledgling nations space to exercise the sovereignty
so cruelly circumscribed elsewhere. Therefore, the United
Nations should not claim a unilateral right to intervene in
the affairs of its Members. Sovereignty can be diluted
only with the voluntary consent of nation States accepting
obligations that are non-discriminatory or, in exceptional
circumstances, where State authority has collapsed. Far
from enfeebling sovereignty, it is the task of the United
Nations to nurture it in a world that has made the
powerful more dominant and the weak increasingly
powerless. We must never forget that this Assembly is an
assembly of our nations united. The United Nations rests
on the commitment to it of sovereign nations.
There is clearly an enormous need for global action
to deal with complex issues which have no territorial
limits or borders. This is the task of the United Nations.
Developing countries which represent the majority of the
United Nations, obviously want it to focus on the issues
of most pressing concern to them. That is not only fair:
that would be the democratic thing to do. For us, the
single most important task is development, and we expect
this to be the highest priority on the international agenda,
as it is on our domestic agendas. Sadly, it is not. The
Agenda for Development looks lamentably like an
appendix. Can we, at this session, pledge ourselves to
honour the commitments, freely negotiated but never
implemented, which will make development possible in
13


the South and make the world, for all of us, a better and
more peaceful place?
It is just as important for the United Nations to have
a say in the decisions that guide the international economy.
Chapter IX of the Charter gave it the task to promote
higher standards of living, solutions of international
economic, social, health and related problems, and universal
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms. Like
the United Nations, the World Trade Organization gives
equal weight to the votes of all its members, but it would
be a pity if the World Trade Organization cut even the
tenuous links between the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade (GATT) and the United Nations and, decided
instead that global economic policies would in the future be
coordinated between it, the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund, where the system of weighted
voting makes the voice of the developing countries
irrelevant. At the same time, several studies commissioned
to coincide with this anniversary claim that the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD)
no longer has a useful purpose. This can either mean that
the problems UNCTAD addresses — development
strategies, poverty alleviation, resource transfers and debt,
and the transfer of technology — have been settled, or are
now irrelevant. Neither is true. These continue to be
burning issues for developing countries, and if the United
Nations chooses to ignore them it will not serve the needs
of its Member States.
The United Nations must assume its Charter
responsibility to supervise and coordinate global economic
policies. In the World Trade Organization efforts have been
made to link trade to environment and labour standards.
The World Bank, in its World Development Report 1995,
warns about
“the proliferation of protectionist demands, many of
them under the guise of demands for fair trade and a
level playing field”.
If, indeed, there is a genuine interest in protecting the
environment and the interests of labour in developing
countries, why are the United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP) and the International Labour
Organization (ILO) being sidelined in this exercise? The
answer must be that there is no provision in these bodies
for the coercive, retaliatory action which would be available
under the sanctions regime of the World Trade
Organization.
However, the industrialized countries say that
environmental and labour standards must be harmonized
upwards, because otherwise transnational corporations
would go where these standards were the lowest. This of
course implies that transnational corporations have an
appalling and exploitative standard of behaviour, but
when, in the 1970s and 1980s, the United Nations tried to
develop a code of conduct for transnational corporations,
we were told that transnational corporations were models
of virtue. How do these two views cohere?
The problem posed by these global economic forces
is enormous. Trade is the oxygen of our economies, but
cross-border trade between transnational corporations
constitutes one third of world trade and almost 15 per
cent of gross global product. No developing country, or
group of developing countries, can match this commercial
strength, augmented, of course, by the enormous weight
of financial flows, which can make or break a country’s
financial structure.
The third element in the trinity of mobility in the
international economy is migration. At present 125
million people live outside their countries, but more than
half of them move between developing countries; this is
not, therefore, as it has so often been misrepresented, only
a problem for the developed world. It is disturbing,
however, that those who insist on unfettered and truly
global flows of capital and trade also insist on restrictions
being placed on the movement of labour. Economic
arguments are given to justify this, but there are also
claims that large migrations disturb the way a society
thinks of itself as a unified cultural or ethnic entity.
The President returned to the Chair.
It would be honest to recognize these fears as racist.
India is a model of how these fears can be overcome. On
the one hand, over the past decade several million illegal
immigrants have come into India. We know to our cost
the political, economic and social strain this causes.
However, we do not accept a racial basis for
discriminating against legal migrants. We do not accept
that nationhood is based on race, any more than it is
based on religion or any other exclusive attribute. The
waves of migration that have washed over India have
made us a multi-ethnic society; we have been culturally
enriched, not impoverished. We urge the international
community not to let the forces of xenophobia rise again.
Sovereignty has never been threatened by fresh blood
freely welcomed; it has been threatened by the forces of
racist intolerance.
14


This brings me naturally to the other force that now
threatens the sovereignty of so many nations. Terrorism is
the black plague of our times and it has been made more
dangerous by the mystique with which the media has
endowed it. It is argued sometimes that one man’s freedom
fighter is another man’s terrorist. This is specious logic. In
1922 Mahatma Gandhi suspended for several years the
freedom struggle in India because, in an incident in the
small village of Chauri Chaura, a mob burnt some
policemen to death. In Gandhi’s view, the view of the
ultimate freedom-fighter, the means must sanctify the ends.
What ends could possibly justify the barbarism of
taking an innocent foreigner in India hostage and beheading
him in cold blood? Foreign mercenaries did this to the
Norwegian Hans Christian Ostro last month. An empire of
terror is being built up with arms and money sent across
borders; its foot soldiers are drawn from the bigoted, its
leadership from ruthless, unprincipled men and, regrettably,
some women.
At every summit in recent years, whether of the non-
aligned, the Group of Seven, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), or the Commonwealth,
Heads of State and Government have reaffirmed their
resolve to defeat all forms of terrorism. However, in the
United Nations, where we are all represented, we have been
unable to speak in such forthright terms. We must do so at
this fiftieth anniversary. To appease terrorism now will be
as dangerous as appeasing xenophobia was in the 1930s and
ultimately as destructive of both peace and democracy,
because terrorism, as I said earlier, is war by other means.
Whether it tries to violate the territorial integrity of a
country, as in India, in our State of Jammu and Kashmir, or
to unseat duly constituted Governments, as in Afghanistan,
the acts of States sponsoring terrorism are, in fact, acts of
war.
Democracies, as open societies, are particularly
vulnerable to terrorism. The United Nations welcomes the
global trend that has made democracy the norm of
governance, but has done nothing to defend democracies
from extremist and other threats. Instead, it comforts itself
with the mantras that democracy is development, and
democracies do not wage war. These neatly package all the
world’s problems and absolve the United Nations of any
further responsibility: establish democracy everywhere and,
automatically, development and peace will follow.
Both propositions are historically untrue. Democracies
that developed in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries
either suppressed democratic rights until they became rich,
or grew rich on the ruthless exploitation of colonies.
When they shed their empires after the Second World
War democracy became development in Europe only in
the uniquely generous embrace of the Marshall Plan. The
myth that democracies do not wage war is destroyed by
the history of colonial rule and its wars, leading to the
conflagration of the First World War. The United Nations
should, therefore, take these propositions as objectives,
not as givens. Democracy should lead to development;
democracies should be peaceful.
I want to touch briefly upon two other global issues
which affect our lives — disarmament and human rights.
After Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Mahatma Gandhi said that
the use of the atom bomb for the wholesale destruction of
men, women and children was the most diabolical use of
science. We were therefore appalled that, instead of
stepping back from the road to nuclear ruin, the nuclear-
weapon States sped faster and faster down it. As they
accelerated, India tried unsuccessfully to put on the
brakes. In 1954 we called for an end to nuclear testing. In
1965 we proposed principles for a non-proliferation
treaty. In 1982 we called for a convention to ban the use
of nuclear weapons and for an end to the production of
fissile material for nuclear weapons. In 1988 we proposed
to the United Nations a comprehensive action plan for a
world free of nuclear weapons.
Our goal — shared, I believe by most of us here —
is a world from which nuclear weapons have been
eliminated. The nuclear-weapon States claim to share this
goal, but their present objective is to retain nuclear
weapons while making sure others do not get them.
The logic of this is hard to understand. It cannot be
argued that the security of a few countries depends on
their having nuclear weapons and that that of the rest
depends on their not having them. What makes the NPT
such a pernicious document is that it legitimizes this
illogicality, and now that it has been made permanent it
has made the possession of nuclear weapons by the
nuclear-weapon States immutable and has made the goal
of global nuclear disarmament that much more difficult.
It is useful to recall that when India and other
developing countries proposed the NPT, a global balance
of responsibilities was envisaged. Those who did not have
nuclear weapons would not seek to acquire them; those
who had them would not try either to refine or develop
them or to increase their arsenals. This balance was never
honoured, with the result that 25 years after the signing
of the NPT the world is a much more dangerous place,
15


made so by the proliferation of nuclear weapons in the
arsenals of the nuclear-weapon States.
I recall this background because two years ago the
international community at last agreed to negotiate a
comprehensive test-ban treaty. We are glad that negotiations
are in progress, but we also note that nuclear-weapon States
agreed to a comprehensive test-ban treaty only after
acquiring the know-how to develop and refine their arsenals
without the need for tests. In our view, the comprehensive
test-ban treaty must be an integral step in the process of
nuclear disarmament. Developing new warheads or refining
existing ones after a comprehensive test-ban treaty is in
place, using innovative technologies, would be as contrary
to the spirit of the comprehensive test-ban treaty as the
NPT is to the spirit of non-proliferation. The comprehensive
test-ban treaty must contain a commitment binding on the
international community, especially the nuclear-weapon
States, to take further measures within an agreed
time-frame towards the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free
world.
The existence of nuclear weapons poses a threat to
peace and security. Only global nuclear disarmament can
guarantee that there will never be a nuclear war. Therefore,
despite the unfortunate legitimization of nuclear weapons
through the indefinite extension of the NPT, India will
continue to work with like-minded countries for the early
elimination of all nuclear weapons. We hope that at this
session the Assembly will finalize dates for the fourth
United Nations special session on disarmament, in 1997.
Human rights have always been a preoccupation of the
United Nations, but their protection and promotion of such
rights in each country is the primary responsibility of the
government. The universality and interdependence of all
human rights are also beyond question. That is precisely
why the United Nations system cannot promote and protect
human rights by a unilateral prioritization of individual
freedoms or a proliferation of intrusive mechanisms, or by
diverting funds from development activities to human rights
activities. The priorities of nations will differ. The United
Nations must balance the promotion of all human rights —
civil, cultural, economic, political and social — preserve
and propagate the values of every society and promote
tolerance for diversity and cross-cultural interaction.
Politicizing the human-rights agenda and using it to target
countries is undesirable.
The United Nations will become responsive to these
global issues and effective and efficient only if it also
becomes more democratic in its functioning. Developing
countries find it hard to identify with the agendas and
priorities of the United Nations; they feel that it now
represents the privilege of a few rather than the interests
of the many. If the majority of its Members become
disenchanted with it, what role can the United Nations
effectively play? For the United Nations to be more
effective, the General Assembly must be given new life
and breathe that life into the other bodies of the system.
The legitimacy and effectiveness of the Security Council
must be enhanced. An expansion of both permanent and
non-permanent members is a must if the Council is to
become a truly representative body acting on behalf of the
Members of the United Nations for the maintenance of
peace and security.
The members of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries have put forward a comprehensive proposal for
the reform and restructuring of the Security Council. India
believes that, to truly reflect the expanded membership of
the United Nations, developing countries must be included
as permanent members. New permanent members should
be chosen not arbitrarily, but on objective criteria. In the
League of Nations it was argued that one country had a
special right of entry into the Supreme Council. When
that was forced through, one or two of the other aspirants
left the League, starting its decline. We should not repeat
that tragedy. On objective criteria, some countries will
clearly qualify for permanent membership. We believe
India will be among them.
The United Nations has in recent years devoted itself
almost exclusively to peace-keeping, which is important,
but not the central issue of our times. It is judged,
naturally, by its record in these operations. There have
been successes and failures, and both provide the reason
and the need for introspection. India believes that United
Nations peace-keeping operations must be based on the
principles evolved over the last 50 years. Operations
guided by these principles have usually done well. Where
these have been abandoned, failure has been common.
Over the past year this truth has gained broad acceptance,
and the Special Committee on Peace-Keeping Operations
is now trying to collate these principles. It would be
desirable for the General Assembly at this fiftieth session
to agree on them. India will contribute to this work.
India has consistently supported the peace-keeping
activities of the United Nations. Indian troops have
participated in all major peace-keeping operations, ranging
from the Congo to Cambodia, Somalia and Mozambique.
We are currently participating in United Nations
peace-keeping operations in Rwanda, Angola, Haiti,
16


Liberia and Kuwait. We have also offered a brigade of
troops to the United Nations stand-by arrangement. India
will continue to contribute to United Nations efforts to
maintain international peace and security.
If the United Nations is to become a leading player on
the world scene, it must be given the means needed to do
the job we entrust to it. Clearly, setting out on a second 50
years with a crippling financial crisis is not the best way to
do so. In India we make considerable efforts to pay our
contributions promptly and in full. We believe that all
Members must pay their assessed contributions in full and
on time. Further, those in arrears must announce a schedule
for settlement. There can be no progress in the on-going
efforts for financial reform unless this is done.
The fiftieth session of the General Assembly is a
historic one. It is our responsibility to rejuvenate the United
Nations, give it the tasks we want it to do, and the means
with which to do them. We set up the United Nations
because we felt that all of us stood to gain from it. In the
dark days of the cold war and in the friction between North
and South, we seem to have lost this vision.
Since the inception of the United Nations, India has
been committed to the principles and objectives of the
Charter. In the last five decades we have played an
important role in shaping the United Nations agenda, taking
the lead on the crucial issues of decolonization,
disarmament, human rights and environment, among others.
On this historic occasion we pledge our continuing
commitment to the United Nations efforts to chart a new
course for the collective benefit of all humanity. As we
attempt to do so, I am reminded of Jawaharlal Nehru’s
speech to the General Assembly in November 1948, in
Paris. He said:
“The objectives are clear; your aim is clear; and yet,
in looking at that aim, we lose ourselves often, if I
may venture to say so, in smaller matters and forget
the main objective that we were looking at. Sometimes
it seems that the objective itself gets a little clouded”.
(Plenary Verbatim Records, Third Session, General
Assembly, 154th meeting, p. 16)
We must ensure that we set aside smaller matters, that
we do not allow the objective to get clouded and that we
move forward together in harmony and for the benefit of all
the people of the world.
I should like to congratulate Mr.
Freitas do Amaral on his election to the presidency of the
General Assembly. We are glad that a representative of
Portugal, a nation for which Israel has high regard, was
elected to that distinguished post.
I would like to express to the Secretary-General, Mr.
Boutros Boutros-Ghali, a man of our region and a man of
peace, our deepest appreciation for his contribution to world
peace in general and to the Middle East peace in particular.
Tomorrow, the Jewish people will pray on the day of
Yom Ha-Kippurim:
(spoke in Hebrew; English text furnished by the delegation)
“In the Book of Life: blessings, peace, a good
livelihood, good decrees, salvation and consolation.
May you be remembered and inscribed.”
(spoke in English)
We pray for all humanity, for the whole world.
For us, the United Nations is not just a place of prayer
and surely not a platform for speeches. We come here to
state our convictions and to announce our commitments. In
our address in 1987, I stated on behalf of the State of
Israel:
“We have found President Mubarak of Egypt to
be a builder of a better life for his people and of
bridges for a comprehensive peace in the region.”
(Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-
second Session, Plenary Meetings, 17th meeting,
p. 23-25)
Today, under the leadership of President Mubarak,
Egypt is becoming a centre for regional development on the
way to hosting the first regional bank of development.
In the same address, we stated:
“An international conference is the door to direct
negotiations. Once convened it should lead
immediately to face-to-face bilateral negotiations.”
(Ibid., p. 26)
On 30 October, 1991, the Madrid Conference took place.
In 1992, again we declared:
“The opportunity to select, through democratic
political elections, the Palestinian administrative
council will enable the Palestinian people to exercise
a double measure of freedom: the freedom to govern
their own lives and to do so ... democratically.”
(Ibid., Forty-seventh Session, Plenary Meetings,
20th meeting, p. 48)
Last week, we achieved what we promised.
Lastly, in 1993, we declared again from this rostrum:
“Geographically speaking, we live side by side
with the Jordanian Kingdom, and what is so obvious
geographically must become clear politically [so
that] we can offer the people of both sides of the
river full peace, that the Dead Sea can become a
spring of new life.” (Ibid., Forty-eighth Session,
Plenary Meetings, 6th meeting, p. 22)
In October 1994, just one year later, Jordan and Israel
signed a peace treaty.
Last year, we said here:
“All countries of the Middle East face a choice:
to remain politically divided and economically
stagnant or to become economically advanced and
politically just.
“... We shall try to establish instruments for
development: a regional bank, channels for private
investment and a framework for regional planning.”
(Ibid., Forty-ninth Session, Plenary Meetings,
10th meeting, p. 16)
In October 1994, the first Middle East-North African
economic summit was held in Casablanca under the
splendid presidency of His Majesty King Hassan II. At
the end of this month, a second summit will be held in
Amman under the auspices of His Majesty King Hussein.
At the end of November, the first ground-breaking Euro-
Mediterranean conference will be held in Barcelona.
Three years, five promises: all of them fulfilled. I
would like to use this occasion to turn to the Syrians and
to turn to the Lebanese and ask them to stop hesitating,
to stop wandering. They have to look at this record and
come in and follow up. The President of Syria has said
that from experience he has learned that only through
military negotiations and making security the major
agenda item can one achieve peace. Sorry: Experience has
4


shown that through negotiation on all levels, embracing all
issues without timidity, without fatigue, we can achieve
peace. If leaders meet and are not successful at the first
meeting, they will have another meeting. How can it be
wrong for them to work day and night, ceaselessly, with
new ideas and new approaches? They are not wasting the
leaders’ time; they are wasting the time of the people —
their fortunes, their happiness, opportunities for the younger
generation.
We also tell all the countries of the Middle East, not
that we want to have a new Middle East, but that we want
the Middle East to join in a new age — for the good of
their people, not for the good of Israel. Israel is in good
shape because we are no longer living in a world where
there are empires of power and colonies of poverty. Poverty
and oppression are home-made, not imposed by others. The
choice is before every country to become free and
prosperous and democratic, like so many nations have done
in a relatively short time in Asia, Latin America and in
some countries of Africa. It is their choice, their
opportunity not just to build a different world but to
introduce the new world to their own people.
For us, the United States is not an empire of power.
We are not afraid of the United States. For us, the United
States is an empire of peace. We need the United States.
For us, Russia is going through a process of change. Russia
will remain great but will become something different. For
us, we welcome the European contribution to other
countries east and south of them and the convening of the
Barcelona conference to offer the Mediterranean peoples
funds and experience to build a new life. We are glad that
Japan is expanding its economic horizons and understanding
and contributing so that other nations can do so. And we
hope that other well-to-do countries in the Middle East,
including Arab countries, will help the needy parts of our
own region.
May I say that in my best judgement the greatest
danger is a combination of high technology and deep
hatred, of modern instruments and feudalistic views, and
the greatest hope for all of us is a double effort to respect
human values and modern education.
Israel itself is in good shape. We are strong militarily:
I do not deny it. We have an excellent economy — an
economy of brains, not of material resources. We have
absorbed a very large immigration of white and black Jews,
white Jews from Russia and black Jews from Ethiopia, and
nobody can understand what put Israel in such a relatively
good position.
What brought this about is, first of all, the return to
the moral choice. By the end of this year — at the latest
at the beginning of next year — not one Palestinian will
remain under our control. For the first time in the history
of the Palestinian people, they are educating their children
without intervention by us or anybody else. Nobody
forces us to do so. We are not weak. We are not poor.
We are not under pressure. We have had to take serious
risks because terror still continues. The Arab boycott is
still intact.
In our own country there is strong opposition to
what we are doing. We have had to spend a great part of
our budget to make peace — and yet, despite all this, we
decided to make a moral choice: not to dominate another
people. We stated in this Assembly that that was our
intention. Now we have done it and even politically, as
difficult as it may be at home — because, as a party, we
may win historically but we may also lose politically —
but then, winning peace is in our eyes more important
than winning elections. Why should you be elected if you
do not use the mandate of the people to change the course
of your history in a reasoned, moral way?
We believe that the strength of ethical judgement is
as important as military exercises or triumphs. We gave
up land and produced instead an economy of brains.
Today Israel is making out of its brains more than some
other countries in our vicinity are making out of oil.
And what we actually expect from the Palestinians
is for them to become democratic, to be prosperous, to
fight violence and terror, and we are giving our
neighbours a simple message: What we can do,
everybody can do.
For many years there was a legend that only the
North, which is white and wealthy and permanent, is a
success story, whereas the South is condemned to
backwardness, to poverty, to lagging behind. What has
happened in Asia, where the most vibrant economic
endeavours are taking place today, and what is happening
in Latin America show that the economy has nothing to
do with geographical location or the colour of the skin.
Make the right choice: serve your people and create a
new future.
What we are offering to anyone who is interested is
our experience — open, in a comradely way. We do not
want to dominate anybody and certainly not anybody’s
economy. We did not give up the domination of people
to gain domination of markets. And we are suggesting to
5


our neighbours — and we are happy that they have
accepted — is that the new frontiers — say, between
Jordan and Israel — will not be frontiers of mines and
hostile fences, but an occasion for joint ventures.
The whole rift of Africa, the whole valley which is a
desert that separates the Jordanians and us will become,
with God’s help, a source for work, for development. We
will build hotels and schools and desalination plants and
parks, and people will be free to move from one side to the
other, competing without hating, cooperating without
dominating.
We want to do the same about the dividing line
between us and the Palestinians: we want to build alongside
the line on the West Bank and Gaza eight industrial parks
so that the Palestinians will not have to cross the border
and go through Israel’s checkpoints: instead, work will
come to them, and together we shall invest and together we
shall develop.
A better economy is the best guarantee of peace.
Actually, there cannot be economic cooperation without
political understanding. Recently, while we were negotiating
we created three zones of security sensibility on the West
Bank — zone A, zone B and zone C. Then we turned to
water and electricity and we asked the water and the
current to submit to our political wisdom, but the electricity
and the water people said that they did not distinguish
between A, B and C. Water flows according to nature and
not according to artificial agreements, and electric current
does not stop at A or B or C. They serve everybody.
Today in the Middle East as elsewhere, the distinction
is no longer ideological or religious or national. There is
just one distinction between an old, poor, backward
economy and a new age where economies are based on
technology and science and where the natural resource is
schools for the children and not the mines of the Gulf.
Everybody can postpone the choice but nobody can escape
it.
Our aim is to have peace so as to serve our people; to
have education so as to equip our children to take
advantage of the new age, to be equal to others and to
compete with other children. It cannot remain a peace
between leaders: it must become a peace for the people,
now and in the future.
I started by showing what has happened in three or
four short years. It is a revolution. It is a beginning. We
should not stop in the middle. Let everybody pray to the
Lord in the language he is used to. Let everybody respect
his own tradition, his own heritage. Let everybody respect
the special experience of a people, of a nation. But let all
of us give up unnecessary hatred, untold suspicion. Let us
give up barricading ourselves behind old dogmas and
terrible prejudices. Let us help the people and the future.
Then the 50 years of the United Nations will offer not
just 50 years without war but the coming 50 years with
peace and prosperity.
May I first take this
occasion to congratulate Ambassador Diogo Freitas do
Amaral of Portugal on his election to the presidency of
the Assembly in this important fiftieth anniversary year.
I should also like to offer a special welcome to
Palau as the one hundred eighty-fifth Member. Palau’s
accession does signal honour to us as a fellow Pacific
State.
Here today I want to talk about making our global
neighbourhood a safer place for all of us; the progress
that has been made in the years since the end of the cold
war, and what still needs to be done. Memories are short;
it is hard to recall the degree of mutual suspicion that
coloured global politics just a few years ago.
We have made great strides in recent times. The
world community has achieved much in its efforts to
make the world safer, and more stable. But we need to
move on to reinforce our achievements in controlling,
reducing and abolishing the horrific weapons of mass
destruction. We have yet to see the dividend we all
expected to flow from the end of the cold war.
The transition to a post-cold-war world is not easy.
We are painfully aware of that. In recent years though,
we have been encouraged to believe that a new world
order was achievable. One of the reasons for this hope,
this optimism, was that the nuclear scourge had receded.
For the first time in 50 years nuclear Powers were
committed to build down rather than to build up, to
decommission and destroy rather than to commission and
construct.
However, recent events have cast a cloud over that
brief period of optimism. New Zealand does not believe
18


that continued nuclear testing, wherever it takes place,
contributes to a safer world. On the contrary, nuclear
testing sends the wrong message to States which do possess
or which aspire to the possession of nuclear weapons. It
also tells them that the development of these weapons is
still acceptable.
The nuclear tests which have taken place since the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons was
extended have disturbed the delicate balance achieved at
that Conference. New Zealand believed then, and continues
to believe, that indefinite extension was the right option.
The world needs a strong non-proliferation regime, one that
cannot be called into question by changing global
circumstances. But the Conference went further than that,
the vast majority of participants making it very clear that
they were against nuclear testing. They also wanted to
move towards the nuclear-free world envisaged in article VI
of the Treaty. The cavalier disregard, and dismissal of the
views of the many, has led to considerable disillusionment.
It will take a long time to restore the trust that had been
there.
New Zealand and the rest of the South Pacific region
have long stood tall and proud in opposition to nuclear
weapons and their testing. We abhor testing wherever it
occurs. But the decision to resume testing in what we see
as our home region has particularly angered the people of
New Zealand. The leaders of the South Pacific Forum
nations expressed their outrage at their meeting just two
weeks ago. They were able to recall the painful memories
in the region, going back to atmospheric testing conducted
between 25 and 50 years ago.
The South Pacific has not been alone in its opposition
to nuclear testing. Governments, parliamentarians and
peoples from every region of the world have spoken up in
anger, alarm and dismay. The two Governments which are
continuing to test nuclear weapons must heed the voice of
the international community. They are dancing to a tune no
one wants to hear.
In these circumstances, New Zealand, along with a
representative group of like-minded States, will submit an
appropriate draft resolution to the First Committee of this
Assembly.
Testing is a backward step, and I condemn it. It is not
too late. All that China and France need to do is listen to
international opinion and announce that their testing
programmes have ceased.
I want to welcome the commitment by three of the
nuclear-weapon States — France, the United Kingdom
and the United States — to a genuine ban on nuclear
testing: a prohibition on any nuclear explosions, no matter
how small. This is what we have always called for: a
comprehensive ban — where the word “comprehensive”
means just that. We are pleased that it is attracting serious
support.
New Zealand calls on the two nuclear-weapon States
that have not yet indicated full support for this approach
to do so quickly. Time is short. The deadline for the
negotiations is 1996, and the international community is
holding the Conference on Disarmament accountable for
meeting that deadline and producing a treaty that is
genuinely comprehensive in scope.
In this regard, the General Assembly has become
increasingly concerned about the lack of accountability in
the Conference on Disarmament. Limited and
unrepresentative membership has been a large part of the
problem. Enlargement is long overdue. New Zealand
welcomes the progress made in recent weeks in Geneva,
and we express our gratitude to Morocco for its efforts in
this regard.
However, the real test will be whether by the time
we meet here again next year the new members will have
been able to take their seats. For the moment, the
outcome is still not satisfactory. I recall that democratic
representation was once at the heart of a tea party in
Boston. Let us hope that there will not be a tea party in
New York in 1996 on membership of the Conference on
Disarmament.
I also urge the members of the Conference on
Disarmament to look beyond the conclusion of a
comprehensive test-ban treaty. New Zealand wants to see
an international agreement banning the production of
fissile material for nuclear weapons. That would be
another important step towards negotiations on the total
elimination of nuclear weapons. We urge the Conference
on Disarmament to resolve its procedural differences and
get the negotiations under way.
I should add that at the Review and Extension
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons we raised the idea of
negotiating an agreement to ban the future production of
nuclear weapons. That could take us a step closer to
eliminating the nuclear threat.
19


But it is also important to address the issues relating
to conventional weapons.
I wish, first, to address the issue of land-mines. I want
to congratulate the Secretary-General and his staff for the
way they have picked up this issue and raised public
awareness around the world. The Conference organized in
Geneva this year was most timely — but more is needed.
Both financial and technical resources need to be made
available to help dispose of the millions of treacherous life-
and livelihood-destroying mines that have already been laid.
I pledge New Zealand’s ongoing assistance in this work.
Of course, disposal alone is not the answer. Urgent
progress needs to be made to deal with these hideous
weapons, which go on claiming the lives of innocent
people — farmers, their children, shopkeepers, collectors of
wood, carriers of water — long after conflicts have ceased.
I ask all the participants at the Conference which opened
this week in Vienna, which has as its main aim the revision
of international law on land-mines, to work together to
achieve the tightest possible restrictions on these totally
indiscriminate weapons. I want to work to eliminate them
entirely from the world’s armouries.
This leads one to the broader questions of arms
transfers. We are profoundly disturbed at the unnecessary
and irrational increase in arms transfers. At a time when,
globally, resources are desperately needed for development,
for the environment, for health, why is it that even modest
measures, such as enhancing the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms are still being resisted?
Neither peace nor development is advanced if States
put increasingly scarce economic resources into the defence
sectors of their economies. Far too much of the global
economic capacity is going into armaments when the
citizens of the world desperately need better health, better
education and a better future for their children.
The widespread availability of conventional arms and
the resurgence of ethnic nationalism have, together,
produced a very dangerous cocktail, which poses a major
threat to stability in the post-cold-war era. The need for
Member States to maintain a collective approach in
addressing these challenges has never been greater.
Events in the former Yugoslavia over the past year
have presented an enormous challenge to the international
community. New Zealand fully supported the firm response
made by this Organization and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization to the murderous shelling of Sarajevo late in
August. The diplomatic efforts now under way, including
the very important constitutional agreement reached last
Tuesday, offer some prospect for bringing to an end
almost four years of a most appalling conflict.
Some have been dismissive of the achievements of
the United Nations in the former Yugoslavia. That,
however, is to overlook the saving of tens of thousands of
lives and the substantial relief of suffering. This is why
New Zealand, despite its geographical distance from the
region, has been willing to play its part. I believe that,
one day, the United Nations mission in Bosnia will enjoy
recognition of the successes it has achieved so far.
It is a little too easy to focus on the problems of the
United Nations. We need to remember its successes as
well. I think of Cambodia and Mozambique, of El
Salvador and Haiti, of Namibia and Angola and of the
contributions to peace in various parts of the Middle East
over the years. Even in Somalia, where a political
settlement proved elusive, massive famine was relieved
thanks to the United Nations.
The United Nations is unique. It is called on to deal
with the most intractable problems — the ones that others
put into the “too hard” basket. And it works under the
closest public scrutiny of Governments and the world’s
media.
New Zealand strongly supports practical steps to
improve peace-keeping management. We have, in fact,
provided additional specialist personnel to the Department
of Peace-keeping Operations at our own expense. We
have contributed to the strengthening of the Secretariat’s
capacity in the demining area. And we shall continue
these commitments because we believe that they are so
necessary. We also entered into the United Nations
stand-by arrangements earlier this year, and we hope that
these will provide a clearer focus for peace-keeping and
its planning.
We have also studied with interest the Secretary-
General’s recommendation, in his Supplement to “An
Agenda for Peace”, that the United Nations should
consider the idea of a rapid-deployment force. I wish to
commend the ground-breaking work that has already been
done by Canada, the Netherlands, Denmark and others.
My discussions yesterday with Ministers from these and
other countries were encouraging to me. Progress can and
should be made in this area.
20


At about this time last year I spoke to the General
Assembly about a number of elements that I consider
critical to the conduct of peace-keeping operations. These
included a sustainable financial system, transparent political
accountability, clear objectives, a credible legal regime that
guarantees the security of United Nations personnel and, of
course, the availability of resources so that objectives can
be met quickly and efficiently.

Progress has been made. We were especially pleased
to see the Convention on the Safety of United Nations
Personnel opened for signature during last year’s session.
We urge those that have not signed it to do so, and soon.
We owe that to the thousands who have served, and are
serving, in the United Nations operations worldwide.
The improved procedures for consultation between the
Security Council and troop contributors, initiated by
Argentina and New Zealand, have now been in place for
almost a year. Pleasing as this is, we still have some way
to go. It is up to those of us who contribute troops to
United Nations operations to ensure there is no slippage in
these procedures.
Regrettably, however, we do not appear to have a
sustainable financial system. I am gravely concerned that,
despite all the warnings here in this Assembly last year,
delegations have not made any real progress in the Working
Group addressing the financial crisis. The United
Nations — this United Nations — ran out of cash in mid-
August. The arrears of Member States in respect of the
regular and peace-keeping budgets have reached
unprecedented levels. It is nothing short of a tragedy that
on the eve of our celebration of the fiftieth anniversary, the
United Nations, this body of ours, is on the verge of
bankruptcy.
At this critical point in the United Nations history, we
need political will, not more words. “Words pay no debts”,
as Shakespeare wrote. We need new ideas, not recycled
platitudes. And, above all, Members must pay their dues,
on time, and in full.
We do stand here at a crossroads. In taking stock of
the United Nations 50 years, we have much on which to
reflect. There have been good times, and there have been
bad times. Reform and revitalization must stay on our
minds. I wish to assure you, Sir, and all other members, of
New Zealand’s commitment to help remould the
Organization to that which will be needed to work for all
of us as we head towards the twenty-first century.
First of all, allow me to congratulate my
colleague, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Portugal,
Professor Diogo Freitas Do Amaral, on the occasion of
his election to the high post of the President of the
General Assembly.
Each of the 50 sessions of the General Assembly has
been a step for the international community on a difficult
road in search of peace within itself, for the strengthening
of the indispensable role of the United Nations. The
current session will be marked as the anniversary session
by the addresses to be made by the Heads of State and
Government in late October. Russia’s views on the
prospects and difficulties of establishing partnership in a
multi-polar and interdependent world — and it is with
equal partnership that we link our national and state
interests — will be stated by the Head of the Russian
State, President Boris Nikolayevich Yeltsin.
If half a century of experience of the United Nations
teaches us anything, it teaches us first of all that only the
equality of States and respect for the diversity of cultures,
religions and national traditions can serve as the basis for
security and prosperity in the modern world. But the
formula “unity in diversity” also presupposes everyone’s
compliance with fundamental principles of international
law and order, respect for human rights and the
6


promotion of economic progress. This is the essence of the
United Nations Charter, which identifies both common
ideals and goals and equal rights and obligations for all
States without “double standards”.
They say that generals always prepare for the last war.
Politicians and diplomats have no right to prepare for the
last peace. On the contrary, it is necessary to avoid slipping
back into a bloc mentality and dividing countries into
“friends and foes”, whether in politics or in economics.
We can indeed make the next 50 years an era of the
United Nations if we accept as its basis the indivisibility of
international security and sustainable social and economic
development for all.
This question becomes more and more acute against
the background of humanitarian disasters in Africa and
other regions of the “third world”, and the social price of
the initial stage of reforms in the post-socialist countries.
No one will be able to hide from global problems behind
dividing lines of national egotism and economic
discrimination, or even expanding military alliances. Such
things will not rein in, but rather spur on the spread of
international terrorism and drugs, and whip up the flames
of local conflicts and the arms race.
One of the principles of the “Agenda for
Development” which is being formulated now should be the
early elimination of the remaining discriminatory
restrictions in the world economy, trade and technology
transfer. In particular, Russia, which is successfully
implementing unparalleled reforms, should be recognized as
an equal trade and economic partner with an economy in
transition.
Such a strategy should also provide for the promotion
of the economic rehabilitation of countries and regions
affected by armed conflicts. The United Nations, its
specialized agencies and Member States should immediately
begin to address directly the problem of the economic
rehabilitation of Bosnia and the former Yugoslavia as a
whole, whose peoples have suffered from war and
economic sanctions that have been in effect for too long.
Russia is ready to take an active part in these efforts, and
we do and will continue to contribute substantially to a
political settlement. The real chances for such a settlement
should not be sacrificed to power or unilateral approaches.
The international community should make equally
great efforts to achieve progress in all aspects of the peace
process in the Middle East and the post-conflict
rehabilitation of all States of that region. We congratulate
Israel and the Palestinians on the occasion of their
reaching an agreement in Taba, whose official signing
ceremony will take place on 28 September next in
Washington under the chairmanship of President Clinton.
We intend to continue our joint efforts with the United
States and to make our contribution to the coming
Amman summit conference.
Europe needs a new model of general and
comprehensive security, without double standards or
dividing lines.
International dialogue on this issue is already under
way. I believe that the active involvement of the United
Nations and its specialized agencies is necessary to the
efforts aimed at the development of this model.
Incidentally, the General Assembly was born in the Old
World.
A new approach is required to disarmament issues in
Europe. On the basis of the implementation of the
Conventional Armed Forces in Europe Treaty (certainly
taking into account new realities) as early as next spring
we should arrive at new major agreements based on the
unity of the vital security interests of the peoples of the
continent instead of the bloc logic of the past.
Our proposal to all nuclear-weapon States to
elaborate a treaty on nuclear safety and strategic stability
has become even more timely.
The indefinite extension of the Non-Proliferation
Treaty establishes favourable conditions for this. Our
common task is to create the necessary political
conditions for those States that have not already done so
to accede to it as non-nuclear States. We consider it
necessary, as a matter of priority, to conclude as soon as
possible, but not later than 1996, work on the
comprehensive test-ban treaty. From this rostrum, Russia
calls for a universal and permanent moratorium on
nuclear tests.
The summit of the “Political Eight” on nuclear
safety, which is to be held next spring in Moscow at the
initiative of the President of Russia and which was
approved in Halifax, will make a major contribution to
global stability.
We would like the United Nations to take urgent
measures on the prevention of illicit trafficking in light
firearms and the proliferation of anti-personnel mines. It
7


is these “light” firearms that have led to enormous human
losses in Rwanda and Angola, Liberia and Bosnia,
Tajikistan and Abkhazia. Russia has already introduced a
moratorium on the export of the most dangerous types of
anti-personnel mines. We urge other States to follow our
example.
This issue should be seriously considered in the United
Nations Disarmament Commission. While supporting the
activities of the Commission, we believe that it should
adopt a new agenda corresponding to the current scale of
cooperation in the area of security and to new threats and
challenges in this field.
The problem of global adherence to a single standard
in the area of human rights and basic democratic
institutions is very acute. Russia, approaching free,
multipartite parliamentary and presidential elections, is
making its own contribution to the establishment of these
very standards. We invite observers from foreign States and
international organizations to attend the forthcoming
elections.
It was not so long ago that dozens of agenda items of
the General Assembly were devoted to the struggle against
apartheid. Now it seems unbelievable that this problem has
been solved, owing to a large extent, to the efforts of the
United Nations. I sincerely welcome the accomplishments
of the people and the Government of South Africa, headed
by Nelson Mandela, in the democratization and creation of
a free, multiracial society.
But did we manage to overcome the danger of
violence arising through fascism, racism, and political and
religious extremism? Alas, the answer is far from
reassuring. That is why the international community has no
right to abandon its efforts in this direction and must not
tolerate the emergence of double standards.
The signing of the CIS conventions on human rights
and fundamental freedoms and on the rights of national and
language minorities was the response of the CIS States to
the United Nations recommendations on the creation of a
single humanitarian sphere in this part of the world.
However, much has yet to be done before a unitary
approach to human rights can become a norm of life for,
among others, 25 million of our compatriots in some
countries of the Commonwealth and the Baltic States. A
double standard here is unacceptable.
Russia is interested in the adoption at this session of
decisions on such issues as the struggle against racism, all
forms of xenophobia and aggressive nationalism, ensuring
the rights of minorities and the promotion of democracy
and the rule of law in countries in transition. The United
Nations should further pursue its policy of qualitative
improvement of the international human rights protection
machinery, primarily by strengthening its control and
preventive functions and enhancing its focus on specific
action. The policy of single standards must become an
incontestable rule in the sphere of peace-keeping as well.
Justice without force is powerless, while force without
justice is tyrannical.
There have been many achievements in United
Nations peace-keeping efforts. Without the Blue Helmets,
the world would be much more dangerous and dozens of
conflicts would have been much more bloody. We are
proud that approximately 20,000 Russian servicemen are
serving as peace-keepers in United Nations and CIS
operations.
However, if we want force always to go hand-in-
hand with justice in the activities of the United Nations
and those who cooperate in them, strict observance of
Security Council decisions must be ensured. Here, the
Secretary-General and his staff can always count on the
support of Russia and, I am confident, of all other
Members of the United Nations. The United Nations
should be protected from setbacks like that which has
occurred in Bosnia.
In general, it is necessary radically to improve
United Nations peace-keeping through precision of the
criteria and terms of the United Nations involvement in
areas of tension; a close linkage between peace-keeping
operations and efforts to achieve the peaceful settlement
of conflicts; the efficient operation of the whole
functional chain — peace-keeping planning, command
and control. We are for the earliest possible
implementation of the Secretary-General’s proposal on the
establishment of United Nations reserve forces.
We welcome the conclusion of the Convention on
the protection of United Nations personnel, which I
signed today on behalf of Russia. This instrument will
help to save lives of hundreds of peace-keepers in hot
spots of the world.
Peace-making activities undertaken by Russia and its
Commonwealth partners contribute to a considerable
extent to ensuring regional and international stability. We
appreciate fruitful cooperation with the United Nations in
Tajikistan and Georgia. However, the United Nations
8


support of our collective efforts sometimes unfortunately
reminds us of a saying: “Too little, too late”. Russia,
together with its CIS partners, expects the United Nations
to make a radical change in its attitude towards peace-
making problems in our part of the world.
During the 50 years of the existence of the United
Nations, sanctions have been an instrument that the
Organization has used to deal with the instigators of
conflicts. Now, the time has come to give this instrument
a more selective and precise nature. The principal criteria
in this regard are: distinct objectives underlying sanctions,
advanced coordination of conditions, and mechanisms for
lifting them once the objectives are attained.
As a newly elected member of the Executive Council
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, Russia intends to make an essential contribution
to overcoming a new global crisis, namely the tragedy of
millions of refugees. To this end, we intend to seek
practical results from the international conference on
refugees and migrants within the post-Soviet space.
At this session the General Assembly should give new
impetus to collective efforts by the international community
in combating crime, illicit drug-trafficking and terrorism.
The explosions in Oklahoma and Paris, the taking of
hostages in Budennovsk and chemical terrorist attacks in
Tokyo — these are bells tolling for us all.
Whatever agenda item we consider, we are convinced
time and again that the answers are to be found only on the
basis of a single standard: respect for the United Nations
Charter and for the purposes and principles of the United
Nations that have withstood the severe tests of the past five
decades and are lighting the way into the twenty-first
century.
It is
a privilege to speak to the General Assembly today on
behalf of the United States.
A half-century ago the General Assembly first met
here in New York, across the river in a converted skating
rink at Flushing Meadows. In those modest surroundings
our predecessors began to put in place an ambitious
framework that they hoped would keep the peace as
successfully as they had prosecuted the war.
In the years since, the United Nations has helped
bring peace, prosperity and hope to countless people
around the world. Technological change has brought
nations closer together than the founders of the United
9


Nations could possibly have foreseen. The United Nations
itself has been challenged in unforeseen ways. It has had to
manage complex humanitarian emergencies, from civil wars
to mass movements of refugees to health epidemics. This
evolution has placed great strains on the Organization and
has revealed the necessity for far-reaching changes in how
it is run.
The Clinton Administration has vigorously made the
case to our Congress and our people for continued
American leadership at the United Nations. The United
States made a commitment to the United Nations Charter
50 years ago, and we are determined to keep our
commitment, including our financial obligations.
We will always remember that for millions of people
around the world, the United Nations is far from a faceless
institution. It is, as Harry Truman once said,
“a case of food, a box of school books; it is a doctor
who vaccinates children; it is an expert who shows
people how to raise more rice and more wheat.”
To millions more around the world, it is the difference
between peace and war.
Economic and social development, as well as the
protection of human rights, remain central to the United
Nations mission. But the United Nations must change to
meet new needs more effectively. When money is wasted
in New York, Geneva or Vienna, when time is lost in
bureaucratic inertia, the people who pay the price are those
most vulnerable to famine, disease and violence.
It is time to recognize that the United Nations must
direct its limited resources to the world’s highest priorities,
focusing on the tasks that it performs the best. The United
Nations bureaucracy should be smaller, with a clear
organizational structure and sharp lines of responsibility.
Each programme must be held to a single simple standard:
it must make a tangible contribution to the freedom,
security and well-being of real people in the real world.
In the last year, under the leadership of Secretary-
General Boutros-Ghali, the groundwork for substantial
change has been laid. The United Nations has an office
with the functions of an inspector general and a mandate to
crack down on waste and fraud. Under-Secretary-General
Joe Connor has embarked on an aggressive campaign to
improve the United Nations management culture, and we
fully support his good work. The United Nations Secretariat
has moved in the right direction by submitting a budget that
begins to restrain spending, and now this momentum for
reform must accelerate.
Let me propose a brief, concrete agenda for reform.
First, we must end United Nations programmes that
have achieved their purpose, and we must consolidate
programmes that overlap, especially in the economic and
social agencies. The United Nations has more than a
dozen organizations responsible for development,
emergency response and statistical reporting. We should
consider establishing a single agency for each of these
functions. We should downsize the United Nations
regional economic commissions. We should ensure that
the functions of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development do not duplicate those of the new
World Trade Organization (WTO), and we should adopt
a moratorium on big United Nations conferences once the
present series is completed, concentrating instead on
meeting the commitments of those conferences that we
have already held.
Secondly, we need to streamline the United Nations
Secretariat to make it more efficient, accountable and
transparent. Each part of the United Nations system
should be subject to the scrutiny of an inspector general.
The United Nations must not tolerate ethical or financial
abuses, and its managers should be appointed and
promoted on the basis of merit.
Thirdly, we should rigorously scrutinize proposals
for new and extended peace-keeping missions, and we
should improve the United Nations ability to respond
rapidly when new missions are approved. We must agree
on an equitable scale of peace-keeping assessments that
reflects fully today’s economic realities. And we should
have a unified budget for peace-keeping operations.
Finally, we must maintain the effectiveness of the
Security Council. Germany and Japan should become
permanent members, and we should ensure that all the
world’s regions are fairly represented, without making the
Council too large and unwieldy.
We welcome the formation of the high-level group
on reform, initiated under the leadership of the outgoing
President of the General Assembly, Mr. Essy. Our goal
must be that of a practical blueprint for United Nations
reform and to ensure that it is adopted before the General
Assembly finishes the work of its fiftieth session next
fall. The way forward is clear; we have already seen and
10


studied countless studies and reports. Now the time has
come to act on the best proposals.
As the Assembly knows, in my country there have
been serious efforts to curtail our support for the United
Nations. The President and I, and our entire Administration,
believe it would be reckless to turn away from an
Organization that helps mobilize the support of other
nations for goals that are consistent with American and
global interests. But to sustain support for the United
Nations among the American people and among the people
of other nations, it is not enough that we defend the
institution. The best argument against retreat is further
reform. Tangible progress in that direction will help us win
the battle for United Nations support that we are waging in
the United States.
The United Nations must emerge from the reform
process better able to meet its fundamental goals, including
the preservation of peace and security. From Korea to the
Persian Gulf to Haiti, the United Nations has provided a
mandate to its Members as they carried out their
responsibilities. The United Nations own Blue Helmets
have helped nations create the basic conditions of peace in
some of the most difficult situations imaginable around the
world, even though they have not always achieved their
intended purpose.
Recently, a young Haitian father was asked what the
peace-keeping forces had achieved in his country. He
answered,
“We walk freely. We sleep quietly. There are no
men who come for us in the night.”
In Haiti, as, for example, in Cambodia, Mozambique and El
Salvador, the United Nations has shown that peace-keeping,
despite its limitations, has been an enormously useful
instrument.
One region where United Nations forces and the
international community have played a critical role is the
Middle East. Another historic milestone will be marked this
Thursday, in Washington, when Israel and the Palestinians
sign their agreement to implement phase two of the
Declaration of Principles. That agreement will bring to life
a goal first set many years ago in the Camp David accords:
to protect Israel’s security and to give Palestinians
throughout the West Bank control over their daily lives.
The international community and the United Nations must
continue to support this process, both diplomatically and
economically.
There is no question that the United Nations has
never undertaken a mission more difficult than the one in
the former Yugoslavia. The limitations of that mission are
all too well known, but we all must recognize that it has
provided relief for hundreds of thousands of people and
has saved literally thousands of lives. Today, diplomacy
backed by force has given the United States and the
international community an opportunity to move forward
on a track that is producing genuinely hopeful results. The
United Nations and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) are working effectively together to
try to bring peace to the region. On 8 September in
Geneva, the parties to the conflict accepted the
fundamental goal that the Security Council has often
expressed: the continuation of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a single State within its internationally
recognized borders. I will be meeting with the Foreign
Ministers of Bosnia, Croatia and Serbia later today, and
at that time I will urge them — implore them — to
maintain the momentum towards peace and to establish
constitutional structures for Bosnia.
The framers of the Charter of the United Nations
created this institution to meet threats to peace and
security posed by aggression and armed conflict. Those
threats are still, unfortunately, very much with us. But
today, the world also faces a new set of security
challenges, including proliferation, terrorism, international
crime and narcotics, as well as the far-reaching
consequences of damage to the environment. These have
assumed a new and dangerous scope in a more
interdependent world. As President Clinton said in San
Francisco in June, the
“new forces of integration carry within them the
seeds of disintegration and destruction”.
While, as I said earlier, new technologies have
brought us closer together, they also have made it easier
for terrorists, drug dealers and other international
criminals to acquire weapons of mass destruction, to set
up cocaine cartels and to hide their ill-gotten gains. The
collapse of communism has shattered dictatorships, to be
sure, but it has also left the political and legal institutions
of newly liberated nations even more vulnerable to those
who seek to subvert them.
Although these threats are sometimes sponsored by
States, they increasingly follow no flag. Each of us must
vigorously fight these enemies on our own, but we will
never be truly secure until we effectively fight them
together. That is the new security challenge for the global
11


community, and it must be the new security mission for the
United Nations.
There is no single area in which the United Nations
can make a more significant contribution than in that of
non-proliferation. Fifty years ago, the United States was the
only country capable of making a nuclear bomb. Today
many countries have the technology that would enable them
to turn a fist-sized chunk of plutonium into a bomb as
small as a suitcase. That is one reason why more than 170
nations agreed, at a conference held here last May and
effectively chaired by Ambassador Dhanapala, to extend for
all time the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. That is an achievement we must rejoice in but
also build on.
I should like to outline some steps in the field of
non-proliferation. First, we should have a comprehensive
test-ban treaty ready for signature by the time we meet here
next September. As President Clinton announced last
month, the United States is committed to a true zero-yield
test ban. We urge other nations to join us in that
commitment.
Secondly, we should immediately start negotiations on
a fissile material cut-off treaty. Those who have been most
vocal in calling for nuclear disarmament should recognize
that it is essential to ban future production of fissile
material for nuclear weapons.
Thirdly, we should push forward with the historic
reductions of the nuclear arsenals of the United States and
countries of the former Soviet Union. I call on the United
States Senate, as well as on the Russian Duma, to approve
the treaty on further reduction and limitation of strategic
offensive arms (START II) so that we can lock in deep cuts
in our strategic nuclear arsenals. In addition, Presidents
Clinton and Yeltsin are working together to ensure the
safety, transparency and irreversibility of nuclear-arms
reductions.
As part of this process, President Yeltsin will host a
nuclear safety and security summit in Moscow next spring.
This summit should have a very ambitious agenda,
including a declaration of principles on nuclear safety. We
look to this summit to address the worldwide problems of
nuclear-waste management, including those of ocean
dumping. The summit should also promote a plan of action
to safeguard nuclear materials, a plan that should include
new measures to prevent criminals and terrorists from
acquiring nuclear materials for use in weapons.
Finally, we should push for the earliest possible
entry into force of the Chemical Weapons Convention.
President Clinton has urged the United States Senate to
act promptly on its ratification, and to stop holding the
START II Treaty and the Chemical Weapons Convention
hostage to unrelated issues. The world has witnessed the
effects of poison gas too many times in this century — on
European battlefields during the First World War, in
Ethiopia and Manchuria during the 1930s, and against
Iranian soldiers and innocent Kurdish civilians in the
1980s. The Chemical Weapons Convention will make
every nation safer, and we need it now.
The United Nations is also playing an invaluable
role in focusing attention on pressing regional
proliferation problems. In Iraq, the United Nations Special
Commission (UNSCOM) and its Chairman, Rolf Ekeus,
continue to uncover horrific details about Saddam
Hussein’s weapons of mass destruction.
Under Saddam Hussein, Iraq developed a deadly
biological-weapons capacity hidden from view. It was
conducting research to turn some of the most toxic
substances known to man into weapons of war. We know
that Saddam succeeded in putting anthrax and botulism in
bombs and missile warheads. In December 1990, he
deployed these weapons, with every intention of using
them against the international coalition and innocent
civilians. He was dissuaded from doing so only by the
steadfast determination of the United States and the
international community.
In the light of what Ambassador Ekeus has
uncovered in Iraq, we can conclude only that for the last
four and a half years, Saddam Hussein has lied about the
full scope of Iraq’s weapons programmes. There should
be no easing of the sanctions regime against Iraq until its
Government complies with all the demands of the
Security Council and clearly demonstrates that it has
changed its ways.
The United Nations should also promote
responsibility and restraint in the transfer of conventional
weapons. At last year’s session of the General Assembly,
President Clinton proposed, and the Assembly approved,
the eventual elimination of anti-personnel mines. On my
recent trip to Cambodia, I saw the terrible damage these
hidden killers can do. This year, we will again call on
other countries to join us in putting an end to the export
of land-mines.
12


Two years ago, President Clinton called on the
international community to devise a true international
system governing the transfer of conventional weapons and
sensitive dual-use technologies. I am pleased that the
Russian Federation has joined with the United States and 26
other countries to agree on a common principle to control
the build-up of dangerous conventional arms. We hope to
activate this global regime, which is called the New Forum,
by the end of this year.
The proliferation of weapons worldwide has added a
disturbing dimension to another threat we all face: the
threat of international terrorism. Indeed, this year’s sarin
gas attack in Tokyo is a grim warning of what can happen
when terrorists acquire weapons of mass destruction.
More nations are joining the fight against those
individuals and groups that attack civilians for political
ends. The United Nations has supported this effort in
important ways. The Security Council recognized the
importance of countering State-sponsored terrorism by
imposing sanctions against Libya for the bombing of Pan
Am 103 and UTA 772.
Terrorists must be treated as criminals and there must
be no place where they can hide from the consequences of
their acts. States that sponsor terrorists should feel the full
weight of sanctions that can be imposed by the international
community. Let us not deceive ourselves: every dollar that
goes into the Government coffers of a State-sponsor of
terrorism such as Iran helps pay for a terrorist’s bullets or
bombs. Iran’s role as the foremost State-sponsor of
terrorism makes its secret quest for weapons of mass
destruction even more alarming. We must stand together to
prevent Iran from acquiring such threatening capabilities.
The United States has taken a leading role in meeting
the international terrorist threat. We have intensified our
sanctions against Iran. Last January President Clinton issued
an Executive Order prohibiting financial transactions with
terrorist groups and individuals that threaten the Middle
East peace process. We are urging our Congress to tighten
our immigration and criminal laws to keep terrorists on the
run or put them behind bars.
The United States strongly supports the counter-
terrorism measures the G-7 and Russia announced at the
Halifax Summit, and we expect the G-8 Ministerial Meeting
on Terrorism in Ottawa to produce a concrete-action plan
to implement these measures that were adopted at the
Halifax Summit.
Other kinds of international crime also threaten the
safety of our citizens and the fabric of our societies. And
globalization brings new and frightening dimensions to
crime. The threat of crime is a particular menace to
young democracies. It weakens confidence in institutions,
preys on the most vulnerable in our societies and
undermines free-market reform.
Of course, every country must take its own measures
to combat these criminal threats. The Administration that
I represent is now completing a review of our approach
to transnational crime, a review that will lead to a
stronger, more coordinated attack on this problem.
To help other States deal with criminal threats, the
United States and Hungary have created the International
Law Enforcement Academy in Budapest to train police
officers and law-enforcement officials from Central
Europe and the States of the former Soviet Union. We are
providing similar help bilaterally, and through the United
Nations International Drug Control Programme, to those
countries whose laws are challenged by international drug
cartels.
A particularly insidious form of crime and corruption
is money-laundering. All nations should work together to
implement the recommendations of the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) to
attack this insidious money-laundering. The nations of this
hemisphere should also advance the anti-money-
laundering initiative introduced at last December’s
Summit of the Americas. Together, we must work to
squeeze the dirty money out of the global financial
system.
Through the United Nations conventions on drugs
and crime the international community has set strong
standards that we must now act to enforce. We call on
Member States which have not already joined the 1988
drug Convention to do so promptly, and we call on those
countries which have approved the Convention to move
quickly to implement its important provisions.
We are also increasingly aware that damage to the
environment and unsustainable population growth threaten
the security of our nations and the well-being of our
peoples. Their harmful effects are evident in famines,
infant mortality rates, refugee crises, and ozone depletion.
In places like Rwanda and Somalia, for example, they
contribute to civil wars and emergencies that can be
resolved only by extremely costly international
intervention. We must carry out the commitments we
13


made last year at the Cairo Conference, as well as the
important commitments made at the Rio Conference three
years ago.
Never have our problems around the world been more
complex. It has never been more evident that these
problems affect all nations, developed and developing alike.
Only by working together can we effectively deal with the
new threats we all face that I have outlined here today.
That is why in this fiftieth anniversary year we must
shape the United Nations agenda as if we were creating the
institution anew. Just as the founders of the United Nations
devised a new framework to deter aggression and armed
conflict, the United Nations, in particular the Security
Council, must now assign the same priority to combating
the threat posed by proliferation, by terrorism, by
international crime, by narcotics and by environmental
pollution. We should dedicate our efforts in the United
Nations and elsewhere to turning our global consensus
against these threats into concrete and effective action. We
must renew and reform the United Nations not for its sake,
but for our own.
Mr. President, I wish to
extend to you, on behalf of the South African delegation,
my sincere congratulations on your election to the
presidency of the fiftieth session of the General Assembly.
Your election demonstrates the high regard in which the
international community holds your country. I should also
like to express our deep gratitude to your predecessor, His
Excellency Mr. Amara Essy, a brother from Africa and the
Foreign Minister of Côte d’Ivoire, who presided over the
forty-ninth session with great wisdom. I should also like to
express to the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, our continued confidence in
his guidance of the Organization.
A half century ago representatives from 50 countries
met at San Francisco to draft the United Nations Charter,
the Declaration of Human Rights and the Statute of the
International Court of Justice. For the United Nations to
have survived for a period of 50 years in an imperfect
world is indeed a milestone and a tribute to the visionary
steps taken half a century ago towards the creation of a
better world.
South Africa’s involvement with the United Nations
goes back to the very conception and birth of this
illustrious body. The then-Prime Minister of South Africa,
Field Marshal J. C. Smuts, helped to draft the Preamble
to the Charter of the United Nations. In the Preamble
many lofty ideas were expressed, among which were the
following:
“to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in
the dignity and worth of the human person, in the
equal rights of men and women and of nations large
and small”.
How ironic that those in power in South Africa since
then, and until last year, acted in a precisely contrary
spirit. The United Nations contributed significantly in
bringing about change in South Africa. Through
perseverance and commitment, the United Nations
assisted us in our struggle to achieve democracy. Our
General Assembly 22nd plenary meeting
Fiftieth session 13 October 1995
reward is its reward. I should like again to express the
gratitude of both the people and the Government of South
Africa for its foresight and courage.
Just over a year ago, on 23 June 1994 to be precise,
I had the honour to address the Assembly on behalf of the
people and the Government of the Republic of South
Africa. On that occasion, which marked South Africa’s
resumption of its participation in the work of the General
Assembly of the United Nations, we were filled with joy
and pride at the peaceful transition of South Africa into a
united, non-racial, democratic and non-sexist society.
In the intervening months I have travelled to many
countries, visited with many foreign ministers and met with
several Heads of State or Government. We spoke of the
miracle that is South Africa. We shared our thoughts and
experiences on the road to that miracle. In that context, we
continue to encourage those who seek change for a better
life to stand fast in their belief.
As the representative of a Member of the United
Nations, I should like to reassure you of our belief in and
support for the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
Organization.
The events in April 1994 in South Africa marked a
break with the past as well as a commitment to the future,
placing a heavy burden on us. As a young democracy, we
are ready to meet the challenge. South Africa will meet this
challenge with a firm commitment to the promotion of
national welfare, prosperity and security, with a firm
commitment to the strengthening of cooperation in the
pursuit of the economic development and security of the
southern African subregion, with an active commitment to
peace, stability and good governance within the African
region and elsewhere, with a firm commitment to South-
South cooperation and with a commitment to responsible
international citizenship.
The Southern African Development Community
(SADC) was conceived in the struggle for freedom in
southern Africa and born of the courage of its leaders in
setting out to create a new reality.
The liberation of South Africa and the end of southern
Africa’s destabilization brought great opportunities for the
development of our subregion. We must now translate those
hopes into reality. In accordance with the Abuja Treaty, we
must transform the southern African region into one of the
reliable building blocks on which Africa’s economic
regeneration will be built.
Our greatest need today is to eradicate the scourge
of poverty afflicting the great mass of our people. Only
then can we fulfil the dream of Africa’s liberation in the
health, happiness and well-being of its children.
The mission of SADC reflects the reality that
southern Africa has long since passed the stage of
lamenting the privations of the past. The challenge is to
find within ourselves the resources to overcome this
legacy, with the cooperation of the international
community. We need to adapt to the demands of a rapidly
changing world economy and to develop the skills needed
to compete internationally.
South Africa’s main objective is to play a
constructive role in bringing peace and stability to the
region. We are totally committed to the utilization of
preventive diplomacy, peace-keeping and peacemaking,
through the use of regional and multilateral mechanisms.
In this context, South Africa participated with others
in the resolution of the conflict in Lesotho and provided
logistical support for the elections in Mozambique. Our
support for United Nations resolutions and actions
regarding Angola and the Western Sahara should also be
seen in that light.
As an elected member of the Central Organ of the
Conflict Resolution Mechanism of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) from June 1994 to June 1995, we
participated in several missions to Burundi. South Africa
was part of a special four-member ministerial mission
elected to assess the nature and the scope of the Burundi
conflict with a view to encouraging and assisting the
Burundians to resolve their differences and end that
conflict. We continue to participate in the Mechanism as
an invited observer.
In view of the desperate situation in the former
Yugoslavia and in Rwanda, it has become imperative for
States to cooperate as far as possible with the respective
ad hoc criminal tribunals that have been created for those
territories. In that regard, my country has made available
some of its most talented jurists to assist.
These situations have demonstrated anew the real
need for the establishment of a permanent international
criminal court. This issue has been revitalized in the past
few years, and a window of opportunity now exists to
finally bring the court into existence. It is my sincere
hope that significant progress will be made in that regard
during this session of the General Assembly.
2
General Assembly 22nd plenary meeting
Fiftieth session 13 October 1995
As we celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the United
Nations, mankind is still faced with political instability,
dictatorship, corruption, civil war, millions of refugees and
internally displaced persons, persistent economic decline
and continued impoverishment.
In the past year, the international political climate has
experienced a succession of changes which have brought
both hope and a certain measure of despair to mankind.
Hope has, however, remained a beckoning beacon bringing
about a sense of confidence in the future. We were
saddened by events in Somalia, but rejoiced at the transition
in Haiti and El Salvador. We despair at the tragedy that is
Bosnia, yet hope that the emerging signs of a solution will
come to fruition.
In this spirit, allow me to congratulate the peoples of
Israel and Palestine on having reached yet another landmark
in their journey towards a lasting settlement. We encourage
and support the Middle East peace process.
The issues of proliferation and disarmament, in
particular nuclear disarmament, are among the major
questions that have been facing the international community
in recent times. At the historic 1995 Review and Extension
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), all those present
agreed to exercise the utmost restraint pending the entry
into force of a comprehensive test-ban treaty. We are of the
view that the recent tests conducted by two nuclear-weapon
States are retrogressive steps in the international
community’s endeavour to ban nuclear testing. We believe
that these tests will negatively affect the outcome of work
on a comprehensive test-ban treaty. The South African
Government is strongly opposed to these and any further
nuclear tests being conducted, and calls upon those States
to cease testing, so as to enhance international efforts
towards non-proliferation and disarmament. We call upon
them to honour both the letter and the spirit of the
Principles and Objectives which they agreed to and helped
negotiate at the NPT Review and Extension Conference.
South Africa has dismantled its nuclear capability. South
Africa, for its part, has proven its commitment to nuclear
disarmament. Now it is the turn of others to manifest a
similar commitment.
South Africa notes with great satisfaction the progress
achieved thus far towards the establishment of an African
nuclear-weapon-free zone. We have been actively involved
in trying to find solutions to the outstanding issues, and we
trust that these hurdles can be overcome and the draft treaty
of Pelindaba can receive due consideration during this
session of the General Assembly. The draft treaty is
important as it would expand the non-nuclear-weapon
area of the globe considerably and would be a further step
towards the final goal of complete nuclear disarmament.
South Africa appeals to the nuclear-weapon States to
ensure that the draft treaty is concluded and the relevant
protocols signed.
Since the 1986 declaration of the Zone of Peace and
Cooperation of the South Atlantic, significant progress has
been made in the political, economic, scientific, technical
and cultural spheres to further the objectives of the Zone.
Only relatively few obstacles remain. We hope to advance
this endeavour when the next meeting of participating
nations takes place in Cape Town in March 1996.
On 13 September 1995 South Africa became the
thirty-seventh State party to the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling
and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction.
On the same day South Africa also acceded to the
Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of
Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed
to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate
Effects. The ratification of the chemical weapons
Convention again underlines the commitment of the
Government of National Unity to the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. South Africa’s accession to
the Convention on certain conventional weapons
underlines my Government’s commitment to the
elimination of the suffering that is caused by the scourge
of war. South Africa has, for this reason, decided to
extend its moratorium on the export of land-mines by the
introduction of a permanent ban on the export or sale of
long-lived anti-personnel land-mines. Furthermore, on
30 August 1995 the Government of National Unity
approved the draft of a new conventional-arms-control
policy. A National Conventional Arms Control Committee
has been established and will function in accordance with
predetermined guiding principles and criteria to ensure
that arms trade and transfers conform to accepted
international practice.
As previously mentioned, the principal role of the
United Nations is to safeguard international peace and
security in order to implement universal respect for
human rights and to create conditions necessary for
sustainable development. Without peace, security and
human rights, sustainable development will be difficult to
achieve. Without development and respect for human
rights, international peace and security will continually be
threatened.
3
General Assembly 22nd plenary meeting
Fiftieth session 13 October 1995
As President Mandela stated in 1992,
“Our common humanity transcends the oceans
and all national boundaries. It binds us together in
common cause against tyranny, to act together in
defence of our very humanity. Let it never be asked of
any one of us what we did when we knew that
another was oppressed.”
Mankind should learn to act against all tyranny in a
unified manner through the United Nations. This should be
our basic aim for the future.
South Africa also wishes to call attention to the
activities of mercenaries, irrespective of their origin and
objectives. Their destabilizing activities cannot be tolerated.
We call on the international community and the United
Nations to be seized of this problem of mercenaries.
The women of South Africa have lived, in varying
degrees, under three forms of oppression, relating to race,
to class and to gender. One of the first steps towards
initiating positive change in the lives of all South African
women was the entrenchment of gender rights in our Bill
of Rights. It was with much pride that the South African
delegation took their seats at the Fourth World Conference
on Women, in Beijing. That was the first time South Africa
participated in a conference on women which focused on
the eradication of poverty, and equal access to education
and to health services. South Africa is fully committed to
implementing the Platform for Action adopted at that
Conference, which will serve as the impetus for a world of
equality, development and peace for all. In addition, our
Parliament has most recently approved South Africa’s
ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women, without any
reservations.
Years of apartheid rule have bequeathed the
overwhelming majority black population with a heavy
legacy of poverty, social disintegration and political
cleavages based on colour and ethnic animosities. It
therefore became the priority task of the South African
Government of National Unity to devise a national strategy
to address this catastrophic situation. A comprehensive and
multi-pronged developmental strategy known as the
Reconstruction and Development Programme is now being
implemented. The implementation of this Programme relies
primarily on the mobilization of domestic resources through
prioritization of budgetary resources, with a view to
addressing the huge material inequalities in such areas as
education, health, housing, infrastructure development and
land reform. It is a unique people-centred and people-
driven Programme, which seeks to translate into economic
benefit the political miracle in our country. At the very
heart of this Programme is the acknowledgement of the
inextricable interdependence between the need for
transparent, accountable and democratic governance of
our society and the imperative of dynamic economic
growth and sustainable development.
South Africa will host the ninth United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD IX)
from 26 April to 11 May 1996. This is an event which all
South Africans are looking forward to with great
expectation. Indeed, it is my pleasure to announce that
our preparations are well advanced and on course.
We attach great significance to UNCTAD IX for a
number of reasons. We believe that the rapid progress of
globalization and liberalization of the world economy has
underscored the relevance and importance of UNCTAD
as a United Nations institution with a strong development
mandate and perspective. We also believe that the
successful completion of the Uruguay Round of
negotiations and the resultant creation of the World Trade
Organization not only has stressed the validity and
relevance of UNCTAD, but has also reinforced the need
to retain and strengthen UNCTAD’s mandate as a policy-
oriented global intergovernmental forum on trade and
development issues. It is a forum where a strong
partnership for development between the developed and
the developing countries can, and must, be forged. While
there may be a need to streamline certain UNCTAD
activities, this should not lead to its demise. Without
UNCTAD, our world, especially the developing world,
would be the poorer.
I would like to take this opportunity to express my
Government’s satisfaction with the intergovernmental
process at the United Nations to draw up a United
Nations Agenda for Development. We believe that the
United Nations is the appropriate forum for the
elaboration of the Agenda for Development. The Agenda
for Development could open great possibilities for
development and for partnership between the developed
and the developing countries. It is for this reason that
South Africa is taking great interest in the work of the Ad
Hoc Open-ended Working Group of the General
Assembly on an Agenda for Development.
My Government has been following with great
interest the ongoing High-level Intergovernmental
Meeting on the Mid-term Global Review of the
4
General Assembly 22nd plenary meeting
Fiftieth session 13 October 1995
Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least
Developed Countries. In this connection, I join others in
calling on the international community to devise a global
strategy to effectively address the debt question confronting
the least developed countries, and to use innovative
measures — whether it be official development aid, foreign
direct investment or multilateral financial assistance — to
arrest the decline of resources destined for the least
developed countries.
I would also like to call upon the international
community to vigorously pursue measures required to
successfully implement the United Nations New Agenda for
the Development of Africa in the 1990s. We are pleased in
that regard by the progress registered during the Economic
and Social Council’s session in Geneva, especially the high-
level segment, which was devoted to the aforementioned
Agenda. Of course, the challenge before the international
community is to find adequate resources to translate this
Agenda into tangible results. It is our hope that this issue
will be treated with the required urgency, given that next
year there will be a mid-term global review of the New
Agenda for the Development of Africa.
Recognizing the importance of cooperation between
developing States, South Africa has acceded to an
agreement establishing the South Centre. The South Centre
will effectively operate as a policy research unit for the
Non-Aligned Movement and the Group of 77, and will draft
policy-oriented position papers on issues of critical
importance to the South. It will, in addition to this basic
function, generate ideas and proposals for consideration by
Governments of the South and other institutions.
The United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development engendered a process of environmental action
and awareness centred on the relationship between
economic development and the sustainable management of
the environment. It is our duty to carry this process forward
in an integrated manner and reconfirm our commitment to
the implementation of international agreements which seek
to manage and preserve the world’s environment.
South Africa is very conscious that the capacity of
developing countries to implement sustainable
environmental strategies will have to be strengthened. The
resources pledged towards the attainment of goals set out in
Agenda 21 will have to be made available if we are to
succeed in achieving the imperatives of development,
sustainable use of the environment, and democracy in the
world.
In Africa, in particular, the ravages of drought and
the advances of desertification require urgent attention.
The global community’s concern for the environment
should be reflected in a common approach to the
manifold environmental pressures threatening our global
heritage.
The United Nations also has an important role to
play in assisting States threatened by natural or man-made
disasters. Preventive diplomacy can contribute towards
eliminating man-made disasters. However, the results of
both man-made disasters and natural disasters can be
ameliorated by effective international humanitarian
assistance coordination through the United Nations. This
will naturally require more coherent programmed delivery
and coordination by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(FAO), the World Health Organization (WHO), the
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the United
Nations Department of Humanitarian Affairs (DHA) and
other international institutions. The United Nations will
have to ensure that the necessary capacities and
mechanisms are created. Recent international action,
especially the follow-up to the Tokyo Conference, has
demonstrated that sufficient international will exists to
perform this function.
We welcome the adoption on 14 September 1995 of
General Assembly resolution 49/252, on the strengthening
of the United Nations. I wish to assure the Assembly of
our intention to work constructively with the President in
this endeavour.
The world in which we find ourselves today is
greatly changed from just 10 years ago. The cold war has
ended, the scourge of apartheid has been removed from
our common society and peace has come to Mozambique
and now Angola. We have also seen the membership of
our United Nations increase to 185, a substantial increase
since the time the Security Council’s membership was last
increased. As a result of these, and other, factors the
international community faces a window of opportunity
within which the Security Council can be successfully
restructured and reformed.
Within the overall effort to reform the United
Nations, South Africa believes that the structure and
functioning of the Security Council should be reformed to
make it more representative, democratic and transparent.
The product of these efforts must be a Security Council
that is effective and legitimate, and that reflects the
5
General Assembly 22nd plenary meeting
Fiftieth session 13 October 1995
realities of our modern world. This result can be achieved
only if reform and restructuring is dealt with as a package.
One of the products of this reform process must result in
Africa having equitable representation on any enlarged
Security Council.
It would be appropriate for me to conclude by
referring to the fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations.
The people of South Africa will celebrate this fiftieth
anniversary in concert with the rest of the world. Our
National Committee organizing the events in our country
has adopted the following as its Declaration of Intent:
“To create an awareness among the peoples of South
Africa of the role which the United nations can play
in their daily lives, and to assist the United Nations in
responding to the challenges of the twenty-first
century.”
President Mandela looks forward to joining his fellow
world leaders in a few weeks’ time to celebrate the
visionary step taken half a century ago towards the creation
of a better world. Building on the successes and victories
of the past, we now embrace the future. We can face the
challenges ahead, inspired by a vision of a new world
where peace and respect for human dignity are the standard.
Mr. President, please allow me, first of all, to
warmly congratulate you on your election to the
presidency of the current session of the General
Assembly. I am convinced that with your remarkable
ability and rich experience, you will admirably fulfil this
mission. I would also like to express my appreciation and
thanks to Mr. Amara Essy for the important contribution
he has made during his presidency.
I wish to avail myself of this opportunity to extend
my welcome and congratulations to the Republic of Palau,
which was admitted into the United Nations after the last
session.
This year marks the fiftieth anniversary of the end of
the Second World War and the founding of the United
Nations. Over the past 50 years, the United Nations has
stood the test of the vicissitudes in the international
situation, grown steadily, scored remarkable achievements
and made major contributions to the peace and prosperity
of mankind. Its membership has increased from 51 at its
founding to today’s 185. The status and role of the United
Nations, the most universal and authoritative
intergovernmental organization of sovereign States today,
is irreplaceable by any other international organization.
The United Nations has traversed a tortuous and
uneven path over the past fifty years, just like the
development of anything else. On the occasion of the
fiftieth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations,
it is time to review the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter, earnestly summarize the positive
and negative experience, and introduce appropriate and
necessary reforms so as to revitalize the United Nations
and usher it into the new century with a new look to meet
the challenge of the times. This is the call of all peoples
and a lofty mission of the times.
The United Nations, which was founded in the
triumph of the world war against fascism, reflects the
ardent desire and determination of the world’s people to
avert the scourge of war forever, safeguard world peace
and security, carry out friendly international cooperation
9


and achieve common development. History has repeatedly
proved that adherence to the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter will enable the United Nations to
play a positive role in safeguarding peace and promoting
development, while violation of and departure from the
purposes and principles of the Charter will impair the
dignity and image of the United Nations and weaken its
role. Therefore, to continue to uphold and carry forward the
purposes and principles of the Charter is an unshirkable
responsibility of all United Nations Members and a basic
principle guiding the reform of the United Nations.
The core of the United Nations Charter is the principle
of equality between sovereign States and non-interference
in each other’s internal affairs. All sovereign States,
whether they are big or small, rich or poor, strong or weak,
are equal members of the international community. The
internal affairs of a country should be managed by its own
people. Major world affairs should be addressed by
countries through consultations on the basis of equality and
mutual respect. In international relations, to bully the small,
oppress the poor, override the weak, impose one’s own
social system, ideology and values on others or interfere in
other countries’ internal affairs all run counter to the spirit
of the United Nations Charter. Some people are publicly
clamouring for “containment” of other countries, which
shows that the cold war mentality still refuses to quit the
stage of history. But it will ultimately be discarded by
history. The post-war period of half a century proves that
in handling State-to-State relations, “hot war”, “cold war”
or “bloc politics” do not work. Strict observance of the
principles of mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial
integrity, mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each
other’s internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit and
peaceful coexistence are the only way for States to live in
amity with each other and achieve common development.
Since the last session of the General Assembly, thanks
to the joint efforts of various quarters, the tendency towards
the peaceful settlement of disputes through negotiations has
grown and international economic cooperation has gained
momentum. However, there still remain many destabilizing
and uncertain factors in the international situation.
Hegemonism and power politics continue to hold out. Peace
and development, the two major tasks of the world today,
still face grave challenges.
Armed conflicts and catastrophic wars in some parts
of the world remain unabated, which has not only inflicted
heavy losses of life and property on the countries and
peoples concerned, but also casts a shadow over regional
peace and stability and that of the whole world. All this
cannot but cause concern and distress among the world’s
people. As the background and causes behind these
conflicts are complicated, to seek a just, fair and
appropriate solution to them would call for tremendous
and concerted efforts by all the parties concerned, the
United Nations and the international community as a
whole. We maintain that the parties concerned should, in
the fundamental and long-term interests of the people,
seek just and fair solutions through negotiations, taking
into full account both history and reality as well as the
reasonable interests and positions of all sides. Where
consensus cannot be reached immediately, the parties
concerned should exercise restraint and patience so as to
prevent contradictions from intensifying and at the same
time try to create conditions and an atmosphere for an
eventual peaceful settlement.
United Nations peace-keeping operations in recent
years have played a useful role in settling international
disputes peacefully. They have both accumulated
successful experience and learned lessons from setbacks.
We believe that, to ensure a healthy development of
United Nations peace-keeping operations and activities in
other related fields such as preventive diplomacy, the
following guidelines should be established and followed:
Observation of the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter, in particular the principle of
respect for State sovereignty and non-interference in the
internal affairs of other countries;
Settlement of disputes through peaceful means such
as good offices, mediation and negotiations instead of
resort to frequent mandatory actions. Even humanitarian
operations should not resort to military means;
Opposition to double standards and the imposition of
the policies and views of one or a few countries on the
Security Council. Some countries should not be allowed
to carry out military intervention in the name of the
United Nations;
For peace-keeping operations, adherence to the
principles that have proved effective, such as obtaining
prior consent from the parties concerned, observing strict
neutrality and the non-use of force except for self-
defence;
Adoption of a realistic approach and confining the
operation within one’s capability. Peace-keeping
operations should be launched only when conditions are
ripe and should refrain, in whatever circumstances, from
10


becoming a party to a conflict in deviation from the
fundamental orientation of such operations.
It has been demonstrated time and again that United
Nations peace-keeping operations, if divorced from these
guidelines, would, contrary to our wishes, fail to achieve
their desired objectives and might even go astray.
Last May, the Review and Extension Conference of
the States Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) adopted the decision to renew the
NPT indefinitely. This serves the interests of all signatories,
helps to strengthen the international non-proliferation
regime and is conducive to the maintenance of world peace
and security. China believes that nuclear non-proliferation
is only an interim step towards the ultimate goal of the
complete prohibition and total destruction of nuclear
weapons. The indefinite extension of the NPT must not be
construed as an indefinite license for the nuclear-weapon
States to perpetuate their prerogatives.
One year ago, also from this rostrum, on behalf of the
Chinese Government I called for the conclusion of a
convention on the complete prohibition of nuclear weapons
and put forward a series of complete and interrelated
proposals on nuclear disarmament. We are pleased to note
that the negotiations on a comprehensive test-ban treaty
have produced some gratifying progress. China supports the
conclusion of such a treaty no later than 1996 and will
continue to work with other countries to this end. Once the
treaty enters into force, China will stop its nuclear testing.
China’s possession of a limited nuclear capability is
entirely for self-defence and for deterring the nuclear threat
against it. The Chinese Government has from the very
beginning unilaterally undertaken not to be the first to use
nuclear weapons at any time and under any circumstances
and not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against
non-nuclear-weapon States. China’s nuclear weapons
therefore do not constitute a threat to any country. We
strongly urge other nuclear-weapon States to respond
positively to China’s initiative by immediately starting
negotiations aimed at concluding a treaty on mutual non-
first-use of nuclear weapons and an agreement on the non-
use or non-threat of use of nuclear weapons against non-
nuclear-weapon States and nuclear-free zones.
It has become a trend in today’s world that when
countries formulate their domestic and foreign policies they
accord top priority to the economy and pay close attention
to national economic development. The worldwide tendency
towards economic integration, regionalization and the
formation of economic groupings has accelerated, and
competition among States in the economic, trade,
scientific and technological fields has further intensified.
Under such circumstances, the developing countries are
faced with a formidable challenge as they strive for
economic growth and higher living standards for their
people.
Furthermore, over 1 billion people on this planet
remain in abject poverty; this constitutes one of the world
community’s most acute problems. Given much-needed
support to the developing countries as they reactivate their
economies and creating a favourable external environment
for them are not only important conditions for the shared
economic growth and common prosperity of all countries,
but also a crucial guarantee for lasting peace and stability
throughout the world. Given the present situation, the
United Nations should ask itself to pay at least as much
attention to development as to peace, effectively perform
its duties under the Charter and play a more dynamic role
in galvanizing economic growth and development in the
developing countries. The reform of the United Nations
must result in the strengthening, not the weakening, of its
role in the area of development.
True, fairly rapid economic growth in the developing
countries must depend primarily on their own efforts.
However, it is also important for the international
community, and the developed countries in particular, to
take practical and effective measures to open markets,
provide development funds, transfer technology, increase
development aid and reduce the debt burden in favour of
the developing countries. International economic
cooperation should be guided by the principle of mutual
opening-up, equality and mutual benefit. Such practices as
implementing protectionist policies of one form or another
and attaching political strings to economic assistance to
developing countries are obviously misguided.
Profound changes have taken place in China amid
the surging tide of change and development across the
world. The 17 years that have elapsed since the beginning
of reform and opening-up in China have been
unprecedented in terms of the economic growth rate and
the improvement of the people’s living standards. At
present, China enjoys political stability, economic
prosperity, ethnic harmony and vigorous advances in
democracy, legality and community undertakings. China’s
exchanges and cooperation with the rest of the world have
reached a level unprecedented in both scope and depth.
Although there may still be many difficulties and
challenges along the road ahead, we are confident that,
11


through several generations of hard work, our people will
lift China out of economic and cultural backwardness and
turn it into a highly prosperous and democratic modern
country.
The Chinese people are peace-loving people. China’s
history for over a century following the Opium War was
one of tears, blood and humiliation in which the Chinese
nation was subjected to repeated aggression, suppression
and plunder at the hands of the big Powers. Do unto others
as you would have others do unto you. The Chinese people
treasure their hard-won independence and freedom and will
never commit aggression or intervene against others. China
is opposed to hegemonism and power politics of any kind
and will never seek hegemony for itself. With a population
of 1.2 billion, China will remain a low-income developing
country for a very long time and the steady improvement of
our people’s living standards will remain our objective,
towards the attainment of which no effort will be spared.
Even when China grows stronger, it will continue firmly to
pursue its independent foreign policy of peace and will live
in amity with other nations. A stable and prosperous China
is a positive factor for peace and development in Asia and
the world at large. This is a conclusion that people of
vision around the world have come to share.
The Chinese people have waged heroic and unyielding
struggles to resist external aggression and oppression and to
defend the sovereignty, independence and unity of the
country. There is but one China in the world. The
Government of the People’s Republic of China is the sole
legal Government of China. It is the sole representative of
China at the United Nations, and Taiwan is an inalienable
part of China. The peaceful reunification of the two sides
of the Taiwan Straits represents the unshakable will and
determination of the entire Chinese people, including our
compatriots in Taiwan. Proceeding from this reality, the
Chinese Government has put forward the correct proposal
on peaceful reunification within the framework of the
concept of “one country, two systems” and a series of
realistic and practicable policies and measures. The past
few years have seen a steady expansion and deepening of
exchanges and contacts between the two sides in various
fields. Any attempt to obstruct peaceful reunification and to
split Taiwan from China is doomed to failure. Should
anyone try to do so, he would be lifting a stone only to
drop it on his own toes.
History moves on. Mankind is progressing. In four
years we will usher in a new millennium. The future is full
of promise. Let us join hands and make concerted efforts to
bring about a better world in which there are peace and
cooperation, justice and equality, mutual respect and
common development, a world of universal prosperity and
continuous progress.
Please accept my warm
congratulations, Sir, on your election as President of the
General Assembly at its fiftieth session. At the same time,
I wish to thank your predecessor, Ambassador Essy, for
his successful work.
The United Nations 50 years on — that makes this
session of the General Assembly an event of extra-special
significance. The people of the world have high
expectations. We must take stock, but in so doing we
must, above all, look to the future.
The representatives of 50 nations who assembled in
San Francisco in the year 1945 were intended to be, as
President Truman put it, “the architects of a better world”.
What has become of their blue-print?
Today the family of nations has 185 members.
Millions of people all over the world owe their lives, their
freedom and their health, their jobs and their homes, to
the United Nations and its specialized agencies.
Decolonization has been completed, apartheid has been
overcome, and respect for human rights is no longer an
internal affair. In the field of disarmament a historic
breakthrough has been achieved: in May of this year the
proliferation of nuclear weapons was halted. That
constitutes a big step towards making the world safe for
mankind.
All these are considerable achievements which many
critics of the United Nations have overlooked in this
jubilee year, achievements on which you, in particular,
Mr. Secretary-General, and your staff are to be
congratulated. Indeed, the United Nations, in spite of
some unjustified criticism, can take pride in what it has
done for the cause of peace, freedom and human dignity.
Especially worthy of our gratitude and appreciation
are the more than 68,000 United Nations troops currently
4


serving on missions in all regions of the world. When
servicemen from Asia, Africa or Latin America attend to
the basic needs of refugees in Europe, in the former
Yugoslavia, and keep the beleaguered people from starving,
then that is, I believe, a marvellous indication that the “one
world” is a reality. Lest we forget: nearly 5,000 of those
troops, the Blue Helmets, have been killed or wounded in
the line of duty. The Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel must be put into effect as
soon as possible. This we owe to all those who serve the
United Nations.
As we recap the events of the past year, we also have
to consider the huge problems now confronting the world
Organization. The ability to safeguard peace: that is the
world’s main criterion when judging the United Nations.
And here we have reached a critical point.
Somalia, Rwanda and Bosnia: these countries stand for
disappointment and setbacks as well. However, I should
like to make it very clear that in such cases the culprit is
quickly found, too quickly. Nothing is more convenient
than to point to the alleged inefficiency of the United
Nations. And nothing could be further from the truth.
When it has not been possible to help people, when
United Nations troops have been humiliated in the former
Yugoslavia, it has in nearly every instance not been the
fault of the United Nations. The problems have lain in its
unsatisfactory mandate, in the lack of political will on the
part of Member States, and, unfortunately, in the shortage
of funds. It is we, the Members, who cause the difficulties.
Following the holding of United Nations troops as
hostages, the atrocities in Zepa and Srebrenica, and the
terrible second bloodbath in Sarajevo’s market place, the
community of nations has demonstrated that there is a limit
to the amount of brutality and contempt for international
law it will tolerate. And there has to be a limit.
The resolve of the United Nations and the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) has paid off — not
only for the people of Sarajevo, who for three years have
been starving and freezing and kept under constant fire, but
also for the peace process.
Yesterday, here in New York, the parties to the
conflict had another meeting with the Contact Group, of
which Germany is a member. Another step forward was
achieved on the constitutional issue following the result
achieved in Geneva, and I believe this step to be a decisive
one. For the first time since the conflict began there is a
realistic prospect of a negotiated peace settlement.
But I should like to warn against being over-
euphoric. A lot has still to be done. We shall have to put
one stone on top of another stone in order to finish this
building. This time none of the participants should leave
the conference table until an agreement has been
reached — a peaceful agreement at the negotiating table,
and not an agreement on the basis of military actions.
Anyone who continues to prefer bloodshed, to prefer
military actions, will be taking a great responsibility upon
himself.
From the beginning, Germany has played an active
part in these efforts. We have never taken sides, nor did
we ever want to take sides, against one party; rather, we
have always taken up the cause of the victims, those who
have been tormented and driven from their homes.
To date, the German Government’s humanitarian aid
in the region amounts to more than 1 billion Deutsche
marks. And I should like to stress strongly that we have
no double standards, nor should we have double
standards. In the short time since August, we have
provided more than 6 million marks to help Serbian
refugees from Krajina.
My country has contributed in various ways to all
peace-keeping operations. By sending medical personnel
to Split and deploying Tornado fighters for the first
time — fighters which we have made available in
Piacenze, Italy — in a United Nations peace-keeping
mission, we have also shown that we do not merely talk
about taking on more responsibility, but that we act to do
so.
We will also meet our responsibility when it comes
to implementing the terms of a peace settlement — and
I hope that this settlement will come soon. The
reconstruction of Bosnia’s economy requires a genuinely
international cooperative effort, an effort on the part of
the international community. The European Union — and
Germany, of course, as a member of the European
Union — will play its part.
What lessons can and must we learn from what has
happened in Somalia, Rwanda and Bosnia?
First, the United Nations must confine itself to doing
what is feasible. Its resources are obviously being strained
beyond the limit. It cannot take on every responsibility. It
5


cannot solve all the problems that the world is confronted
with.
Secondly, the extent and duration of the commitment
of the United Nations must be more precise, the political
and military objectives must be clearly defined, and there
must be a realistic and, above all, coherent mandate.
Thirdly, if the world Organization is going to
intervene, then it must act consistently and resolutely. There
must be no repetition of what happened in Rwanda or Zepa
or Srebrenica.
Fourthly, cooperation between the United Nations and
other organizations such as NATO must from the outset be
planned in such a way that maximum speed and, above all,
efficiency are assured.
Fifthly, we believe that the regional organizations must
play a larger role than they have done so far. Not every
problem must go straight to the United Nations. In Europe,
for instance, and in other places of the world too, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) could assume much greater responsibility.
However, we have to enable it to do so.
Still, let there be no illusions. Peace-keeping is not just
a fair-weather exercise. Such missions will always be apt to
create problems for the world Organization.
And, in view of the hundreds of thousands of lives
that have been saved in Somalia and Bosnia, who can argue
with an easy conscience that the United Nations should not
have intervened? And many of these people have already
been forgotten. What is required here is an increased peace-
keeping capacity — constructive help, not destructive
criticism.
And to those who over and over again have called into
question the actions of the United Nations and its peace-
keeping operations, I would like to address the following
question: Is there an alternative? Who could take the place
of the United Nations? Indeed, Europe has not been able to
cope with this tragedy in its own house as well as we all
hoped it would.
But nor should we forget the European Union’s
achievements in the former Yugoslavia. It paved the way
for the Contact Group’s ongoing peace efforts.
To my mind, the conflict in the former Yugoslavia
emphasizes how important and right it was for Western
Europe to embark on a new course after the Second
World War, a course that was directed against nationalism
and against the use of force. For four decades, as a result
of the East-West conflict, not all European nations were
able to follow that route of the European Community,
today’s European Union.
The European Union is now striving to correct that
terrible aberration and bridge the gulfs that separate it
from Central and Eastern Europe. The goal is one Europe,
a Europe in which the old big-Power politics and
hegemonic aspirations can never again take root.
That Europe must have a legitimate place for Russia,
but for Ukraine as well. The European house does not
consist solely of the European Union: it has many rooms.
Neither of these two nations, Russia or Ukraine, should
be left outside. To our Russian and Ukrainian partners
and friends I say: Europe needs your contribution and it
does so also in bringing peace to the former Yugoslavia.
Here their new partnership with the European Union and
NATO must — and, I add, will — prove its value.
Many feared that when the East-West confrontation
disappeared Europe would focus exclusively on its own
affairs. That has not been the case. The European Union
is intensifying its political, economic and cultural
cooperation with the other regions of the world.
In Asia, Africa and Latin America it is already a
model for peace, prosperity and regional integration. In
the United Nations the European Union is the principal
partner for dialogue with the developing countries.
The European Union and Germany have been
particularly active in promoting peace and economic
recovery in the Middle East. The recent agreement on the
West Bank worked out by Yassir Arafat and Shimon
Peres is another important milestone on the road to lasting
peace in that region. I congratulate both sides on their
courage and on their far-sightedness. The United States is
playing a major part in this process in this region. We are
grateful to them for that. Egypt has rendered an important
contribution as an intermediary.
Increasing the peace-keeping capacity of the United
Nations also involves reforming the Security Council.
There is now a global consensus, I believe, that this is
necessary.
The first steps towards reform have already been
taken. More changes have been made to the Council’s
6


methods of work and more transparency achieved in the
past two years than in the whole of the previous four
decades.
Like many other Member States, Germany considers
that the Council should have more permanent and non-
permanent members. The nations of Asia, Africa and Latin
America need wider representation and I think we owe it to
them. They have deserved it. The same applies to several
countries with an important global role.
Germany, with the support of many Member States,
has announced its interest in permanent membership of the
Security Council. Our willingness to assume greater
responsibility, also within this framework, is for us the
logical and consistent extension of our commitment to the
United Nations. This commitment is consistent with the
fundamental principle of our foreign policy, which is to
give priority to multilateral cooperation. We have abided by
that principle in pursuing European integration, and we
believe that that same principle would help us play a useful
role in the Security Council.
The world finds itself faced with many new conflicts
and challenges. It is crucial that in dealing with them we
should focus our efforts more than we have done so far on
conflict prevention. A political solution must remain the
first option. That requires wider use of human rights
observers, improvements in the United Nations early
warning system, the promotion of democratization and the
observation of election processes, as successfully done
recently in Mozambique.
We have provided a list of experienced intermediaries
for the tasks of preventive diplomacy. The example of
Macedonia shows what the preventive deployment of
United Nations Blue Helmets can achieve. I am very happy
about the agreement that has been achieved between Greece
and Macedonia on this extremely important issue.
Preventing fire can save countless lives and in any case it
is cheaper than putting fires out. On my recent visit to
Rwanda I was deeply shocked, in the truest sense of the
word, by the atrocities that have been perpetrated there by
human beings on other human beings. If the United Nations
had intervened at an early stage and resolutely, many lives
could have been saved.
Germany has set up a substantial emergency aid
programme for Rwanda. We are trying in particular to do
something about the awful prison conditions. I myself
visited prisons, in Kigali for example, and I must tell you
that I have never seen anything like that in all my life.
Urgent remedies are needed here to ensure that one
injustice is not followed by another. I travelled to Burundi
too, and I returned deeply saddened and concerned. We
must not make the same mistakes in Burundi.
Disarmament, arms control and confidence-
building — these are some of the main components of
conflict prevention. In recent years we have made the
kind of progress that no one would have believed possible
at the height of the arms race 15 years ago. The task of
buttressing this breakthrough and building on the
achievements has acquired great political significance.
A few weeks ago we commemorated the fiftieth
anniversary of the first atomic bomb explosions over
Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Nuclear weapons must never,
never, be used again. They must be eliminated
completely, as required by article VI of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. That aim was
reaffirmed by the nuclear Powers at the New York
Conference extending the Treaty.
Never has the door to a ban on every kind of
nuclear-test explosion been wider open than today. We
must now direct all our efforts to the achievement of this
goal. The Geneva negotiations must produce such a
comprehensive ban by the autumn of 1996 at the latest.
Anti-personnel mines, too, are “weapons of mass
destruction”. Day in, day out, they are taking a terrible
toll on human life, and many of the victims are women
and, above all, innocent children. If any kind of weapon
must be outlawed, then this one should be.
Eliminating this scourge is a task of the highest
priority, particularly in Nicaragua, Angola, Mozambique,
Afghanistan, Georgia and Cambodia. Germany, together
with its European partners, will continue the initiative in
this direction during this session of the General
Assembly.
At the First Review Conference of the Convention
on certain conventional weapons, which opened in Vienna
the day before yesterday, tougher export restrictions will
have to be agreed on and a strict ban imposed on the use
of anti-personnel mines.
I appeal to all Members of the United Nations: In
the name of humanity, accede to the Convention on
certain conventional weapons as quickly as possible.
7


There are good reasons why the work of the United
Nations began with the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. The United Nations is more than a mere gathering
of sovereign States. It is based on the common belief in the
dignity and worth of every human being, and it is my view
that this must remain the focal point of all political activity.
Universal Children’s Day, celebrated a week ago,
reminded us of the awful fate to which these, the weakest
members of society, are often exposed. The United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) therefore needs the support of
every one of us.
The task of helping those people all over the world
who have been persecuted and deprived of their rights must
remain at the top of the political agenda. Pressure from the
international community, the media, non-governmental
organizations and private citizens must be maintained.
Those who torture people and who treat human rights with
contempt should not be able to sleep peacefully. To this
end, the High Commissioner’s position will have to be
strengthened and the Centre for Human Rights better
equipped. People who commit war crimes must know that
they will be prosecuted under international criminal law.
Hence, Germany strongly urges the establishment of a
permanent international court of justice.
But above all, stronger measures to protect minorities
are called for. “Ethnic cleansing” is no basis for peaceful
coexistence, either in Europe or anywhere else.
More than 27 million people are today on the move.
This is one of the most dramatic events of our time. The
cause is not only hunger and distress, but, in most cases,
unfortunately, ethnic and religious fanaticism. Diversity of
culture and tradition is one of the world’s greatest assets,
and no one should seek to impose a particular model of
society on others.
The fact that there exists a core of human rights which
everyone has to respect is quite a different matter. This was
reaffirmed at the Vienna Conference and should not be
challenged by anyone.
Today the dialogue of cultures is central to the quest
for peace. I have invited leading representatives of the
Islamic world to come to Germany in November to
participate in such a dialogue. My feeling is that we have
to learn to understand each other better. I have also urged
that the Bosnia Contact Group closely coordinate its efforts
with the Islamic Contact Group.
In Germany, two and a half million Muslims are
living harmoniously with the local community. In my
view, it is extremely important that we should develop
cooperation and mutual trust at the international level as
well, and I am speaking as the German Foreign Minister.
Islam cannot be equated with terrorism or
fundamentalism. No new enemy stereotypes must be
allowed to develop. I think that we should be happy that
we have been able to do away with the old ones.
Peace and development are inseparable. Any reform
of the United Nations worthy of that name should
therefore encompass economic and social matters as well.
This fiftieth anniversary is a unique opportunity to create
a modern framework for a new development in
partnership. Work on the Agenda for Development must
therefore be completed as soon as possible.
Apart from improving and simplifying the finance
regime for United Nations development activities, the
chief concern is to coordinate and efficiently implement
the results of the world conferences on the environment,
social problems, population growth and women —
especially the Conference on Women that has just ended
in Beijing.
These are the main interrelated issues of our time as
we pursue the goal of peace. The planet Earth must
remain habitable for future generations as well. Progress
is possible only through equal and fair partnership
between North and South. Germany will continue to exert
every effort to this end.
None of this can be done unless we can come to
grips with the biggest crisis confronting the United
Nations: that of its financial situation. There is no reason
to deny that it has assumed dramatic proportions; one has
to be quite frank about this. This crisis can be overcome
only if all contributors, and especially the main ones,
meet their obligations punctually. Germany is the third
largest contributor to the United Nations, and we pay our
bills. We cannot allow a situation to continue where those
who pay their contributions on time are also burdened
with the arrears of wealthier Members. Unless decisive
action is taken very soon, whole areas of activity could
grind to a halt.
I very much welcome the confirmation by the
American Secretary of State that the United States stands
by the obligations arising from its membership. The
United Nations needs an America that fulfils its
8


leadership role, just as the United States needs a world
Organization capable of, and willing to undertake, reform.
How can we overcome this financial crisis? First, we
must restore the balance between the budgets for peace-
keeping operations and the regular budget of the United
Nations. We cannot allow resources for such operations to
be used up to the point of depletion while at the same time
funds for urgent programmes of economic or social
development are either non-existent or have to be cut back.
Secondly, it is time we found a scale of assessments
that reflects Members’ actual ability to pay. You,
Mr. Secretary-General, have made great efforts to
rationalize the Organization’s work, to ensure budgetary
discipline and to reduce staff. I appeal to all Member States
to give Under-Secretary-General Paschke the support he
needs for his difficult job.
The United Nations is indispensable to the task of
maintaining global order and as a forum and instrument for
international cooperation, today no less than in the era after
the Second World War. No other organization has the same
ability to focus the interests and energies of the world’s
nations, which we believe is necessary.
The United Nations is not “the others”, but us, the
Members. And this Organization is only as strong and as
united as we, its Members, make it.
Hence my appeal today to the Assembly: let us stop
our constant vacillation between euphoria and
disappointment regarding the United Nations. Let us stop
apportioning blame, which leads nowhere. Let us rather
merge vision and pragmatism, solidarity and responsibility
for our own actions into a rational and realistic international
partnership under the aegis of the United Nations. Let us
give this world Organization more clout and make it more
efficient and economical. Yes, we will have to slim down
the United Nations. It has to save money. Let us do these
things in a constructive spirit, together with, and on behalf
of, the United Nations. Let us give the United Nations what
it needs — including paying our dues.
That is what the world community expects of us now,
and rightly so. That is the task facing the family of nations
on the threshold of the new millennium. If the reforms fail,
there will be only losers.
“Hope is the pillar of the world”, they say in South
Africa. Fifty years ago, such a pillar of hope for mankind
was erected in San Francisco. Let us do everything to
ensure that this pillar will continue to support the hopes
of mankind in the next 50 years as well. Germany will
continue to play its part.
Mr. President, I should like to say first how
pleased France is to see you personally presiding over the
work of the General Assembly. Beyond your personal
merits, which I acknowledge with pleasure, your election
underscores the important contribution to the activities of
the Organization of Portugal, a member of the European
Union with which France feels particularly close.
The United Nations is 50 years old. As the Heads of
State and Government of the European Union solemnly
emphasized in Cannes last June, the collective work since
the Second World War has been considerable. The
European Council on that occasion paid tribute to the
major contribution of the United Nations to this collective
work and gave some examples: decolonization, the
maintenance of international peace and security,
disarmament, development, humanitarian aid and, of
course, the protection of human rights.
But the successes of the Organization do not belong
solely to history. This year has shown the vitality of the
United Nations. In Copenhagen, the social dimension of
development, the struggle against exclusion and for
productive employment, which are both major challenges
for all our societies, are now within the domain of our
Organization. In Beijing, the principle of strict equality
between men and women and the right of women to
decide freely about their lives in all matters have finally
been endorsed once and for all as universal values. In
New York, the United Nations has begun preparatory
work towards the establishment of a world criminal court.
This project signals decisive progress for international
humanitarian law.
In Vienna, at this very moment, a conference on the
scourge of inhumane weapons is being held. France is
working in particular to eradicate the scourge of the
spread of anti-personnel mines. In 1993, it decided upon
a unilateral moratorium on the export of these mines.
Now the time has come to go one step farther.
Accordingly, I wish to confirm that France has decided to
adopt a unilateral moratorium on the production of all
categories of anti-personnel mines. It is therefore
12


imposing upon itself a ban on the manufacture of such
weapons. France also pledges from this point on to destroy
gradually its stock of anti-personnel mines. I call on all
Member States to join with us and do the same thing.
This year has also been marked by the success of the
New York Review and Extension Conference of the States
parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. This success was a major step towards
disarmament. France proposes that this coming year should
be a time for further progress in this domain: disarmament
should be our common goal and it should encompass all
aspects of disarmament. France calls upon the States that
have not yet adhered to this Treaty to do so without further
delay. The struggle against the proliferation of nuclear
weapons must be universal. I suggest that all the States
which have already signed this Treaty multiply concerted
efforts to persuade the States which have not yet signed to
join them.
In addition, it is important to follow through on the
new objectives decided by the review Conference of the
Non-Proliferation Treaty in May. Among these, the most
important is the conclusion, no later than 1996, of the
comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty now being negotiated
in Geneva. The President of the French Republic,
Mr. Jacques Chirac, most solemnly reaffirmed on 13 June
1995 France’s determination to achieve this goal and to
ensure that the ban is total. France is pleased that other
nuclear Powers have in turn made the same commitment.
It calls on all nuclear Powers to ensure, together with all
the Member States of the Organization, that this pledge is
duly confirmed in the text of the future treaty and that the
negotiation of the treaty is completed before the autumn of
1996.
I take this opportunity to recall the reasons that led
France to complete the programme of nuclear tests that was
temporarily suspended in 1992. The final series of tests
now under way has no other purpose than to enable us to
sign the treaty banning nuclear tests definitively. There
were some who imagined and others who wished to make
believe that we might reconsider such a decision. This will
not happen. Once again I repeat, this is a final test series,
limited to what is strictly necessary and held under
conditions that have been proved to be harmless. It will
enable us to adhere as early as possible to the future treaty
banning tests definitively.
The disarmament effort must of course be directed
towards reducing existing stockpiles of nuclear weapons.
Substantial progress has been achieved over the past few
years with the destruction of a significant number of
warheads by the two main Powers. I would recall that
France for its part, although it has never contributed to
nuclear overarmament, reduced the nuclear warheads it
had deployed by 15 per cent between 1991 and 1995.
Disarmament, however, does not apply solely to
nuclear weapons. With regard to chemical weapons, I call
upon all the Member States to ratify, or for those which
have not yet done so to adhere to, the 1992 Convention
banning chemical weapons. I regret that France is the
only permanent member of the Security Council that has
ratified this Convention. I hope that the other permanent
members will do so in the coming months.
We must continue the effort to reduce conventional
forces in Europe. France took its full part in the
agreement on conventional force reductions in Europe. It
proposes that the conference which will be held in May
1996 to examine the implementation of this agreement
should focus on compliance by all States with a treaty
that is the keystone of security in Europe. This conference
should also be the occasion for further progress.
There remains the highly sensitive issue of the
Convention banning biological weapons. A serious
verification system has to be set up. I hope that the
working group responsible for this matter in Geneva
quickly establishes such a system.
My country cannot accept the argument put forward
by some that the Organization has failed in its task. We
reject the accusations of passivity and helplessness that
are sometimes made against it. Nevertheless, we cannot
hide the fact that the celebration of the fiftieth anniversary
will not be as joyful and as optimistic as we would have
liked. The image of the Organization in public opinion is
confused, even negative at times. We should try together
and with a clear head to identify the reasons for such a
situation. I am convinced they have nothing to do with
any disaffection with the Organization. Never have the
aspirations of our peoples, especially the youth of the
world, so matched the objectives of the Charter: peace
and disarmament, environmental protection, solidarity
with the very poor, aid to those who suffer, the promotion
of democracy, of liberty and basic human rights, and the
collective struggle against the major scourges of the end
of the century, namely drugs, terrorism and AIDS. In the
last few years, we have witnessed the emergence of a
body of common values on a world scale. These are the
values which the United Nations, like France, upholds;
they are the values of peace.
13


In Europe we built with our neighbours a Community
and then a European Union, and in doing so we turned a
page of a history that had so often led us to confrontation
with each other. Since 1945 Europe has known a period of
unparalleled peace. The European Union is on the verge of
being enlarged again. France warmly welcomes the
forthcoming membership of its neighbours in Central,
Eastern and Mediterranean Europe, and will do everything
to make it a great success. In this way, the unity of our
continent is gradually being organized.
The extension of the boundaries of the European
Union does not lead it to close in on itself. Quite the
contrary, Europe is opening up to nearby neighbours from
the South, as the Euro-Mediterranean Conference in
Barcelona will demonstrate. I should like to emphasize the
fundamental importance of that Conference. Europe also
wants to develop its relations with Asia; in this regard, the
first Europe-Asia Summit, scheduled for March 1996, will
be a clear illustration. Lastly, Europe is deepening its
partnership with Russia as well as enhancing its close ties
with the United States and other partners.
I would like to insist on the fact that the European
Union, under the impetus of the French presidency, has
confirmed its privileged relationship with the African,
Caribbean and Pacific countries in the context of the Lomé
Convention and its special place in North-South relations as
the leading donor of development assistance.
In all those areas, Europe has set the example.
These values of peace are also at work in the Middle
East. France welcomes the important results that have
already been achieved under the peace process. I am
thinking of the Declaration of Principles of 13 September
1993 and the Jordanian-Israeli peace treaty of 26 October
1994. But, above all, I am pleased to see that the principles
agreed upon in Oslo have at last borne fruit with the long-
awaited initialling of the interim agreement this Sunday.
With this, a major turning-point, manifested by the
declaration of principles, has been given concrete form. The
Israeli-Palestinian peace process is now irreversible. I also
hope that the talks between Israel and Syria will soon
resume and that negotiations will start between Israel and
Lebanon so that a just and lasting peace, in accordance with
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and
425 (1978), be guaranteed throughout the region.
As the French President, Mr. Jacques Chirac, stated at
the celebration of the fiftieth anniversary at Geneva, the
world needs the United Nations. And it knows it, as proved
by the increasing number of tasks Member States have
entrusted to the Organization.
Therefore, today’s doubts have another origin. I see
two major causes. First, the United Nations is not shown
sufficient respect, probably because of a lack of political
will and resources. Secondly, the Organization has yet to
demonstrate its ability to reform itself.
Let me speak of respect first. One will never be able
lay sufficient stress on the devastating effect of the sight
of the Blue Berets of the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR) held hostage last spring, in chains and
humiliated in their dignity as men and soldiers. In
Somalia, in Rwanda prior to Operation Turquoise, in the
former Yugoslavia since the outbreak of the conflict, the
soldiers of peace had already found themselves in
situations that the United Nations accepted but that no
Member State would ever have tolerated. It is not
surprising that the image of the Organization has thereby
suffered.
I want to make myself clear. It is not a matter of
questioning the enormous work that has been
accomplished by the United Nations peace-keeping forces
since the end of the cold war: Namibia, Cambodia,
Mozambique, El Salvador and Haiti owe to those forces
progress that would have been impossible without the
United Nations. In Somalia, the United Nations saved
thousands of lives. Its intervention in the countries of the
former Yugoslavia made it possible to prevent the war
from spreading to Macedonia, to contain and dampen the
conflict within central Bosnia and Croatia, and, above all,
to ensure the survival of the populations in certain safe
areas, in Sarajevo in particular, for three years. However,
we have been helpless witnesses to unacceptable
suffering, to shameful operations of so-called “ethnic
cleansing” and to crimes against humanity, which the
international community was unable to prevent and before
which it remained passive.
These tragic events have shown the dangers of
mixing humanitarian and military missions and the risks
incurred when the mission conferred by the United
Nations is lacking in clarity. The Organization needs to
make itself respected when it intervenes in a conflict. Last
spring, France proposed to its partners that the time to
react had come at last. It suggested a change in attitude
and policy, with the formation of a powerfully armed
Rapid Reaction Force. We have since begun, in liaison
with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO),
decisive action to lift the siege of Sarajevo. This has
14


enabled the United Nations to recover the respect of all
parties.
This strengthening of the United Nations capacities for
action has no other objective than to place force at the
service of law. Only a political solution can truly settle the
conflicts brought about by the dissolution of the former
Yugoslavia.
That is why France, together with its partners in the
European Union and within the Contact Group, has taken
a clear position in favour of a settlement based on two
main principles, namely, respect for international law and
the support of the settlement by all the populations
concerned.
Respect for international law entails a rejection of any
solution which, imposed by force, would mean breaking
with the founding principles of our Organization. Bosnia
and Herzegovina is a recognized State and a Member of the
United Nations. Its territorial integrity and sovereignty must
be preserved. There is nothing to discuss or negotiate on
those two matters.
Those who have chosen to break the law and who
have committed the crimes of which we are all aware will
be held responsible individually. The International Criminal
Tribunal, whose creation was proposed by France in 1992,
must fully exert its jurisdiction.
It is also important that all the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina should be able to assert their specific character
through representative entities. Let each entity have direct
management of its own affairs and even be able to maintain
special relations with States whose populations share the
same affinities. All this is legitimate so long as the
management of common interests and the exercise of the
functions of sovereignty are not brought into question.
The agreement on the principles of a settlement
proposed to the protagonists in this conflict by the Contact
Group at Geneva on 8 September of this year and accepted
by their representatives, meets these two criteria. This is
why France has welcomed it, approves it and will support
it. The agreement and subsequent actions represent an
encouraging step, but they are only a first step. The extent
of what remains to be done to end the tragedy of Bosnia
clearly shows the major role that the United Nations will
have to take. In that mission, it can rely on France’s
unwavering support. It must also rely on the support of the
international community. Peace will be the work of all.
The decline in the respect shown the Organization is
evident in another domain that also affects its survival,
namely, its financing. It is not normal for the Secretary-
General of the world’s largest Organization, faced with
the threat of imminent bankruptcy, to have fewer avenues
of recourse in dealing with his debtors than the smallest
of our businesses. It is not acceptable for Member
States — and I am not thinking here only of those that
are experiencing real economic difficulties — to show
such scant respect for the Organization by ignoring the
legal obligations they have freely accepted.
France would like to see the United Nations stronger
and more respected. For this to occur, however, it is also
essential that the Organization be reformed and adapted.
The Secretary-General has spared no effort to open
the way to reform. Under his aegis, significant progress
has been made in the management of the Organization.
All the debates in these past few years were undertaken
at his initiative and have been based on his proposals in
the Agenda for Peace and the Agenda for Development.
France is awaiting with the greatest interest the Agenda
for Democracy, which will complete this triptych in a
field in which the United Nations is called on to take the
leading role. The Organization has need, more than ever,
of its Secretary-General in order to adapt to the demands
of the twenty-first century.
However, it also requires the political will of its
Member States, and this is not sufficiently in evidence. At
the opening of this fiftieth session, my wish is a simple
one. Let us concentrate on the projects that have already
been begun so that they can be completed soon, within
the coming year. France will contribute to this, and I
should like in this respect to submit a few proposals.
One of our main objectives will be to reach an
agreement on enlarging the Security Council. Enlargement
will be successful only if the Council continues in a
lasting way to be representative of the community of
nations through a reasonable increase in the number of its
members.
I should like to reaffirm this today: the Security
Council will have to welcome Germany and Japan as
permanent members, as well as some major States of the
developing world. It would also be desirable, naturally,
for the Council simultaneously to be opened to some new
non-permanent members.
15


The negotiation on the enlargement of the Security
Council now can and should be concluded quickly. Let us
wait no longer. It is equally imperative for the discussion
on United Nations financing to produce results in the next
few months.
But we must be honest with ourselves. This
negotiation depends in part on the response to the United
States’ request for a reduction in its assessed contribution
to the budget for peace-keeping operations. I shall not try
to disguise France’s genuine doubts as to the legitimacy of
this request.
None the less, for the higher interests of the
Organization, my country is ready to examine this question
without any a priori conclusions. It does, however, set
certain imperative conditions. The first condition is that any
new scale must respect fully the real capacity of Member
States to pay. On this point I should like once again to pay
tribute to your country, Mr. President. Portugal decided this
year, of its own accord, to increase its contribution to the
budget for peace-keeping operations. The second condition
is that the agreement must make it possible for the
Organization to start off again on sound bases. All existing
arrears will therefore have to be paid up. The third
condition is that automatic sanctions should be applied to
those who do not pay appropriately in order to prevent a
recurrence of the current crisis.
This is the modest price of enabling the United
Nations to devote itself less nervously to its two principal
missions: peace-keeping and development.
Peace-keeping is the domain of the Security Council,
the only body empowered to decide on the use of force and
to determine the principles and mandate of operations
carried out in the interest of international peace and
security.
We have to learn the lessons of the experiences of
recent years. Aside from traditional peace-keeping, the
United Nations may find itself obliged, in accordance with
the mandate entrusted to it by the Security Council, to
resort to force, within the limitations of its means, in order
to preserve whatever can be preserved. United Nations
military action is often the sole recourse available to the
international community.
It is therefore essential to increase the efficiency of the
United Nations in the service of peace. Among the most
pressing matters, I wish to underline the need to set up
capacities for rapid intervention, in the framework of the
vital process begun two years ago concerning stand-by
forces. I wish also to mention the need to improve the
command of operations and the interest in a still greater
use of preventive diplomacy.
I would like to say a few words about a situation
that is of grave concern to France and that calls
specifically for urgent action in preventive diplomacy on
a large scale. I am referring to the situation in the Great
Lakes region of Africa.
Since the assassination of Burundi’s President,
Mr. Ndadaye, and the unprecedented tragedy that struck
Rwanda, this entire region has been deeply destabilized.
More than 2 million Rwandans and Burundis are living
outside their country in terrible conditions, with the
difficulties that all this entails for the host countries. The
absence of lasting political solutions, the climate of
insecurity and fear that is kept alive by all the extremists,
the suspicion reigning on all sides, the risk of new
tragedies — all this compels us to address together and in
depth the fundamental problems in this area, taking into
account their extreme complexity and the trauma caused
by the genocide that has plunged Rwanda into mourning.
France remains convinced that only a comprehensive
regional approach that is political in character will make
it possible to do this. The principle of a conference on
peace, stability and security in the Great Lakes region is
now accepted, and we welcome the recent appointment of
a Special Representative by the Secretary-General. But
time is of the essence.
This conference must be carefully prepared, with the
active participation of the States most directly involved
and interested in its success, and it must lead to the
establishment of a stability pact for the African Great
Lakes region. There are three elements that I believe to
be essential in this respect: first, the adoption of
principles for the return of the refugees and for national
reconciliation, along with a commitment by States not to
tolerate any activity hostile to their neighbours on their
territory; secondly, the conclusion of bilateral or
multilateral agreements among the States concerned to
enshrine these principles and commitments and to give
them substance; and, finally, the organization of a follow-
up mechanism under the aegis of the Security Council.
France holds the conviction that development
assistance is the second, or perhaps the first, raison d’être
of the United Nations. Here, too, the balance sheet invites
reflection. How can we not have questions about the
16


feebleness of results, the persistence of extreme poverty, or
at times even famine, these crises that erase all prospects of
development and bring indescribable suffering to
populations? How can we not have questions about the
reduced contributions of the world’s richest countries?
These failures have gone onto the record. Now we
must act, reform and take the best advantage of the
experience we have acquired. The institutions of the United
Nations and their network of representatives in the field are
strong points. The development agencies have to refocus
their activity specifically on their objectives. They have to
set real priorities aimed at addressing real needs — in other
words, first and foremost the needs of the least developed
countries.
But it would be shocking if, as I sometimes predict
will happen, reform were boosted for the sole purpose of
reducing still further the contribution of the richest States
in the struggle against human poverty.
France, together with its partners in the European
Union, hopes to bring about, through An Agenda for
Development a mobilization for development on new
foundations. The situation is too disturbing to set the
interests of the States of the North and South in opposition
to each other. We are all bound by a higher duty: the global
struggle against poverty.
If, before this session comes to a close, we are able to
enlarge the Security Council, to place United Nations
financing on solid bases, to give the Organization the
means to intervene rapidly and effectively to maintain peace
and, finally, to modernize the modalities and institutions for
development assistance, we will truly have celebrated the
fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations, above and
beyond all the speech-making, in a fitting manner: by our
actions.
Allow me finally to mention a project that is
particularly dear to me: to re-establish, on the occasion of
this anniversary, the universality of our Organization, which
is reflected in the diversity of cultures and languages
manifested here.
Linguistic pluralism is essential. It reflects the right of
each Member State to understand the others, but also its
duty to make itself understood. A draft resolution on this
subject will be submitted to the Assembly; it will deal with
the use of languages in the Assembly’s deliberations and in
the Secretariat, and I hope it will enshrine the need to retain
sufficient resources to ensure the provisions of translation
and interpretation services. I am convinced that we will
reach a consensus in this regard.
Our Organization has deliberately taken its actions
for the long term. Recent events may obscure
achievements that are nevertheless solid, the results of
collective, patient, courageous work. But the gains are
there. It is up to each of us to make them known and
consolidate them so that the United Nations may continue
to fulfil the indispensable role entrusted to it 50 years
ago.
May I first
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
in this most important year for the United Nations.
It is nearly half a century since the General Assembly
of the United Nations first met, in London. King George VI
told the visiting representatives of 50 countries that no more
important meeting had ever taken place there. The founders
of the United Nations had taken on themselves a heavy
responsibility and a noble work.
Today we must pay tribute to those founders and
their efforts. Earlier models of collective security had
soon crumbled. The League of Nations collapsed after
less than two decades. The United Nations has proved
more durable. Over 50 years it has helped spread peace
in place of war. It has worked to push back hunger and
disease and to advance democracy and human rights.
Without the United Nations we would have a bleaker
world.
I am delighted to add Britain’s voice to these
celebrations at the fiftieth session of the General
Assembly. After five decades it is timely to recall what
the United Nations has achieved. At the start of a new
half-century it is right to weigh the lessons of past
experience.
The United Nations is a means to an end. Its value
lies not simply in the shared principles and ambitions
enshrined in the Charter, but in practical results. Its
successes are real.
The United Nations has been a force for peace.
From Korea in the 1950s to Kuwait in the 1990s, it has
helped check and reverse the tides of aggression. In the
Near East and Cyprus, United Nations troops have
worked for decades to sustain a measure of stability. In
Cambodia the United Nations mounted its most complex
operation ever to rebuild a country shattered by 13 years
of war. In Mozambique United Nations peace-keepers
have helped demobilize 100,000 combatants, allowing
democratic elections and the creation of a unified army.
The United Nations has been a source of relief from
suffering. Since 1951 the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has provided
food, shelter, medicine and education for over 30 million
refugees. United Nations programmes have immunized 80
per cent of the world’s children against disease. United
Nations sanitation and nutrition projects have halved child
mortality in developing countries.
The United Nations has been a motor for democracy
and sustainable development. It has given electoral help
to over 40 countries. Its charters and covenants set
international standards of human rights. It has brokered
agreements to conserve world forests and fish stocks.
9


The United Nations has done good work for five
decades. My country, the United Kingdom, has been at its
heart from the start. From the drafting of the Charter, as the
first host, in London, of the General Assembly and of the
Security Council, we have been a staunch supporter of the
United Nations. From the first stirrings of environmental
concern in the 1960s, to the fight against AIDS since the
1980s, through to management innovation and financial
reform in the 1990s, Britain has been a driving force for the
changing agenda of the United Nations. In 1947 we were
a party to the first case to come before the International
Court of Justice. This year a British judge became the
Court’s first ever woman member.
Even before the end of the cold war, British forces
had served the United Nations cause for decades. For 30
years the United Nations operation in Cyprus has depended
on British troops and logistics. In the last five years British
forces have served in Kuwait, Cambodia, Rwanda, Angola,
Georgia and, of course, Bosnia. Today Britain commits
more troops to United Nations peace-keeping than any other
Member State — with 10,250 out of a total of 69,000.
Near the end of its first half-century, the end of the
cold war opened a new chapter for the United Nations.
After years of super-Power stalemate, it again became
possible to take effective action in the Security Council,
including by authorizing the use of force to reverse
aggression. Almost immediately a rash of ethnically based
regional disputes began to break out, from the former
Yugoslavia in the West to Central Asia in the East.
Early experience brought a sense of exhilaration.
When Saddam Hussein made his foolish miscalculation and
sought to wipe Kuwait off the map, the United Nations was
the means chosen to stop him, and it worked. Talk of a
new world order did not seem empty.
Five years on, the record looks more diffuse. The
international community could do little to halt disintegration
in Somalia or to avert bloody collapse in Rwanda. The wars
of secession in the former Yugoslavia have dragged on for
four years.
But those who speak of United Nations failure are
wrong. The pendulum that swung too far towards euphoria
after the Gulf War has swung too far towards despair. Look
at the facts.
Alongside the torment of Bosnia and Rwanda are the
democratic revolutions that have swept South Africa, South
America and Central and Eastern Europe. We live in a
post-apartheid world, with a Europe of free nations and
the Middle East peace process a reality rather than a
slogan. The United Nations has helped bring about peace
in Namibia, Cambodia, El Salvador, Mozambique and at
last, perhaps, in Angola. Even in Bosnia, the real good
the United Nations has done has been obscured by unreal
expectations. The reality of the past five years is not one
of spreading world disorder, but of painstaking, steady
efforts to build peace.
Compare this record to the grim setting for the first
General Assembly meeting in 1946, when whole regions
lay in ruins after five years of world war. The truth is that
the history of serious attempts at international cooperation
is still quite young. The United Nations is by far its most
successful expression. There is today no one country or
group of countries ready and able to cope with new world
disorder all alone, and since regional instability and
economic dislocation affect all our interests, we need a
strong and effective United Nations.
This is not to deny the need for change. But it is no
good simply blaming the Organization. We, the United
Nations Members, must meet our obligations to help
improve the system. We have done much in recent years.
The United Nations is better able now to plan, mount and
conduct missions. Britain and others have seconded
military officers to New York to develop the planning and
operational capability and funded secondments by other
nations. Last year Britain helped launch a new initiative
on African peace-keeping. That is bearing fruit now, in
United Nations regional training, in closer cooperation
between African countries and the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) Conflict Resolution Mechanism and
in products like the Anglo-French Peace-keeping
Glossary, developed by the Ghanaian Staff College.
The process of reform must continue. The more
seriously the United Nations addresses issues like pre-
planning, logistic support and command and control, the
more confidence troop contributors will have, the more
forces will be put at the disposal of the United Nations
and the more effective the operations will be.
Changing procedures is not enough. We must learn
to be more realistic in what we ask of the United Nations.
That means not setting aspirations we cannot provide the
means to meet. Sometimes a declaratory statement is
useful to put the international community’s views on
record, to underpin a consensus. At other times it may be
better for the Security Council to remain silent than to
issue unrealistic pronouncements.
10


Bosnia and Somalia have shown the limits of peace-
keeping. They offer a clear lesson. The United Nations is
not yet suited to fight wars. Peace enforcement is better
left, perhaps, to a coalition of the willing acting under
United Nations authority. We must not send in the United
Nations to keep a peace which does not exist and then
blame the United Nations for failure, nor send it in
mandated and equipped to keep the peace and then blame
it because it does not enforce the peace.
Whatever the blemishes of recent years, there is
greater scope today for effective international action than
ever before. The United Nations should be the centre-point
of such work. I suggest we should focus greater effort in
future on two areas.
First, preventive action is better than cure. Far better
than containing or extinguishing a fire is stopping it from
igniting. Bosnia is the most tragic example. Today the
prospects for peace look a little stronger. I commend the
efforts of Dick Holbrooke, supported by the Contact Group,
to mediate between the parties, and the agreement reached
in Geneva on 8 September. Many hard choices lie ahead for
all sides before a final settlement is achieved. But we have
made a start. It is vital that all parties seize this chance for
peace. Only political negotiations, not military force, can
secure that.
But the war has dragged on for three and a half years
now. Tens of thousands of people have been killed;
millions more have been made homeless. It will take years
for the wounds inflicted on that country to heal. Certainly
the suffering would have been many times worse without
a United Nations presence. When I was in Sarajevo last
week, the Bosnian Government told me how much it values
the work done by British and other forces to help the
people of Bosnia. But how much better for all these people
if war had been avoided from the start. Perhaps much of
the damage and destruction might have been prevented by
closer international attention to the problems and tensions
arising from the breakup of Yugoslavia in the early 1990s.
We have started to learn that lesson. The early
deployment of a small United Nations force in The Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has helped to stop
conflict from spreading there. Elsewhere the quiet
diplomacy of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe has helped defuse tension in Ukraine and
Albania; has nudged adversaries toward peace talks in
Georgia, Moldova and Chechnya. There are few headlines
for successes that avert fighting and save lives. But the
headlines of war carry a heavy price. Preventive action is
a wiser investment.
Many routes exist. Britain and France have sketched
out one model: to use the skills of diplomats, of soldiers,
of academics and others to defuse tension and promote
dialogue. The presence of aid workers, human rights
monitors, or United Nations envoys can help contain a
brewing crisis; and all credit to the United Nations
representative doing that in Burundi. We strongly support
the efforts of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) to
work with the United Nations in preventive diplomacy
and conflict resolution. The initiative on African peace-
keeping will help.
So many different actors can play a part. The crucial
point is not who acts but when. Early warning of a crisis
and prompt action by the international community are the
real key to avoiding further tragedy of the kind we have
seen in Bosnia.
My second proposal is for a new approach to peace-
building. To provide lasting security requires more than
diplomacy and military force. To build real peace we
must bridge the gap between our humanitarian work and
our long-term development work.
Aid workers have grown used to coping with the
debris of war. In the past five years the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) has given help to millions fleeing conflict:
Rwandans in Tanzania and Zaire, Afghans in Iran and
Pakistan, Liberians in Côte d’Ivoire and in Guinea. But
too often we treat short-term humanitarian needs in
isolation. Huge sums have been spent in humanitarian
efforts in Rwanda, for example. But Rwanda’s long-term
stability depends on rebuilding the structures of society
and on civil rights; helping local communities to help
themselves, in areas from health and housing through to
an effective judiciary.
I suggest that two elements are key to a new
approach.
First of all, we must adopt a longer-term perspective
in tackling immediate crises. Even when a cease-fire is
holding, or elections have taken place, if the framework
of society is shaky, a continued international presence can
offer it stability until a government can cope. An abrupt
end to a mission, by contrast, can be very destabilizing.
In El Salvador, for example, a small human rights team
stayed on after the United Nations troops had left, to
11


provide further advice and monitoring. Peace-keepers
themselves can help begin the work of reconstruction. The
United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) and the aid
agencies have been doing that for over a year in central
Bosnia, underpinning reconciliation between Muslim and
Croat communities by rebuilding roads and hospitals and
schools.
I strongly support the thesis of the Secretary-General’s
recent report: that we must go beyond electoral assistance,
to preparing the social and institutional ground in which
democracy and civil society can put down firm roots. The
task of rebuilding Bosnia could be a model for the future.
Secondly, we need far better coordination in what we
do. If funds are to be gathered and used quickly and
effectively, donors themselves must make a greater effort
to meet their promises of help. Before operations begin, as
planning gets under way, the international financial
institutions must be involved from the start, as they were in
Cambodia. All the actors in the United Nations system must
be working together, military and political, humanitarian
and development, crossing the traditional boundaries
between rival baronies. Such a coalition of interests could
plug the gap we see too often now, until the major
reconstruction programmes can begin.

My proposal is to build on these principles in United
Nations programmes for stabilization and transition. There
are many areas where international expertise can help
restore a society; creating judicial systems; training an
army; developing a finance ministry or a diplomatic service.
To fulfil these needs, we should be prepared to loan our
experts to countries emerging from conflict, as Britain’s
Know-How Fund does for countries in Central and Eastern
Europe emerging from communism. United Nations
programmes for stabilization and transition could be the
greatest contribution we could make to international
security.
The demands on the United Nations have grown
enormously. To meet them the United Nations needs
change at the centre too. I welcome work under way to cut
costs and reduce waste in New York. The whole United
Nations system must learn from that example. We need
better planning and budgeting, an end to fraud and
mismanagement. More subcontracting can help, using non-
governmental organizations, even private companies, for
tasks like mine clearance and logistics in Angola. And there
is still too much duplication between the United Nations
agencies. Rhetoric is not enough. Reform has to be real,
and it has to be soon.
This is not a side issue. It is not a narrow interest.
If we are to do the United Nations work effectively —
peace-keeping, aid or humanitarian — we must use its
resources better. No one, G-7 or G-77, benefits from
waste. Recent experience has shown the United Nations
is in some ways ill-fitted for its tasks; under-powered in
some areas, like peace-keeping and preventive diplomacy;
but, however, still bloated in other parts of the system.
United Nations Members must pay their dues. But the
United Nations must justify those funds, and get the most
from them, by hard decisions on duplication and over-
staffing, and diverting resources to the top priorities.
Britain supports enlargement of the Security Council
to broaden its base without reducing its effectiveness.
Permanent membership is the key issue. Permanent
members of the Security Council must be both willing
and able to make a significant contribution through the
United Nations to international security. That is what the
Security Council is about. That is what it must remain if
it is to be effective. Germany and Japan are playing an
increasing part across the range of United Nations
business, and are among the top three financial
contributors. It is right that they should benefit from an
expansion of the permanent membership, with the wider
rights that entails, but also with the wider responsibilities
to contribute to security and peace-keeping. Broad
geographical balance in an enlarged Council also needs to
be maintained.
But the United Nations system will never work if we
do not fund it properly. The United Nations is on the
verge of financial collapse. It is owed over $3.7 billion in
unpaid contributions. Troop contributors are owed nearly
$1 billion. Last year 39 countries failed to pay at all. The
United Kingdom favours tightening of penalties for non-
payment, including the charging of interest on late
payments. We find unacceptable cross-funding of regular
budget deficits from the peace-keeping budget. Perhaps an
appropriate policy could best be entitled: No
Representation without Taxation!
The financing arrangements must change. Some
members pay too much. Others, like the new economic
giants of the developing world, now pay less than they
should. We need a scale that is simpler and reflects a
country’s real capacity to pay, and without the additional
anomalies and distortions of the present system. Britain
12


and Sweden have put forward ideas. We need progress
soon.
But the problem is not solved by turning the tap off.
This year we have all reaffirmed our support for goals and
work of the United Nations. But empty words will not pay
bills.
The final lesson from the last 50 years may be the
most important: the case for a strong, effective United
Nations.
In conclusion, may I say that the United Nations today
faces a crisis of confidence. United States Congressmen
may be the most vocal sceptics. They are not alone. The air
of optimism, of a fresh start after the cold war, is overtaken
in some quarters by gloom at the instability and
fragmentation around us, and pessimism at our ability to
cope. This despair is dangerous.
Multilateral action is not an add-on to national policy.
It gives wider legitimacy to principles we value, such as
human rights and democracy. It spreads the cost of aims we
share, such as freeing Kuwait from invasion or restoring
democracy in Haiti. It lets us work with others to fight
common threats, such as greenhouse-gas emissions or the
international drug trade.
The price is not high. The bill for all United Nations
peace-keeping, all aid and development work last year, was
slightly over 3.5 per cent of the United States’ defence
budget, or less than the United Kingdom spends on police
and public administration. One day of Operation Desert
Storm cost as much as all that year’s United Nations peace-
keeping. The price of disengagement and disorder would be
greater. Public support is there. Even in the United States,
polls are clear: people support the United Nations, and they
support international peace-keeping. We have a duty to our
electorates to continue the United Nations work.
It is easy to forget the United Nations successes over
50 years. It is easy to turn away from disorder and chaos.
But the world is too small. Crises in distant countries affect
us too; our commerce, our citizens overseas, our
neighbour’s security — ultimately it is our own. It is in our
interest to play what part we can to build a more decent
world. If the United Nations were not here to help do that,
we would have to invent something else.
The experience of five decades offers lessons for the
future. I know the Secretary-General is committed to
change. Getting the United Nations we need for the twenty-
first century requires the support and participation of all
Member States. The United Kingdom has played a full
part in the United Nations for 50 years, and we will
continue to do so.
It gives me great pleasure to
congratulate Mr. Freitas do Amaral on his election as
President of the General Assembly at its fiftieth session,
during which he will guide our discussions on what the
future of the United Nations should be. May I also convey
my thanks to the President of the General Assembly at its
forty-ninth session, Mr. Amara Essy, who, as it were, tilled
the ground which the new President will sow.
A fiftieth anniversary is a climacteric, usually joyous
but not necessarily so. In ancient India, this was around the
time in a man’s life that he would be expected to withdraw
into a forest, to spend the rest of his days in contemplation
of past and future, it being the assessment of our ancestors
that anything a man could usefully do he would have done
by then. No such drastic measures are needed for the
United Nations, not least because it has spent much of its
first 50 years meditating in a concrete jungle. And the
shadow of the woods of Bretton always loom over it. I do
think, however, that as we celebrate, which we should, the
survival of the United Nations, we should judge what it has
done and what it now needs to do. The United Nations
system has had remarkable success in helping to defeat
colonialism and apartheid, on social issues like universal
health care and women’s rights, and in banning, through
global, non-discriminatory treaties, two of the three
weapons of mass destruction. These are considerable
achievements. But a clear pattern emerges from them.
Whenever the United Nations has acted on principle,
responding to the felt needs and priorities of the majority of
its membership, it has done well. When it has pursued
narrow agendas or succumbed to special pleading, it has
not.
If we were setting out tasks for the United Nations
today, what would be the major trends and challenges we
would expect it to address? The first is the international
economy, transformed by global movements of trade,
capital and labour; driven by forces which can break
developing economies; regulated — if they can be at all —
in forums outside the United Nations, which is therefore
marginalized in this most momentous of contemporary
developments. The second is an opening up of political
systems, with democracy the norm of national
governance. The United Nations welcomes this and urges
the recalcitrant to change, but is itself sapped by
undemocratic systems and institutions. The third is the
scourge of war increasingly replaced by the scourge of
terrorism, which, for the countries that sponsor it, is war
by other means. The United Nations, set up to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war, ignores
it, as the League of Nations, to its fatal peril, ignored the
threat of xenophobia.
These are complex and titanic forces. We, therefore,
cannot accept, either as a statement of fact or as a basis
of policy, the view that all this meant was that the days
of absolute sovereignty were over. Sovereignty has never
been absolute. Most Members of the United Nations
joined immediately after emerging from colonial rule,
with their economies destroyed, and dependent on foreign
languages for communication, on imperial capitals for
support and on donors for subsistence. This is hardly the
stuff on which absolute sovereignty is built. It was, in
fact, one of the great virtues of the United Nations that it
gave fledgling nations space to exercise the sovereignty
so cruelly circumscribed elsewhere. Therefore, the United
Nations should not claim a unilateral right to intervene in
the affairs of its Members. Sovereignty can be diluted
only with the voluntary consent of nation States accepting
obligations that are non-discriminatory or, in exceptional
circumstances, where State authority has collapsed. Far
from enfeebling sovereignty, it is the task of the United
Nations to nurture it in a world that has made the
powerful more dominant and the weak increasingly
powerless. We must never forget that this Assembly is an
assembly of our nations united. The United Nations rests
on the commitment to it of sovereign nations.
There is clearly an enormous need for global action
to deal with complex issues which have no territorial
limits or borders. This is the task of the United Nations.
Developing countries which represent the majority of the
United Nations, obviously want it to focus on the issues
of most pressing concern to them. That is not only fair:
that would be the democratic thing to do. For us, the
single most important task is development, and we expect
this to be the highest priority on the international agenda,
as it is on our domestic agendas. Sadly, it is not. The
Agenda for Development looks lamentably like an
appendix. Can we, at this session, pledge ourselves to
honour the commitments, freely negotiated but never
implemented, which will make development possible in
13


the South and make the world, for all of us, a better and
more peaceful place?
It is just as important for the United Nations to have
a say in the decisions that guide the international economy.
Chapter IX of the Charter gave it the task to promote
higher standards of living, solutions of international
economic, social, health and related problems, and universal
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms. Like
the United Nations, the World Trade Organization gives
equal weight to the votes of all its members, but it would
be a pity if the World Trade Organization cut even the
tenuous links between the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade (GATT) and the United Nations and, decided
instead that global economic policies would in the future be
coordinated between it, the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund, where the system of weighted
voting makes the voice of the developing countries
irrelevant. At the same time, several studies commissioned
to coincide with this anniversary claim that the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD)
no longer has a useful purpose. This can either mean that
the problems UNCTAD addresses — development
strategies, poverty alleviation, resource transfers and debt,
and the transfer of technology — have been settled, or are
now irrelevant. Neither is true. These continue to be
burning issues for developing countries, and if the United
Nations chooses to ignore them it will not serve the needs
of its Member States.
The United Nations must assume its Charter
responsibility to supervise and coordinate global economic
policies. In the World Trade Organization efforts have been
made to link trade to environment and labour standards.
The World Bank, in its World Development Report 1995,
warns about
“the proliferation of protectionist demands, many of
them under the guise of demands for fair trade and a
level playing field”.
If, indeed, there is a genuine interest in protecting the
environment and the interests of labour in developing
countries, why are the United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP) and the International Labour
Organization (ILO) being sidelined in this exercise? The
answer must be that there is no provision in these bodies
for the coercive, retaliatory action which would be available
under the sanctions regime of the World Trade
Organization.
However, the industrialized countries say that
environmental and labour standards must be harmonized
upwards, because otherwise transnational corporations
would go where these standards were the lowest. This of
course implies that transnational corporations have an
appalling and exploitative standard of behaviour, but
when, in the 1970s and 1980s, the United Nations tried to
develop a code of conduct for transnational corporations,
we were told that transnational corporations were models
of virtue. How do these two views cohere?
The problem posed by these global economic forces
is enormous. Trade is the oxygen of our economies, but
cross-border trade between transnational corporations
constitutes one third of world trade and almost 15 per
cent of gross global product. No developing country, or
group of developing countries, can match this commercial
strength, augmented, of course, by the enormous weight
of financial flows, which can make or break a country’s
financial structure.
The third element in the trinity of mobility in the
international economy is migration. At present 125
million people live outside their countries, but more than
half of them move between developing countries; this is
not, therefore, as it has so often been misrepresented, only
a problem for the developed world. It is disturbing,
however, that those who insist on unfettered and truly
global flows of capital and trade also insist on restrictions
being placed on the movement of labour. Economic
arguments are given to justify this, but there are also
claims that large migrations disturb the way a society
thinks of itself as a unified cultural or ethnic entity.
The President returned to the Chair.
It would be honest to recognize these fears as racist.
India is a model of how these fears can be overcome. On
the one hand, over the past decade several million illegal
immigrants have come into India. We know to our cost
the political, economic and social strain this causes.
However, we do not accept a racial basis for
discriminating against legal migrants. We do not accept
that nationhood is based on race, any more than it is
based on religion or any other exclusive attribute. The
waves of migration that have washed over India have
made us a multi-ethnic society; we have been culturally
enriched, not impoverished. We urge the international
community not to let the forces of xenophobia rise again.
Sovereignty has never been threatened by fresh blood
freely welcomed; it has been threatened by the forces of
racist intolerance.
14


This brings me naturally to the other force that now
threatens the sovereignty of so many nations. Terrorism is
the black plague of our times and it has been made more
dangerous by the mystique with which the media has
endowed it. It is argued sometimes that one man’s freedom
fighter is another man’s terrorist. This is specious logic. In
1922 Mahatma Gandhi suspended for several years the
freedom struggle in India because, in an incident in the
small village of Chauri Chaura, a mob burnt some
policemen to death. In Gandhi’s view, the view of the
ultimate freedom-fighter, the means must sanctify the ends.
What ends could possibly justify the barbarism of
taking an innocent foreigner in India hostage and beheading
him in cold blood? Foreign mercenaries did this to the
Norwegian Hans Christian Ostro last month. An empire of
terror is being built up with arms and money sent across
borders; its foot soldiers are drawn from the bigoted, its
leadership from ruthless, unprincipled men and, regrettably,
some women.
At every summit in recent years, whether of the non-
aligned, the Group of Seven, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), or the Commonwealth,
Heads of State and Government have reaffirmed their
resolve to defeat all forms of terrorism. However, in the
United Nations, where we are all represented, we have been
unable to speak in such forthright terms. We must do so at
this fiftieth anniversary. To appease terrorism now will be
as dangerous as appeasing xenophobia was in the 1930s and
ultimately as destructive of both peace and democracy,
because terrorism, as I said earlier, is war by other means.
Whether it tries to violate the territorial integrity of a
country, as in India, in our State of Jammu and Kashmir, or
to unseat duly constituted Governments, as in Afghanistan,
the acts of States sponsoring terrorism are, in fact, acts of
war.
Democracies, as open societies, are particularly
vulnerable to terrorism. The United Nations welcomes the
global trend that has made democracy the norm of
governance, but has done nothing to defend democracies
from extremist and other threats. Instead, it comforts itself
with the mantras that democracy is development, and
democracies do not wage war. These neatly package all the
world’s problems and absolve the United Nations of any
further responsibility: establish democracy everywhere and,
automatically, development and peace will follow.
Both propositions are historically untrue. Democracies
that developed in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries
either suppressed democratic rights until they became rich,
or grew rich on the ruthless exploitation of colonies.
When they shed their empires after the Second World
War democracy became development in Europe only in
the uniquely generous embrace of the Marshall Plan. The
myth that democracies do not wage war is destroyed by
the history of colonial rule and its wars, leading to the
conflagration of the First World War. The United Nations
should, therefore, take these propositions as objectives,
not as givens. Democracy should lead to development;
democracies should be peaceful.
I want to touch briefly upon two other global issues
which affect our lives — disarmament and human rights.
After Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Mahatma Gandhi said that
the use of the atom bomb for the wholesale destruction of
men, women and children was the most diabolical use of
science. We were therefore appalled that, instead of
stepping back from the road to nuclear ruin, the nuclear-
weapon States sped faster and faster down it. As they
accelerated, India tried unsuccessfully to put on the
brakes. In 1954 we called for an end to nuclear testing. In
1965 we proposed principles for a non-proliferation
treaty. In 1982 we called for a convention to ban the use
of nuclear weapons and for an end to the production of
fissile material for nuclear weapons. In 1988 we proposed
to the United Nations a comprehensive action plan for a
world free of nuclear weapons.
Our goal — shared, I believe by most of us here —
is a world from which nuclear weapons have been
eliminated. The nuclear-weapon States claim to share this
goal, but their present objective is to retain nuclear
weapons while making sure others do not get them.
The logic of this is hard to understand. It cannot be
argued that the security of a few countries depends on
their having nuclear weapons and that that of the rest
depends on their not having them. What makes the NPT
such a pernicious document is that it legitimizes this
illogicality, and now that it has been made permanent it
has made the possession of nuclear weapons by the
nuclear-weapon States immutable and has made the goal
of global nuclear disarmament that much more difficult.
It is useful to recall that when India and other
developing countries proposed the NPT, a global balance
of responsibilities was envisaged. Those who did not have
nuclear weapons would not seek to acquire them; those
who had them would not try either to refine or develop
them or to increase their arsenals. This balance was never
honoured, with the result that 25 years after the signing
of the NPT the world is a much more dangerous place,
15


made so by the proliferation of nuclear weapons in the
arsenals of the nuclear-weapon States.
I recall this background because two years ago the
international community at last agreed to negotiate a
comprehensive test-ban treaty. We are glad that negotiations
are in progress, but we also note that nuclear-weapon States
agreed to a comprehensive test-ban treaty only after
acquiring the know-how to develop and refine their arsenals
without the need for tests. In our view, the comprehensive
test-ban treaty must be an integral step in the process of
nuclear disarmament. Developing new warheads or refining
existing ones after a comprehensive test-ban treaty is in
place, using innovative technologies, would be as contrary
to the spirit of the comprehensive test-ban treaty as the
NPT is to the spirit of non-proliferation. The comprehensive
test-ban treaty must contain a commitment binding on the
international community, especially the nuclear-weapon
States, to take further measures within an agreed
time-frame towards the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free
world.
The existence of nuclear weapons poses a threat to
peace and security. Only global nuclear disarmament can
guarantee that there will never be a nuclear war. Therefore,
despite the unfortunate legitimization of nuclear weapons
through the indefinite extension of the NPT, India will
continue to work with like-minded countries for the early
elimination of all nuclear weapons. We hope that at this
session the Assembly will finalize dates for the fourth
United Nations special session on disarmament, in 1997.
Human rights have always been a preoccupation of the
United Nations, but their protection and promotion of such
rights in each country is the primary responsibility of the
government. The universality and interdependence of all
human rights are also beyond question. That is precisely
why the United Nations system cannot promote and protect
human rights by a unilateral prioritization of individual
freedoms or a proliferation of intrusive mechanisms, or by
diverting funds from development activities to human rights
activities. The priorities of nations will differ. The United
Nations must balance the promotion of all human rights —
civil, cultural, economic, political and social — preserve
and propagate the values of every society and promote
tolerance for diversity and cross-cultural interaction.
Politicizing the human-rights agenda and using it to target
countries is undesirable.
The United Nations will become responsive to these
global issues and effective and efficient only if it also
becomes more democratic in its functioning. Developing
countries find it hard to identify with the agendas and
priorities of the United Nations; they feel that it now
represents the privilege of a few rather than the interests
of the many. If the majority of its Members become
disenchanted with it, what role can the United Nations
effectively play? For the United Nations to be more
effective, the General Assembly must be given new life
and breathe that life into the other bodies of the system.
The legitimacy and effectiveness of the Security Council
must be enhanced. An expansion of both permanent and
non-permanent members is a must if the Council is to
become a truly representative body acting on behalf of the
Members of the United Nations for the maintenance of
peace and security.
The members of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries have put forward a comprehensive proposal for
the reform and restructuring of the Security Council. India
believes that, to truly reflect the expanded membership of
the United Nations, developing countries must be included
as permanent members. New permanent members should
be chosen not arbitrarily, but on objective criteria. In the
League of Nations it was argued that one country had a
special right of entry into the Supreme Council. When
that was forced through, one or two of the other aspirants
left the League, starting its decline. We should not repeat
that tragedy. On objective criteria, some countries will
clearly qualify for permanent membership. We believe
India will be among them.
The United Nations has in recent years devoted itself
almost exclusively to peace-keeping, which is important,
but not the central issue of our times. It is judged,
naturally, by its record in these operations. There have
been successes and failures, and both provide the reason
and the need for introspection. India believes that United
Nations peace-keeping operations must be based on the
principles evolved over the last 50 years. Operations
guided by these principles have usually done well. Where
these have been abandoned, failure has been common.
Over the past year this truth has gained broad acceptance,
and the Special Committee on Peace-Keeping Operations
is now trying to collate these principles. It would be
desirable for the General Assembly at this fiftieth session
to agree on them. India will contribute to this work.
India has consistently supported the peace-keeping
activities of the United Nations. Indian troops have
participated in all major peace-keeping operations, ranging
from the Congo to Cambodia, Somalia and Mozambique.
We are currently participating in United Nations
peace-keeping operations in Rwanda, Angola, Haiti,
16


Liberia and Kuwait. We have also offered a brigade of
troops to the United Nations stand-by arrangement. India
will continue to contribute to United Nations efforts to
maintain international peace and security.
If the United Nations is to become a leading player on
the world scene, it must be given the means needed to do
the job we entrust to it. Clearly, setting out on a second 50
years with a crippling financial crisis is not the best way to
do so. In India we make considerable efforts to pay our
contributions promptly and in full. We believe that all
Members must pay their assessed contributions in full and
on time. Further, those in arrears must announce a schedule
for settlement. There can be no progress in the on-going
efforts for financial reform unless this is done.
The fiftieth session of the General Assembly is a
historic one. It is our responsibility to rejuvenate the United
Nations, give it the tasks we want it to do, and the means
with which to do them. We set up the United Nations
because we felt that all of us stood to gain from it. In the
dark days of the cold war and in the friction between North
and South, we seem to have lost this vision.
Since the inception of the United Nations, India has
been committed to the principles and objectives of the
Charter. In the last five decades we have played an
important role in shaping the United Nations agenda, taking
the lead on the crucial issues of decolonization,
disarmament, human rights and environment, among others.
On this historic occasion we pledge our continuing
commitment to the United Nations efforts to chart a new
course for the collective benefit of all humanity. As we
attempt to do so, I am reminded of Jawaharlal Nehru’s
speech to the General Assembly in November 1948, in
Paris. He said:
“The objectives are clear; your aim is clear; and yet,
in looking at that aim, we lose ourselves often, if I
may venture to say so, in smaller matters and forget
the main objective that we were looking at. Sometimes
it seems that the objective itself gets a little clouded”.
(Plenary Verbatim Records, Third Session, General
Assembly, 154th meeting, p. 16)
We must ensure that we set aside smaller matters, that
we do not allow the objective to get clouded and that we
move forward together in harmony and for the benefit of all
the people of the world.
I should like to congratulate Mr.
Freitas do Amaral on his election to the presidency of the
General Assembly. We are glad that a representative of
Portugal, a nation for which Israel has high regard, was
elected to that distinguished post.
I would like to express to the Secretary-General, Mr.
Boutros Boutros-Ghali, a man of our region and a man of
peace, our deepest appreciation for his contribution to world
peace in general and to the Middle East peace in particular.
Tomorrow, the Jewish people will pray on the day of
Yom Ha-Kippurim:
(spoke in Hebrew; English text furnished by the delegation)
“In the Book of Life: blessings, peace, a good
livelihood, good decrees, salvation and consolation.
May you be remembered and inscribed.”
(spoke in English)
We pray for all humanity, for the whole world.
For us, the United Nations is not just a place of prayer
and surely not a platform for speeches. We come here to
state our convictions and to announce our commitments. In
our address in 1987, I stated on behalf of the State of
Israel:
“We have found President Mubarak of Egypt to
be a builder of a better life for his people and of
bridges for a comprehensive peace in the region.”
(Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-
second Session, Plenary Meetings, 17th meeting,
p. 23-25)
Today, under the leadership of President Mubarak,
Egypt is becoming a centre for regional development on the
way to hosting the first regional bank of development.
In the same address, we stated:
“An international conference is the door to direct
negotiations. Once convened it should lead
immediately to face-to-face bilateral negotiations.”
(Ibid., p. 26)
On 30 October, 1991, the Madrid Conference took place.
In 1992, again we declared:
“The opportunity to select, through democratic
political elections, the Palestinian administrative
council will enable the Palestinian people to exercise
a double measure of freedom: the freedom to govern
their own lives and to do so ... democratically.”
(Ibid., Forty-seventh Session, Plenary Meetings,
20th meeting, p. 48)
Last week, we achieved what we promised.
Lastly, in 1993, we declared again from this rostrum:
“Geographically speaking, we live side by side
with the Jordanian Kingdom, and what is so obvious
geographically must become clear politically [so
that] we can offer the people of both sides of the
river full peace, that the Dead Sea can become a
spring of new life.” (Ibid., Forty-eighth Session,
Plenary Meetings, 6th meeting, p. 22)
In October 1994, just one year later, Jordan and Israel
signed a peace treaty.
Last year, we said here:
“All countries of the Middle East face a choice:
to remain politically divided and economically
stagnant or to become economically advanced and
politically just.
“... We shall try to establish instruments for
development: a regional bank, channels for private
investment and a framework for regional planning.”
(Ibid., Forty-ninth Session, Plenary Meetings,
10th meeting, p. 16)
In October 1994, the first Middle East-North African
economic summit was held in Casablanca under the
splendid presidency of His Majesty King Hassan II. At
the end of this month, a second summit will be held in
Amman under the auspices of His Majesty King Hussein.
At the end of November, the first ground-breaking Euro-
Mediterranean conference will be held in Barcelona.
Three years, five promises: all of them fulfilled. I
would like to use this occasion to turn to the Syrians and
to turn to the Lebanese and ask them to stop hesitating,
to stop wandering. They have to look at this record and
come in and follow up. The President of Syria has said
that from experience he has learned that only through
military negotiations and making security the major
agenda item can one achieve peace. Sorry: Experience has
4


shown that through negotiation on all levels, embracing all
issues without timidity, without fatigue, we can achieve
peace. If leaders meet and are not successful at the first
meeting, they will have another meeting. How can it be
wrong for them to work day and night, ceaselessly, with
new ideas and new approaches? They are not wasting the
leaders’ time; they are wasting the time of the people —
their fortunes, their happiness, opportunities for the younger
generation.
We also tell all the countries of the Middle East, not
that we want to have a new Middle East, but that we want
the Middle East to join in a new age — for the good of
their people, not for the good of Israel. Israel is in good
shape because we are no longer living in a world where
there are empires of power and colonies of poverty. Poverty
and oppression are home-made, not imposed by others. The
choice is before every country to become free and
prosperous and democratic, like so many nations have done
in a relatively short time in Asia, Latin America and in
some countries of Africa. It is their choice, their
opportunity not just to build a different world but to
introduce the new world to their own people.
For us, the United States is not an empire of power.
We are not afraid of the United States. For us, the United
States is an empire of peace. We need the United States.
For us, Russia is going through a process of change. Russia
will remain great but will become something different. For
us, we welcome the European contribution to other
countries east and south of them and the convening of the
Barcelona conference to offer the Mediterranean peoples
funds and experience to build a new life. We are glad that
Japan is expanding its economic horizons and understanding
and contributing so that other nations can do so. And we
hope that other well-to-do countries in the Middle East,
including Arab countries, will help the needy parts of our
own region.
May I say that in my best judgement the greatest
danger is a combination of high technology and deep
hatred, of modern instruments and feudalistic views, and
the greatest hope for all of us is a double effort to respect
human values and modern education.
Israel itself is in good shape. We are strong militarily:
I do not deny it. We have an excellent economy — an
economy of brains, not of material resources. We have
absorbed a very large immigration of white and black Jews,
white Jews from Russia and black Jews from Ethiopia, and
nobody can understand what put Israel in such a relatively
good position.
What brought this about is, first of all, the return to
the moral choice. By the end of this year — at the latest
at the beginning of next year — not one Palestinian will
remain under our control. For the first time in the history
of the Palestinian people, they are educating their children
without intervention by us or anybody else. Nobody
forces us to do so. We are not weak. We are not poor.
We are not under pressure. We have had to take serious
risks because terror still continues. The Arab boycott is
still intact.
In our own country there is strong opposition to
what we are doing. We have had to spend a great part of
our budget to make peace — and yet, despite all this, we
decided to make a moral choice: not to dominate another
people. We stated in this Assembly that that was our
intention. Now we have done it and even politically, as
difficult as it may be at home — because, as a party, we
may win historically but we may also lose politically —
but then, winning peace is in our eyes more important
than winning elections. Why should you be elected if you
do not use the mandate of the people to change the course
of your history in a reasoned, moral way?
We believe that the strength of ethical judgement is
as important as military exercises or triumphs. We gave
up land and produced instead an economy of brains.
Today Israel is making out of its brains more than some
other countries in our vicinity are making out of oil.
And what we actually expect from the Palestinians
is for them to become democratic, to be prosperous, to
fight violence and terror, and we are giving our
neighbours a simple message: What we can do,
everybody can do.
For many years there was a legend that only the
North, which is white and wealthy and permanent, is a
success story, whereas the South is condemned to
backwardness, to poverty, to lagging behind. What has
happened in Asia, where the most vibrant economic
endeavours are taking place today, and what is happening
in Latin America show that the economy has nothing to
do with geographical location or the colour of the skin.
Make the right choice: serve your people and create a
new future.
What we are offering to anyone who is interested is
our experience — open, in a comradely way. We do not
want to dominate anybody and certainly not anybody’s
economy. We did not give up the domination of people
to gain domination of markets. And we are suggesting to
5


our neighbours — and we are happy that they have
accepted — is that the new frontiers — say, between
Jordan and Israel — will not be frontiers of mines and
hostile fences, but an occasion for joint ventures.
The whole rift of Africa, the whole valley which is a
desert that separates the Jordanians and us will become,
with God’s help, a source for work, for development. We
will build hotels and schools and desalination plants and
parks, and people will be free to move from one side to the
other, competing without hating, cooperating without
dominating.
We want to do the same about the dividing line
between us and the Palestinians: we want to build alongside
the line on the West Bank and Gaza eight industrial parks
so that the Palestinians will not have to cross the border
and go through Israel’s checkpoints: instead, work will
come to them, and together we shall invest and together we
shall develop.
A better economy is the best guarantee of peace.
Actually, there cannot be economic cooperation without
political understanding. Recently, while we were negotiating
we created three zones of security sensibility on the West
Bank — zone A, zone B and zone C. Then we turned to
water and electricity and we asked the water and the
current to submit to our political wisdom, but the electricity
and the water people said that they did not distinguish
between A, B and C. Water flows according to nature and
not according to artificial agreements, and electric current
does not stop at A or B or C. They serve everybody.
Today in the Middle East as elsewhere, the distinction
is no longer ideological or religious or national. There is
just one distinction between an old, poor, backward
economy and a new age where economies are based on
technology and science and where the natural resource is
schools for the children and not the mines of the Gulf.
Everybody can postpone the choice but nobody can escape
it.
Our aim is to have peace so as to serve our people; to
have education so as to equip our children to take
advantage of the new age, to be equal to others and to
compete with other children. It cannot remain a peace
between leaders: it must become a peace for the people,
now and in the future.
I started by showing what has happened in three or
four short years. It is a revolution. It is a beginning. We
should not stop in the middle. Let everybody pray to the
Lord in the language he is used to. Let everybody respect
his own tradition, his own heritage. Let everybody respect
the special experience of a people, of a nation. But let all
of us give up unnecessary hatred, untold suspicion. Let us
give up barricading ourselves behind old dogmas and
terrible prejudices. Let us help the people and the future.
Then the 50 years of the United Nations will offer not
just 50 years without war but the coming 50 years with
peace and prosperity.
May I first take this
occasion to congratulate Ambassador Diogo Freitas do
Amaral of Portugal on his election to the presidency of
the Assembly in this important fiftieth anniversary year.
I should also like to offer a special welcome to
Palau as the one hundred eighty-fifth Member. Palau’s
accession does signal honour to us as a fellow Pacific
State.
Here today I want to talk about making our global
neighbourhood a safer place for all of us; the progress
that has been made in the years since the end of the cold
war, and what still needs to be done. Memories are short;
it is hard to recall the degree of mutual suspicion that
coloured global politics just a few years ago.
We have made great strides in recent times. The
world community has achieved much in its efforts to
make the world safer, and more stable. But we need to
move on to reinforce our achievements in controlling,
reducing and abolishing the horrific weapons of mass
destruction. We have yet to see the dividend we all
expected to flow from the end of the cold war.
The transition to a post-cold-war world is not easy.
We are painfully aware of that. In recent years though,
we have been encouraged to believe that a new world
order was achievable. One of the reasons for this hope,
this optimism, was that the nuclear scourge had receded.
For the first time in 50 years nuclear Powers were
committed to build down rather than to build up, to
decommission and destroy rather than to commission and
construct.
However, recent events have cast a cloud over that
brief period of optimism. New Zealand does not believe
18


that continued nuclear testing, wherever it takes place,
contributes to a safer world. On the contrary, nuclear
testing sends the wrong message to States which do possess
or which aspire to the possession of nuclear weapons. It
also tells them that the development of these weapons is
still acceptable.
The nuclear tests which have taken place since the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons was
extended have disturbed the delicate balance achieved at
that Conference. New Zealand believed then, and continues
to believe, that indefinite extension was the right option.
The world needs a strong non-proliferation regime, one that
cannot be called into question by changing global
circumstances. But the Conference went further than that,
the vast majority of participants making it very clear that
they were against nuclear testing. They also wanted to
move towards the nuclear-free world envisaged in article VI
of the Treaty. The cavalier disregard, and dismissal of the
views of the many, has led to considerable disillusionment.
It will take a long time to restore the trust that had been
there.
New Zealand and the rest of the South Pacific region
have long stood tall and proud in opposition to nuclear
weapons and their testing. We abhor testing wherever it
occurs. But the decision to resume testing in what we see
as our home region has particularly angered the people of
New Zealand. The leaders of the South Pacific Forum
nations expressed their outrage at their meeting just two
weeks ago. They were able to recall the painful memories
in the region, going back to atmospheric testing conducted
between 25 and 50 years ago.
The South Pacific has not been alone in its opposition
to nuclear testing. Governments, parliamentarians and
peoples from every region of the world have spoken up in
anger, alarm and dismay. The two Governments which are
continuing to test nuclear weapons must heed the voice of
the international community. They are dancing to a tune no
one wants to hear.
In these circumstances, New Zealand, along with a
representative group of like-minded States, will submit an
appropriate draft resolution to the First Committee of this
Assembly.
Testing is a backward step, and I condemn it. It is not
too late. All that China and France need to do is listen to
international opinion and announce that their testing
programmes have ceased.
I want to welcome the commitment by three of the
nuclear-weapon States — France, the United Kingdom
and the United States — to a genuine ban on nuclear
testing: a prohibition on any nuclear explosions, no matter
how small. This is what we have always called for: a
comprehensive ban — where the word “comprehensive”
means just that. We are pleased that it is attracting serious
support.
New Zealand calls on the two nuclear-weapon States
that have not yet indicated full support for this approach
to do so quickly. Time is short. The deadline for the
negotiations is 1996, and the international community is
holding the Conference on Disarmament accountable for
meeting that deadline and producing a treaty that is
genuinely comprehensive in scope.
In this regard, the General Assembly has become
increasingly concerned about the lack of accountability in
the Conference on Disarmament. Limited and
unrepresentative membership has been a large part of the
problem. Enlargement is long overdue. New Zealand
welcomes the progress made in recent weeks in Geneva,
and we express our gratitude to Morocco for its efforts in
this regard.
However, the real test will be whether by the time
we meet here again next year the new members will have
been able to take their seats. For the moment, the
outcome is still not satisfactory. I recall that democratic
representation was once at the heart of a tea party in
Boston. Let us hope that there will not be a tea party in
New York in 1996 on membership of the Conference on
Disarmament.
I also urge the members of the Conference on
Disarmament to look beyond the conclusion of a
comprehensive test-ban treaty. New Zealand wants to see
an international agreement banning the production of
fissile material for nuclear weapons. That would be
another important step towards negotiations on the total
elimination of nuclear weapons. We urge the Conference
on Disarmament to resolve its procedural differences and
get the negotiations under way.
I should add that at the Review and Extension
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons we raised the idea of
negotiating an agreement to ban the future production of
nuclear weapons. That could take us a step closer to
eliminating the nuclear threat.
19


But it is also important to address the issues relating
to conventional weapons.
I wish, first, to address the issue of land-mines. I want
to congratulate the Secretary-General and his staff for the
way they have picked up this issue and raised public
awareness around the world. The Conference organized in
Geneva this year was most timely — but more is needed.
Both financial and technical resources need to be made
available to help dispose of the millions of treacherous life-
and livelihood-destroying mines that have already been laid.
I pledge New Zealand’s ongoing assistance in this work.
Of course, disposal alone is not the answer. Urgent
progress needs to be made to deal with these hideous
weapons, which go on claiming the lives of innocent
people — farmers, their children, shopkeepers, collectors of
wood, carriers of water — long after conflicts have ceased.
I ask all the participants at the Conference which opened
this week in Vienna, which has as its main aim the revision
of international law on land-mines, to work together to
achieve the tightest possible restrictions on these totally
indiscriminate weapons. I want to work to eliminate them
entirely from the world’s armouries.
This leads one to the broader questions of arms
transfers. We are profoundly disturbed at the unnecessary
and irrational increase in arms transfers. At a time when,
globally, resources are desperately needed for development,
for the environment, for health, why is it that even modest
measures, such as enhancing the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms are still being resisted?
Neither peace nor development is advanced if States
put increasingly scarce economic resources into the defence
sectors of their economies. Far too much of the global
economic capacity is going into armaments when the
citizens of the world desperately need better health, better
education and a better future for their children.
The widespread availability of conventional arms and
the resurgence of ethnic nationalism have, together,
produced a very dangerous cocktail, which poses a major
threat to stability in the post-cold-war era. The need for
Member States to maintain a collective approach in
addressing these challenges has never been greater.
Events in the former Yugoslavia over the past year
have presented an enormous challenge to the international
community. New Zealand fully supported the firm response
made by this Organization and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization to the murderous shelling of Sarajevo late in
August. The diplomatic efforts now under way, including
the very important constitutional agreement reached last
Tuesday, offer some prospect for bringing to an end
almost four years of a most appalling conflict.
Some have been dismissive of the achievements of
the United Nations in the former Yugoslavia. That,
however, is to overlook the saving of tens of thousands of
lives and the substantial relief of suffering. This is why
New Zealand, despite its geographical distance from the
region, has been willing to play its part. I believe that,
one day, the United Nations mission in Bosnia will enjoy
recognition of the successes it has achieved so far.
It is a little too easy to focus on the problems of the
United Nations. We need to remember its successes as
well. I think of Cambodia and Mozambique, of El
Salvador and Haiti, of Namibia and Angola and of the
contributions to peace in various parts of the Middle East
over the years. Even in Somalia, where a political
settlement proved elusive, massive famine was relieved
thanks to the United Nations.
The United Nations is unique. It is called on to deal
with the most intractable problems — the ones that others
put into the “too hard” basket. And it works under the
closest public scrutiny of Governments and the world’s
media.
New Zealand strongly supports practical steps to
improve peace-keeping management. We have, in fact,
provided additional specialist personnel to the Department
of Peace-keeping Operations at our own expense. We
have contributed to the strengthening of the Secretariat’s
capacity in the demining area. And we shall continue
these commitments because we believe that they are so
necessary. We also entered into the United Nations
stand-by arrangements earlier this year, and we hope that
these will provide a clearer focus for peace-keeping and
its planning.
We have also studied with interest the Secretary-
General’s recommendation, in his Supplement to “An
Agenda for Peace”, that the United Nations should
consider the idea of a rapid-deployment force. I wish to
commend the ground-breaking work that has already been
done by Canada, the Netherlands, Denmark and others.
My discussions yesterday with Ministers from these and
other countries were encouraging to me. Progress can and
should be made in this area.
20


At about this time last year I spoke to the General
Assembly about a number of elements that I consider
critical to the conduct of peace-keeping operations. These
included a sustainable financial system, transparent political
accountability, clear objectives, a credible legal regime that
guarantees the security of United Nations personnel and, of
course, the availability of resources so that objectives can
be met quickly and efficiently.

Progress has been made. We were especially pleased
to see the Convention on the Safety of United Nations
Personnel opened for signature during last year’s session.
We urge those that have not signed it to do so, and soon.
We owe that to the thousands who have served, and are
serving, in the United Nations operations worldwide.
The improved procedures for consultation between the
Security Council and troop contributors, initiated by
Argentina and New Zealand, have now been in place for
almost a year. Pleasing as this is, we still have some way
to go. It is up to those of us who contribute troops to
United Nations operations to ensure there is no slippage in
these procedures.
Regrettably, however, we do not appear to have a
sustainable financial system. I am gravely concerned that,
despite all the warnings here in this Assembly last year,
delegations have not made any real progress in the Working
Group addressing the financial crisis. The United
Nations — this United Nations — ran out of cash in mid-
August. The arrears of Member States in respect of the
regular and peace-keeping budgets have reached
unprecedented levels. It is nothing short of a tragedy that
on the eve of our celebration of the fiftieth anniversary, the
United Nations, this body of ours, is on the verge of
bankruptcy.
At this critical point in the United Nations history, we
need political will, not more words. “Words pay no debts”,
as Shakespeare wrote. We need new ideas, not recycled
platitudes. And, above all, Members must pay their dues,
on time, and in full.
We do stand here at a crossroads. In taking stock of
the United Nations 50 years, we have much on which to
reflect. There have been good times, and there have been
bad times. Reform and revitalization must stay on our
minds. I wish to assure you, Sir, and all other members, of
New Zealand’s commitment to help remould the
Organization to that which will be needed to work for all
of us as we head towards the twenty-first century.
First of all, allow me to congratulate my
colleague, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Portugal,
Professor Diogo Freitas Do Amaral, on the occasion of
his election to the high post of the President of the
General Assembly.
Each of the 50 sessions of the General Assembly has
been a step for the international community on a difficult
road in search of peace within itself, for the strengthening
of the indispensable role of the United Nations. The
current session will be marked as the anniversary session
by the addresses to be made by the Heads of State and
Government in late October. Russia’s views on the
prospects and difficulties of establishing partnership in a
multi-polar and interdependent world — and it is with
equal partnership that we link our national and state
interests — will be stated by the Head of the Russian
State, President Boris Nikolayevich Yeltsin.
If half a century of experience of the United Nations
teaches us anything, it teaches us first of all that only the
equality of States and respect for the diversity of cultures,
religions and national traditions can serve as the basis for
security and prosperity in the modern world. But the
formula “unity in diversity” also presupposes everyone’s
compliance with fundamental principles of international
law and order, respect for human rights and the
6


promotion of economic progress. This is the essence of the
United Nations Charter, which identifies both common
ideals and goals and equal rights and obligations for all
States without “double standards”.
They say that generals always prepare for the last war.
Politicians and diplomats have no right to prepare for the
last peace. On the contrary, it is necessary to avoid slipping
back into a bloc mentality and dividing countries into
“friends and foes”, whether in politics or in economics.
We can indeed make the next 50 years an era of the
United Nations if we accept as its basis the indivisibility of
international security and sustainable social and economic
development for all.
This question becomes more and more acute against
the background of humanitarian disasters in Africa and
other regions of the “third world”, and the social price of
the initial stage of reforms in the post-socialist countries.
No one will be able to hide from global problems behind
dividing lines of national egotism and economic
discrimination, or even expanding military alliances. Such
things will not rein in, but rather spur on the spread of
international terrorism and drugs, and whip up the flames
of local conflicts and the arms race.
One of the principles of the “Agenda for
Development” which is being formulated now should be the
early elimination of the remaining discriminatory
restrictions in the world economy, trade and technology
transfer. In particular, Russia, which is successfully
implementing unparalleled reforms, should be recognized as
an equal trade and economic partner with an economy in
transition.
Such a strategy should also provide for the promotion
of the economic rehabilitation of countries and regions
affected by armed conflicts. The United Nations, its
specialized agencies and Member States should immediately
begin to address directly the problem of the economic
rehabilitation of Bosnia and the former Yugoslavia as a
whole, whose peoples have suffered from war and
economic sanctions that have been in effect for too long.
Russia is ready to take an active part in these efforts, and
we do and will continue to contribute substantially to a
political settlement. The real chances for such a settlement
should not be sacrificed to power or unilateral approaches.
The international community should make equally
great efforts to achieve progress in all aspects of the peace
process in the Middle East and the post-conflict
rehabilitation of all States of that region. We congratulate
Israel and the Palestinians on the occasion of their
reaching an agreement in Taba, whose official signing
ceremony will take place on 28 September next in
Washington under the chairmanship of President Clinton.
We intend to continue our joint efforts with the United
States and to make our contribution to the coming
Amman summit conference.
Europe needs a new model of general and
comprehensive security, without double standards or
dividing lines.
International dialogue on this issue is already under
way. I believe that the active involvement of the United
Nations and its specialized agencies is necessary to the
efforts aimed at the development of this model.
Incidentally, the General Assembly was born in the Old
World.
A new approach is required to disarmament issues in
Europe. On the basis of the implementation of the
Conventional Armed Forces in Europe Treaty (certainly
taking into account new realities) as early as next spring
we should arrive at new major agreements based on the
unity of the vital security interests of the peoples of the
continent instead of the bloc logic of the past.
Our proposal to all nuclear-weapon States to
elaborate a treaty on nuclear safety and strategic stability
has become even more timely.
The indefinite extension of the Non-Proliferation
Treaty establishes favourable conditions for this. Our
common task is to create the necessary political
conditions for those States that have not already done so
to accede to it as non-nuclear States. We consider it
necessary, as a matter of priority, to conclude as soon as
possible, but not later than 1996, work on the
comprehensive test-ban treaty. From this rostrum, Russia
calls for a universal and permanent moratorium on
nuclear tests.
The summit of the “Political Eight” on nuclear
safety, which is to be held next spring in Moscow at the
initiative of the President of Russia and which was
approved in Halifax, will make a major contribution to
global stability.
We would like the United Nations to take urgent
measures on the prevention of illicit trafficking in light
firearms and the proliferation of anti-personnel mines. It
7


is these “light” firearms that have led to enormous human
losses in Rwanda and Angola, Liberia and Bosnia,
Tajikistan and Abkhazia. Russia has already introduced a
moratorium on the export of the most dangerous types of
anti-personnel mines. We urge other States to follow our
example.
This issue should be seriously considered in the United
Nations Disarmament Commission. While supporting the
activities of the Commission, we believe that it should
adopt a new agenda corresponding to the current scale of
cooperation in the area of security and to new threats and
challenges in this field.
The problem of global adherence to a single standard
in the area of human rights and basic democratic
institutions is very acute. Russia, approaching free,
multipartite parliamentary and presidential elections, is
making its own contribution to the establishment of these
very standards. We invite observers from foreign States and
international organizations to attend the forthcoming
elections.
It was not so long ago that dozens of agenda items of
the General Assembly were devoted to the struggle against
apartheid. Now it seems unbelievable that this problem has
been solved, owing to a large extent, to the efforts of the
United Nations. I sincerely welcome the accomplishments
of the people and the Government of South Africa, headed
by Nelson Mandela, in the democratization and creation of
a free, multiracial society.
But did we manage to overcome the danger of
violence arising through fascism, racism, and political and
religious extremism? Alas, the answer is far from
reassuring. That is why the international community has no
right to abandon its efforts in this direction and must not
tolerate the emergence of double standards.
The signing of the CIS conventions on human rights
and fundamental freedoms and on the rights of national and
language minorities was the response of the CIS States to
the United Nations recommendations on the creation of a
single humanitarian sphere in this part of the world.
However, much has yet to be done before a unitary
approach to human rights can become a norm of life for,
among others, 25 million of our compatriots in some
countries of the Commonwealth and the Baltic States. A
double standard here is unacceptable.
Russia is interested in the adoption at this session of
decisions on such issues as the struggle against racism, all
forms of xenophobia and aggressive nationalism, ensuring
the rights of minorities and the promotion of democracy
and the rule of law in countries in transition. The United
Nations should further pursue its policy of qualitative
improvement of the international human rights protection
machinery, primarily by strengthening its control and
preventive functions and enhancing its focus on specific
action. The policy of single standards must become an
incontestable rule in the sphere of peace-keeping as well.
Justice without force is powerless, while force without
justice is tyrannical.
There have been many achievements in United
Nations peace-keeping efforts. Without the Blue Helmets,
the world would be much more dangerous and dozens of
conflicts would have been much more bloody. We are
proud that approximately 20,000 Russian servicemen are
serving as peace-keepers in United Nations and CIS
operations.
However, if we want force always to go hand-in-
hand with justice in the activities of the United Nations
and those who cooperate in them, strict observance of
Security Council decisions must be ensured. Here, the
Secretary-General and his staff can always count on the
support of Russia and, I am confident, of all other
Members of the United Nations. The United Nations
should be protected from setbacks like that which has
occurred in Bosnia.
In general, it is necessary radically to improve
United Nations peace-keeping through precision of the
criteria and terms of the United Nations involvement in
areas of tension; a close linkage between peace-keeping
operations and efforts to achieve the peaceful settlement
of conflicts; the efficient operation of the whole
functional chain — peace-keeping planning, command
and control. We are for the earliest possible
implementation of the Secretary-General’s proposal on the
establishment of United Nations reserve forces.
We welcome the conclusion of the Convention on
the protection of United Nations personnel, which I
signed today on behalf of Russia. This instrument will
help to save lives of hundreds of peace-keepers in hot
spots of the world.
Peace-making activities undertaken by Russia and its
Commonwealth partners contribute to a considerable
extent to ensuring regional and international stability. We
appreciate fruitful cooperation with the United Nations in
Tajikistan and Georgia. However, the United Nations
8


support of our collective efforts sometimes unfortunately
reminds us of a saying: “Too little, too late”. Russia,
together with its CIS partners, expects the United Nations
to make a radical change in its attitude towards peace-
making problems in our part of the world.
During the 50 years of the existence of the United
Nations, sanctions have been an instrument that the
Organization has used to deal with the instigators of
conflicts. Now, the time has come to give this instrument
a more selective and precise nature. The principal criteria
in this regard are: distinct objectives underlying sanctions,
advanced coordination of conditions, and mechanisms for
lifting them once the objectives are attained.
As a newly elected member of the Executive Council
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, Russia intends to make an essential contribution
to overcoming a new global crisis, namely the tragedy of
millions of refugees. To this end, we intend to seek
practical results from the international conference on
refugees and migrants within the post-Soviet space.
At this session the General Assembly should give new
impetus to collective efforts by the international community
in combating crime, illicit drug-trafficking and terrorism.
The explosions in Oklahoma and Paris, the taking of
hostages in Budennovsk and chemical terrorist attacks in
Tokyo — these are bells tolling for us all.
Whatever agenda item we consider, we are convinced
time and again that the answers are to be found only on the
basis of a single standard: respect for the United Nations
Charter and for the purposes and principles of the United
Nations that have withstood the severe tests of the past five
decades and are lighting the way into the twenty-first
century.
It is
a privilege to speak to the General Assembly today on
behalf of the United States.
A half-century ago the General Assembly first met
here in New York, across the river in a converted skating
rink at Flushing Meadows. In those modest surroundings
our predecessors began to put in place an ambitious
framework that they hoped would keep the peace as
successfully as they had prosecuted the war.
In the years since, the United Nations has helped
bring peace, prosperity and hope to countless people
around the world. Technological change has brought
nations closer together than the founders of the United
9


Nations could possibly have foreseen. The United Nations
itself has been challenged in unforeseen ways. It has had to
manage complex humanitarian emergencies, from civil wars
to mass movements of refugees to health epidemics. This
evolution has placed great strains on the Organization and
has revealed the necessity for far-reaching changes in how
it is run.
The Clinton Administration has vigorously made the
case to our Congress and our people for continued
American leadership at the United Nations. The United
States made a commitment to the United Nations Charter
50 years ago, and we are determined to keep our
commitment, including our financial obligations.
We will always remember that for millions of people
around the world, the United Nations is far from a faceless
institution. It is, as Harry Truman once said,
“a case of food, a box of school books; it is a doctor
who vaccinates children; it is an expert who shows
people how to raise more rice and more wheat.”
To millions more around the world, it is the difference
between peace and war.
Economic and social development, as well as the
protection of human rights, remain central to the United
Nations mission. But the United Nations must change to
meet new needs more effectively. When money is wasted
in New York, Geneva or Vienna, when time is lost in
bureaucratic inertia, the people who pay the price are those
most vulnerable to famine, disease and violence.
It is time to recognize that the United Nations must
direct its limited resources to the world’s highest priorities,
focusing on the tasks that it performs the best. The United
Nations bureaucracy should be smaller, with a clear
organizational structure and sharp lines of responsibility.
Each programme must be held to a single simple standard:
it must make a tangible contribution to the freedom,
security and well-being of real people in the real world.
In the last year, under the leadership of Secretary-
General Boutros-Ghali, the groundwork for substantial
change has been laid. The United Nations has an office
with the functions of an inspector general and a mandate to
crack down on waste and fraud. Under-Secretary-General
Joe Connor has embarked on an aggressive campaign to
improve the United Nations management culture, and we
fully support his good work. The United Nations Secretariat
has moved in the right direction by submitting a budget that
begins to restrain spending, and now this momentum for
reform must accelerate.
Let me propose a brief, concrete agenda for reform.
First, we must end United Nations programmes that
have achieved their purpose, and we must consolidate
programmes that overlap, especially in the economic and
social agencies. The United Nations has more than a
dozen organizations responsible for development,
emergency response and statistical reporting. We should
consider establishing a single agency for each of these
functions. We should downsize the United Nations
regional economic commissions. We should ensure that
the functions of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development do not duplicate those of the new
World Trade Organization (WTO), and we should adopt
a moratorium on big United Nations conferences once the
present series is completed, concentrating instead on
meeting the commitments of those conferences that we
have already held.
Secondly, we need to streamline the United Nations
Secretariat to make it more efficient, accountable and
transparent. Each part of the United Nations system
should be subject to the scrutiny of an inspector general.
The United Nations must not tolerate ethical or financial
abuses, and its managers should be appointed and
promoted on the basis of merit.
Thirdly, we should rigorously scrutinize proposals
for new and extended peace-keeping missions, and we
should improve the United Nations ability to respond
rapidly when new missions are approved. We must agree
on an equitable scale of peace-keeping assessments that
reflects fully today’s economic realities. And we should
have a unified budget for peace-keeping operations.
Finally, we must maintain the effectiveness of the
Security Council. Germany and Japan should become
permanent members, and we should ensure that all the
world’s regions are fairly represented, without making the
Council too large and unwieldy.
We welcome the formation of the high-level group
on reform, initiated under the leadership of the outgoing
President of the General Assembly, Mr. Essy. Our goal
must be that of a practical blueprint for United Nations
reform and to ensure that it is adopted before the General
Assembly finishes the work of its fiftieth session next
fall. The way forward is clear; we have already seen and
10


studied countless studies and reports. Now the time has
come to act on the best proposals.
As the Assembly knows, in my country there have
been serious efforts to curtail our support for the United
Nations. The President and I, and our entire Administration,
believe it would be reckless to turn away from an
Organization that helps mobilize the support of other
nations for goals that are consistent with American and
global interests. But to sustain support for the United
Nations among the American people and among the people
of other nations, it is not enough that we defend the
institution. The best argument against retreat is further
reform. Tangible progress in that direction will help us win
the battle for United Nations support that we are waging in
the United States.
The United Nations must emerge from the reform
process better able to meet its fundamental goals, including
the preservation of peace and security. From Korea to the
Persian Gulf to Haiti, the United Nations has provided a
mandate to its Members as they carried out their
responsibilities. The United Nations own Blue Helmets
have helped nations create the basic conditions of peace in
some of the most difficult situations imaginable around the
world, even though they have not always achieved their
intended purpose.
Recently, a young Haitian father was asked what the
peace-keeping forces had achieved in his country. He
answered,
“We walk freely. We sleep quietly. There are no
men who come for us in the night.”
In Haiti, as, for example, in Cambodia, Mozambique and El
Salvador, the United Nations has shown that peace-keeping,
despite its limitations, has been an enormously useful
instrument.
One region where United Nations forces and the
international community have played a critical role is the
Middle East. Another historic milestone will be marked this
Thursday, in Washington, when Israel and the Palestinians
sign their agreement to implement phase two of the
Declaration of Principles. That agreement will bring to life
a goal first set many years ago in the Camp David accords:
to protect Israel’s security and to give Palestinians
throughout the West Bank control over their daily lives.
The international community and the United Nations must
continue to support this process, both diplomatically and
economically.
There is no question that the United Nations has
never undertaken a mission more difficult than the one in
the former Yugoslavia. The limitations of that mission are
all too well known, but we all must recognize that it has
provided relief for hundreds of thousands of people and
has saved literally thousands of lives. Today, diplomacy
backed by force has given the United States and the
international community an opportunity to move forward
on a track that is producing genuinely hopeful results. The
United Nations and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) are working effectively together to
try to bring peace to the region. On 8 September in
Geneva, the parties to the conflict accepted the
fundamental goal that the Security Council has often
expressed: the continuation of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a single State within its internationally
recognized borders. I will be meeting with the Foreign
Ministers of Bosnia, Croatia and Serbia later today, and
at that time I will urge them — implore them — to
maintain the momentum towards peace and to establish
constitutional structures for Bosnia.
The framers of the Charter of the United Nations
created this institution to meet threats to peace and
security posed by aggression and armed conflict. Those
threats are still, unfortunately, very much with us. But
today, the world also faces a new set of security
challenges, including proliferation, terrorism, international
crime and narcotics, as well as the far-reaching
consequences of damage to the environment. These have
assumed a new and dangerous scope in a more
interdependent world. As President Clinton said in San
Francisco in June, the
“new forces of integration carry within them the
seeds of disintegration and destruction”.
While, as I said earlier, new technologies have
brought us closer together, they also have made it easier
for terrorists, drug dealers and other international
criminals to acquire weapons of mass destruction, to set
up cocaine cartels and to hide their ill-gotten gains. The
collapse of communism has shattered dictatorships, to be
sure, but it has also left the political and legal institutions
of newly liberated nations even more vulnerable to those
who seek to subvert them.
Although these threats are sometimes sponsored by
States, they increasingly follow no flag. Each of us must
vigorously fight these enemies on our own, but we will
never be truly secure until we effectively fight them
together. That is the new security challenge for the global
11


community, and it must be the new security mission for the
United Nations.
There is no single area in which the United Nations
can make a more significant contribution than in that of
non-proliferation. Fifty years ago, the United States was the
only country capable of making a nuclear bomb. Today
many countries have the technology that would enable them
to turn a fist-sized chunk of plutonium into a bomb as
small as a suitcase. That is one reason why more than 170
nations agreed, at a conference held here last May and
effectively chaired by Ambassador Dhanapala, to extend for
all time the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. That is an achievement we must rejoice in but
also build on.
I should like to outline some steps in the field of
non-proliferation. First, we should have a comprehensive
test-ban treaty ready for signature by the time we meet here
next September. As President Clinton announced last
month, the United States is committed to a true zero-yield
test ban. We urge other nations to join us in that
commitment.
Secondly, we should immediately start negotiations on
a fissile material cut-off treaty. Those who have been most
vocal in calling for nuclear disarmament should recognize
that it is essential to ban future production of fissile
material for nuclear weapons.
Thirdly, we should push forward with the historic
reductions of the nuclear arsenals of the United States and
countries of the former Soviet Union. I call on the United
States Senate, as well as on the Russian Duma, to approve
the treaty on further reduction and limitation of strategic
offensive arms (START II) so that we can lock in deep cuts
in our strategic nuclear arsenals. In addition, Presidents
Clinton and Yeltsin are working together to ensure the
safety, transparency and irreversibility of nuclear-arms
reductions.
As part of this process, President Yeltsin will host a
nuclear safety and security summit in Moscow next spring.
This summit should have a very ambitious agenda,
including a declaration of principles on nuclear safety. We
look to this summit to address the worldwide problems of
nuclear-waste management, including those of ocean
dumping. The summit should also promote a plan of action
to safeguard nuclear materials, a plan that should include
new measures to prevent criminals and terrorists from
acquiring nuclear materials for use in weapons.
Finally, we should push for the earliest possible
entry into force of the Chemical Weapons Convention.
President Clinton has urged the United States Senate to
act promptly on its ratification, and to stop holding the
START II Treaty and the Chemical Weapons Convention
hostage to unrelated issues. The world has witnessed the
effects of poison gas too many times in this century — on
European battlefields during the First World War, in
Ethiopia and Manchuria during the 1930s, and against
Iranian soldiers and innocent Kurdish civilians in the
1980s. The Chemical Weapons Convention will make
every nation safer, and we need it now.
The United Nations is also playing an invaluable
role in focusing attention on pressing regional
proliferation problems. In Iraq, the United Nations Special
Commission (UNSCOM) and its Chairman, Rolf Ekeus,
continue to uncover horrific details about Saddam
Hussein’s weapons of mass destruction.
Under Saddam Hussein, Iraq developed a deadly
biological-weapons capacity hidden from view. It was
conducting research to turn some of the most toxic
substances known to man into weapons of war. We know
that Saddam succeeded in putting anthrax and botulism in
bombs and missile warheads. In December 1990, he
deployed these weapons, with every intention of using
them against the international coalition and innocent
civilians. He was dissuaded from doing so only by the
steadfast determination of the United States and the
international community.
In the light of what Ambassador Ekeus has
uncovered in Iraq, we can conclude only that for the last
four and a half years, Saddam Hussein has lied about the
full scope of Iraq’s weapons programmes. There should
be no easing of the sanctions regime against Iraq until its
Government complies with all the demands of the
Security Council and clearly demonstrates that it has
changed its ways.
The United Nations should also promote
responsibility and restraint in the transfer of conventional
weapons. At last year’s session of the General Assembly,
President Clinton proposed, and the Assembly approved,
the eventual elimination of anti-personnel mines. On my
recent trip to Cambodia, I saw the terrible damage these
hidden killers can do. This year, we will again call on
other countries to join us in putting an end to the export
of land-mines.
12


Two years ago, President Clinton called on the
international community to devise a true international
system governing the transfer of conventional weapons and
sensitive dual-use technologies. I am pleased that the
Russian Federation has joined with the United States and 26
other countries to agree on a common principle to control
the build-up of dangerous conventional arms. We hope to
activate this global regime, which is called the New Forum,
by the end of this year.
The proliferation of weapons worldwide has added a
disturbing dimension to another threat we all face: the
threat of international terrorism. Indeed, this year’s sarin
gas attack in Tokyo is a grim warning of what can happen
when terrorists acquire weapons of mass destruction.
More nations are joining the fight against those
individuals and groups that attack civilians for political
ends. The United Nations has supported this effort in
important ways. The Security Council recognized the
importance of countering State-sponsored terrorism by
imposing sanctions against Libya for the bombing of Pan
Am 103 and UTA 772.
Terrorists must be treated as criminals and there must
be no place where they can hide from the consequences of
their acts. States that sponsor terrorists should feel the full
weight of sanctions that can be imposed by the international
community. Let us not deceive ourselves: every dollar that
goes into the Government coffers of a State-sponsor of
terrorism such as Iran helps pay for a terrorist’s bullets or
bombs. Iran’s role as the foremost State-sponsor of
terrorism makes its secret quest for weapons of mass
destruction even more alarming. We must stand together to
prevent Iran from acquiring such threatening capabilities.
The United States has taken a leading role in meeting
the international terrorist threat. We have intensified our
sanctions against Iran. Last January President Clinton issued
an Executive Order prohibiting financial transactions with
terrorist groups and individuals that threaten the Middle
East peace process. We are urging our Congress to tighten
our immigration and criminal laws to keep terrorists on the
run or put them behind bars.
The United States strongly supports the counter-
terrorism measures the G-7 and Russia announced at the
Halifax Summit, and we expect the G-8 Ministerial Meeting
on Terrorism in Ottawa to produce a concrete-action plan
to implement these measures that were adopted at the
Halifax Summit.
Other kinds of international crime also threaten the
safety of our citizens and the fabric of our societies. And
globalization brings new and frightening dimensions to
crime. The threat of crime is a particular menace to
young democracies. It weakens confidence in institutions,
preys on the most vulnerable in our societies and
undermines free-market reform.
Of course, every country must take its own measures
to combat these criminal threats. The Administration that
I represent is now completing a review of our approach
to transnational crime, a review that will lead to a
stronger, more coordinated attack on this problem.
To help other States deal with criminal threats, the
United States and Hungary have created the International
Law Enforcement Academy in Budapest to train police
officers and law-enforcement officials from Central
Europe and the States of the former Soviet Union. We are
providing similar help bilaterally, and through the United
Nations International Drug Control Programme, to those
countries whose laws are challenged by international drug
cartels.
A particularly insidious form of crime and corruption
is money-laundering. All nations should work together to
implement the recommendations of the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) to
attack this insidious money-laundering. The nations of this
hemisphere should also advance the anti-money-
laundering initiative introduced at last December’s
Summit of the Americas. Together, we must work to
squeeze the dirty money out of the global financial
system.
Through the United Nations conventions on drugs
and crime the international community has set strong
standards that we must now act to enforce. We call on
Member States which have not already joined the 1988
drug Convention to do so promptly, and we call on those
countries which have approved the Convention to move
quickly to implement its important provisions.
We are also increasingly aware that damage to the
environment and unsustainable population growth threaten
the security of our nations and the well-being of our
peoples. Their harmful effects are evident in famines,
infant mortality rates, refugee crises, and ozone depletion.
In places like Rwanda and Somalia, for example, they
contribute to civil wars and emergencies that can be
resolved only by extremely costly international
intervention. We must carry out the commitments we
13


made last year at the Cairo Conference, as well as the
important commitments made at the Rio Conference three
years ago.
Never have our problems around the world been more
complex. It has never been more evident that these
problems affect all nations, developed and developing alike.
Only by working together can we effectively deal with the
new threats we all face that I have outlined here today.
That is why in this fiftieth anniversary year we must
shape the United Nations agenda as if we were creating the
institution anew. Just as the founders of the United Nations
devised a new framework to deter aggression and armed
conflict, the United Nations, in particular the Security
Council, must now assign the same priority to combating
the threat posed by proliferation, by terrorism, by
international crime, by narcotics and by environmental
pollution. We should dedicate our efforts in the United
Nations and elsewhere to turning our global consensus
against these threats into concrete and effective action. We
must renew and reform the United Nations not for its sake,
but for our own.
Mr. President, I wish to
extend to you, on behalf of the South African delegation,
my sincere congratulations on your election to the
presidency of the fiftieth session of the General Assembly.
Your election demonstrates the high regard in which the
international community holds your country. I should also
like to express our deep gratitude to your predecessor, His
Excellency Mr. Amara Essy, a brother from Africa and the
Foreign Minister of Côte d’Ivoire, who presided over the
forty-ninth session with great wisdom. I should also like to
express to the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, our continued confidence in
his guidance of the Organization.
A half century ago representatives from 50 countries
met at San Francisco to draft the United Nations Charter,
the Declaration of Human Rights and the Statute of the
International Court of Justice. For the United Nations to
have survived for a period of 50 years in an imperfect
world is indeed a milestone and a tribute to the visionary
steps taken half a century ago towards the creation of a
better world.
South Africa’s involvement with the United Nations
goes back to the very conception and birth of this
illustrious body. The then-Prime Minister of South Africa,
Field Marshal J. C. Smuts, helped to draft the Preamble
to the Charter of the United Nations. In the Preamble
many lofty ideas were expressed, among which were the
following:
“to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in
the dignity and worth of the human person, in the
equal rights of men and women and of nations large
and small”.
How ironic that those in power in South Africa since
then, and until last year, acted in a precisely contrary
spirit. The United Nations contributed significantly in
bringing about change in South Africa. Through
perseverance and commitment, the United Nations
assisted us in our struggle to achieve democracy. Our
General Assembly 22nd plenary meeting
Fiftieth session 13 October 1995
reward is its reward. I should like again to express the
gratitude of both the people and the Government of South
Africa for its foresight and courage.
Just over a year ago, on 23 June 1994 to be precise,
I had the honour to address the Assembly on behalf of the
people and the Government of the Republic of South
Africa. On that occasion, which marked South Africa’s
resumption of its participation in the work of the General
Assembly of the United Nations, we were filled with joy
and pride at the peaceful transition of South Africa into a
united, non-racial, democratic and non-sexist society.
In the intervening months I have travelled to many
countries, visited with many foreign ministers and met with
several Heads of State or Government. We spoke of the
miracle that is South Africa. We shared our thoughts and
experiences on the road to that miracle. In that context, we
continue to encourage those who seek change for a better
life to stand fast in their belief.
As the representative of a Member of the United
Nations, I should like to reassure you of our belief in and
support for the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
Organization.
The events in April 1994 in South Africa marked a
break with the past as well as a commitment to the future,
placing a heavy burden on us. As a young democracy, we
are ready to meet the challenge. South Africa will meet this
challenge with a firm commitment to the promotion of
national welfare, prosperity and security, with a firm
commitment to the strengthening of cooperation in the
pursuit of the economic development and security of the
southern African subregion, with an active commitment to
peace, stability and good governance within the African
region and elsewhere, with a firm commitment to South-
South cooperation and with a commitment to responsible
international citizenship.
The Southern African Development Community
(SADC) was conceived in the struggle for freedom in
southern Africa and born of the courage of its leaders in
setting out to create a new reality.
The liberation of South Africa and the end of southern
Africa’s destabilization brought great opportunities for the
development of our subregion. We must now translate those
hopes into reality. In accordance with the Abuja Treaty, we
must transform the southern African region into one of the
reliable building blocks on which Africa’s economic
regeneration will be built.
Our greatest need today is to eradicate the scourge
of poverty afflicting the great mass of our people. Only
then can we fulfil the dream of Africa’s liberation in the
health, happiness and well-being of its children.
The mission of SADC reflects the reality that
southern Africa has long since passed the stage of
lamenting the privations of the past. The challenge is to
find within ourselves the resources to overcome this
legacy, with the cooperation of the international
community. We need to adapt to the demands of a rapidly
changing world economy and to develop the skills needed
to compete internationally.
South Africa’s main objective is to play a
constructive role in bringing peace and stability to the
region. We are totally committed to the utilization of
preventive diplomacy, peace-keeping and peacemaking,
through the use of regional and multilateral mechanisms.
In this context, South Africa participated with others
in the resolution of the conflict in Lesotho and provided
logistical support for the elections in Mozambique. Our
support for United Nations resolutions and actions
regarding Angola and the Western Sahara should also be
seen in that light.
As an elected member of the Central Organ of the
Conflict Resolution Mechanism of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) from June 1994 to June 1995, we
participated in several missions to Burundi. South Africa
was part of a special four-member ministerial mission
elected to assess the nature and the scope of the Burundi
conflict with a view to encouraging and assisting the
Burundians to resolve their differences and end that
conflict. We continue to participate in the Mechanism as
an invited observer.
In view of the desperate situation in the former
Yugoslavia and in Rwanda, it has become imperative for
States to cooperate as far as possible with the respective
ad hoc criminal tribunals that have been created for those
territories. In that regard, my country has made available
some of its most talented jurists to assist.
These situations have demonstrated anew the real
need for the establishment of a permanent international
criminal court. This issue has been revitalized in the past
few years, and a window of opportunity now exists to
finally bring the court into existence. It is my sincere
hope that significant progress will be made in that regard
during this session of the General Assembly.
2
General Assembly 22nd plenary meeting
Fiftieth session 13 October 1995
As we celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the United
Nations, mankind is still faced with political instability,
dictatorship, corruption, civil war, millions of refugees and
internally displaced persons, persistent economic decline
and continued impoverishment.
In the past year, the international political climate has
experienced a succession of changes which have brought
both hope and a certain measure of despair to mankind.
Hope has, however, remained a beckoning beacon bringing
about a sense of confidence in the future. We were
saddened by events in Somalia, but rejoiced at the transition
in Haiti and El Salvador. We despair at the tragedy that is
Bosnia, yet hope that the emerging signs of a solution will
come to fruition.
In this spirit, allow me to congratulate the peoples of
Israel and Palestine on having reached yet another landmark
in their journey towards a lasting settlement. We encourage
and support the Middle East peace process.
The issues of proliferation and disarmament, in
particular nuclear disarmament, are among the major
questions that have been facing the international community
in recent times. At the historic 1995 Review and Extension
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), all those present
agreed to exercise the utmost restraint pending the entry
into force of a comprehensive test-ban treaty. We are of the
view that the recent tests conducted by two nuclear-weapon
States are retrogressive steps in the international
community’s endeavour to ban nuclear testing. We believe
that these tests will negatively affect the outcome of work
on a comprehensive test-ban treaty. The South African
Government is strongly opposed to these and any further
nuclear tests being conducted, and calls upon those States
to cease testing, so as to enhance international efforts
towards non-proliferation and disarmament. We call upon
them to honour both the letter and the spirit of the
Principles and Objectives which they agreed to and helped
negotiate at the NPT Review and Extension Conference.
South Africa has dismantled its nuclear capability. South
Africa, for its part, has proven its commitment to nuclear
disarmament. Now it is the turn of others to manifest a
similar commitment.
South Africa notes with great satisfaction the progress
achieved thus far towards the establishment of an African
nuclear-weapon-free zone. We have been actively involved
in trying to find solutions to the outstanding issues, and we
trust that these hurdles can be overcome and the draft treaty
of Pelindaba can receive due consideration during this
session of the General Assembly. The draft treaty is
important as it would expand the non-nuclear-weapon
area of the globe considerably and would be a further step
towards the final goal of complete nuclear disarmament.
South Africa appeals to the nuclear-weapon States to
ensure that the draft treaty is concluded and the relevant
protocols signed.
Since the 1986 declaration of the Zone of Peace and
Cooperation of the South Atlantic, significant progress has
been made in the political, economic, scientific, technical
and cultural spheres to further the objectives of the Zone.
Only relatively few obstacles remain. We hope to advance
this endeavour when the next meeting of participating
nations takes place in Cape Town in March 1996.
On 13 September 1995 South Africa became the
thirty-seventh State party to the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling
and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction.
On the same day South Africa also acceded to the
Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of
Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed
to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate
Effects. The ratification of the chemical weapons
Convention again underlines the commitment of the
Government of National Unity to the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. South Africa’s accession to
the Convention on certain conventional weapons
underlines my Government’s commitment to the
elimination of the suffering that is caused by the scourge
of war. South Africa has, for this reason, decided to
extend its moratorium on the export of land-mines by the
introduction of a permanent ban on the export or sale of
long-lived anti-personnel land-mines. Furthermore, on
30 August 1995 the Government of National Unity
approved the draft of a new conventional-arms-control
policy. A National Conventional Arms Control Committee
has been established and will function in accordance with
predetermined guiding principles and criteria to ensure
that arms trade and transfers conform to accepted
international practice.
As previously mentioned, the principal role of the
United Nations is to safeguard international peace and
security in order to implement universal respect for
human rights and to create conditions necessary for
sustainable development. Without peace, security and
human rights, sustainable development will be difficult to
achieve. Without development and respect for human
rights, international peace and security will continually be
threatened.
3
General Assembly 22nd plenary meeting
Fiftieth session 13 October 1995
As President Mandela stated in 1992,
“Our common humanity transcends the oceans
and all national boundaries. It binds us together in
common cause against tyranny, to act together in
defence of our very humanity. Let it never be asked of
any one of us what we did when we knew that
another was oppressed.”
Mankind should learn to act against all tyranny in a
unified manner through the United Nations. This should be
our basic aim for the future.
South Africa also wishes to call attention to the
activities of mercenaries, irrespective of their origin and
objectives. Their destabilizing activities cannot be tolerated.
We call on the international community and the United
Nations to be seized of this problem of mercenaries.
The women of South Africa have lived, in varying
degrees, under three forms of oppression, relating to race,
to class and to gender. One of the first steps towards
initiating positive change in the lives of all South African
women was the entrenchment of gender rights in our Bill
of Rights. It was with much pride that the South African
delegation took their seats at the Fourth World Conference
on Women, in Beijing. That was the first time South Africa
participated in a conference on women which focused on
the eradication of poverty, and equal access to education
and to health services. South Africa is fully committed to
implementing the Platform for Action adopted at that
Conference, which will serve as the impetus for a world of
equality, development and peace for all. In addition, our
Parliament has most recently approved South Africa’s
ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women, without any
reservations.
Years of apartheid rule have bequeathed the
overwhelming majority black population with a heavy
legacy of poverty, social disintegration and political
cleavages based on colour and ethnic animosities. It
therefore became the priority task of the South African
Government of National Unity to devise a national strategy
to address this catastrophic situation. A comprehensive and
multi-pronged developmental strategy known as the
Reconstruction and Development Programme is now being
implemented. The implementation of this Programme relies
primarily on the mobilization of domestic resources through
prioritization of budgetary resources, with a view to
addressing the huge material inequalities in such areas as
education, health, housing, infrastructure development and
land reform. It is a unique people-centred and people-
driven Programme, which seeks to translate into economic
benefit the political miracle in our country. At the very
heart of this Programme is the acknowledgement of the
inextricable interdependence between the need for
transparent, accountable and democratic governance of
our society and the imperative of dynamic economic
growth and sustainable development.
South Africa will host the ninth United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD IX)
from 26 April to 11 May 1996. This is an event which all
South Africans are looking forward to with great
expectation. Indeed, it is my pleasure to announce that
our preparations are well advanced and on course.
We attach great significance to UNCTAD IX for a
number of reasons. We believe that the rapid progress of
globalization and liberalization of the world economy has
underscored the relevance and importance of UNCTAD
as a United Nations institution with a strong development
mandate and perspective. We also believe that the
successful completion of the Uruguay Round of
negotiations and the resultant creation of the World Trade
Organization not only has stressed the validity and
relevance of UNCTAD, but has also reinforced the need
to retain and strengthen UNCTAD’s mandate as a policy-
oriented global intergovernmental forum on trade and
development issues. It is a forum where a strong
partnership for development between the developed and
the developing countries can, and must, be forged. While
there may be a need to streamline certain UNCTAD
activities, this should not lead to its demise. Without
UNCTAD, our world, especially the developing world,
would be the poorer.
I would like to take this opportunity to express my
Government’s satisfaction with the intergovernmental
process at the United Nations to draw up a United
Nations Agenda for Development. We believe that the
United Nations is the appropriate forum for the
elaboration of the Agenda for Development. The Agenda
for Development could open great possibilities for
development and for partnership between the developed
and the developing countries. It is for this reason that
South Africa is taking great interest in the work of the Ad
Hoc Open-ended Working Group of the General
Assembly on an Agenda for Development.
My Government has been following with great
interest the ongoing High-level Intergovernmental
Meeting on the Mid-term Global Review of the
4
General Assembly 22nd plenary meeting
Fiftieth session 13 October 1995
Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least
Developed Countries. In this connection, I join others in
calling on the international community to devise a global
strategy to effectively address the debt question confronting
the least developed countries, and to use innovative
measures — whether it be official development aid, foreign
direct investment or multilateral financial assistance — to
arrest the decline of resources destined for the least
developed countries.
I would also like to call upon the international
community to vigorously pursue measures required to
successfully implement the United Nations New Agenda for
the Development of Africa in the 1990s. We are pleased in
that regard by the progress registered during the Economic
and Social Council’s session in Geneva, especially the high-
level segment, which was devoted to the aforementioned
Agenda. Of course, the challenge before the international
community is to find adequate resources to translate this
Agenda into tangible results. It is our hope that this issue
will be treated with the required urgency, given that next
year there will be a mid-term global review of the New
Agenda for the Development of Africa.
Recognizing the importance of cooperation between
developing States, South Africa has acceded to an
agreement establishing the South Centre. The South Centre
will effectively operate as a policy research unit for the
Non-Aligned Movement and the Group of 77, and will draft
policy-oriented position papers on issues of critical
importance to the South. It will, in addition to this basic
function, generate ideas and proposals for consideration by
Governments of the South and other institutions.
The United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development engendered a process of environmental action
and awareness centred on the relationship between
economic development and the sustainable management of
the environment. It is our duty to carry this process forward
in an integrated manner and reconfirm our commitment to
the implementation of international agreements which seek
to manage and preserve the world’s environment.
South Africa is very conscious that the capacity of
developing countries to implement sustainable
environmental strategies will have to be strengthened. The
resources pledged towards the attainment of goals set out in
Agenda 21 will have to be made available if we are to
succeed in achieving the imperatives of development,
sustainable use of the environment, and democracy in the
world.
In Africa, in particular, the ravages of drought and
the advances of desertification require urgent attention.
The global community’s concern for the environment
should be reflected in a common approach to the
manifold environmental pressures threatening our global
heritage.
The United Nations also has an important role to
play in assisting States threatened by natural or man-made
disasters. Preventive diplomacy can contribute towards
eliminating man-made disasters. However, the results of
both man-made disasters and natural disasters can be
ameliorated by effective international humanitarian
assistance coordination through the United Nations. This
will naturally require more coherent programmed delivery
and coordination by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(FAO), the World Health Organization (WHO), the
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the United
Nations Department of Humanitarian Affairs (DHA) and
other international institutions. The United Nations will
have to ensure that the necessary capacities and
mechanisms are created. Recent international action,
especially the follow-up to the Tokyo Conference, has
demonstrated that sufficient international will exists to
perform this function.
We welcome the adoption on 14 September 1995 of
General Assembly resolution 49/252, on the strengthening
of the United Nations. I wish to assure the Assembly of
our intention to work constructively with the President in
this endeavour.
The world in which we find ourselves today is
greatly changed from just 10 years ago. The cold war has
ended, the scourge of apartheid has been removed from
our common society and peace has come to Mozambique
and now Angola. We have also seen the membership of
our United Nations increase to 185, a substantial increase
since the time the Security Council’s membership was last
increased. As a result of these, and other, factors the
international community faces a window of opportunity
within which the Security Council can be successfully
restructured and reformed.
Within the overall effort to reform the United
Nations, South Africa believes that the structure and
functioning of the Security Council should be reformed to
make it more representative, democratic and transparent.
The product of these efforts must be a Security Council
that is effective and legitimate, and that reflects the
5
General Assembly 22nd plenary meeting
Fiftieth session 13 October 1995
realities of our modern world. This result can be achieved
only if reform and restructuring is dealt with as a package.
One of the products of this reform process must result in
Africa having equitable representation on any enlarged
Security Council.
It would be appropriate for me to conclude by
referring to the fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations.
The people of South Africa will celebrate this fiftieth
anniversary in concert with the rest of the world. Our
National Committee organizing the events in our country
has adopted the following as its Declaration of Intent:
“To create an awareness among the peoples of South
Africa of the role which the United nations can play
in their daily lives, and to assist the United Nations in
responding to the challenges of the twenty-first
century.”
President Mandela looks forward to joining his fellow
world leaders in a few weeks’ time to celebrate the
visionary step taken half a century ago towards the creation
of a better world. Building on the successes and victories
of the past, we now embrace the future. We can face the
challenges ahead, inspired by a vision of a new world
where peace and respect for human dignity are the standard.
