Please allow me first of all to offer my sincere
congratulations to Ambassador Razali Ismail on his election
to the presidency of the General Assembly at its current
session. I am convinced that with his outstanding ability
and rich experience he will fulfil this lofty mission with
distinction. I would also like to express my thanks to
Mr. Diogo Freitas do Amaral for the important contribution
he made during his presidency of the last session.
The 1990s are a period of momentous transition,
during which international relations are undergoing the most
far-reaching changes since the Second World War. The
collapse and disappearance of the bipolar structure has
rekindled hope that the world will become a community of
countries with equal rights for all, rather than one
dominated by a single big Power. Multipolarity is gaining
momentum in a global as well as a regional context. Major
Powers are readjusting their relationships. On the other
hand, the multitude of developing countries have become
increasingly aware of the need to bolster their strength
through concerted efforts. The Non-Aligned Movement
continues to uphold the ideals and principles of
independence, independent decision-making and
non-affiliation with blocs, and is vigorously pushing for
a new just and democratic international order of peace
and equality. Regional economic organizations, which are
displaying great vitality, are expanding their role in
promoting regional cooperation and development in their
respective areas.
Asia’s upsurge is having a significant impact on the
world’s political and economic configurations. The world
is deeply impressed with the vigorous economic
development of Asia, East Asia in particular. The
convening of the first Asia-Europe meeting highlighted
the changes now being seen and marked an important
new beginning for an equal, cooperative relationship
between Asia and Europe. As the world moves towards
multipolarity, the forces for peace are bolstered. The call
for dialogue and cooperation, as against confrontation and
conflict, has become louder.
In the Asia-Pacific region, efforts to maintain peace
and stability and promote common development through
dialogue, consultation and cooperation have yielded
positive results. An agreement on confidence-building in
the military field along border areas has been concluded
between China on the one hand, and the Russian
Federation, Kazakstan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan on the
other; this agreement governs a boundary over 3,000
kilometres in length. The Association of South-East Asian
Nations (ASEAN) Regional Forum has succeeded in
bringing Asia-Pacific countries together to consider
security issues facing the region. The Asia-Pacific
Economic Cooperation Council (APEC) has become a
useful mechanism for promoting trade and investment
liberalization as well as economic and technological
cooperation in the region.
The past year has seen peace returning to a number
of war-torn countries and regions. We are pleased to note
that the peace accord reached between the belligerents in
Bosnia and Herzegovina is being implemented, and that
Yugoslavia and Croatia have normalized their relations.
It is hoped that peace will soon be fully restored to the
region of the former Yugoslavia in order to put an end to
the prolonged conflict in that part of Europe.
The impact on Africa of the drastic changes in the
post-cold war international situation is waning. Africa is
entering a new historical era in which it is striving for
peace, stability and development. Many burning issues in
Africa have already been or are in the process of being
settled gradually. At the same time, however, some
14


countries and regions are still plagued by the scourge of
war. We hope that the international community will
continue to give attention and attach importance to African
issues so as to help bring lasting peace and development to
the whole African continent at an early date.
But the path towards peace is tortuous. After some
major gains in preceding years, the Middle East peace
process has hit snags again. China is concerned at this
development. We hope that all the parties concerned will
strive for an early comprehensive and just settlement of this
issue by strictly observing the agreements already reached
and resuming negotiations and dialogue on the basis of the
relevant United Nations resolutions.
Peace should have prevailed in the post-cold-war
world, in which equal members of the international
community should respect each other’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity, refrain from invading each other or
interfering in each other’s internal affairs, and live in
harmony with each other, in a spirit of seeking common
ground and putting aside differences. However, the reality
is that the world today is far from tranquil because the
cold-war mentality dies hard and hegemonism has
repeatedly raised its ugly head. Interference in other
countries’ internal affairs under various pretexts, and
indulgence in sanctions-wielding or even the use of force
are trampling on the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and all accepted norms of
international relations, thereby threatening and undermining
world peace and stability. Recent controversies in
international forums, generated by the issue of sanctions,
signify that in the context of a growing trend towards
multipolarity, hegemonism and power politics will become
increasingly untenable.
The vigorous expansion of international trade and
investment and the rapid advance of science and technology
have led to closer economic ties between countries and
regions, thus accelerating the process of economic
globalization. This presents a rare opportunity to both
developed and developing countries. By riding the tide of
globalization and relying on their own unremitting efforts,
some developing countries have achieved sustained and
rapid economic growth, thereby giving a great impetus to
world economic growth. These and other changes on the
world scene have widened the prospects of international
cooperation.
Regrettably, however, a counter-current of trade
protectionism has recently arisen in the ranks of developed
countries, designed to curtail the development of developing
countries and exclude them from the decision-making
process on major world economic issues. Any act
prejudicial to developing countries will in the final
analysis undermine the interests of developed countries.
International economic exchanges and cooperation should
be built on the basis of mutual complementarity. Facing
the tide of economic globalization, neither developed nor
developing countries should resort to trade protectionism.
Rather, both should make the necessary readjustments and
reforms in the light of their own national conditions in
order to promote their welfare and keep out of harm’s
way. Only by enhancing international exchanges and
cooperation on the basis of equality and mutual benefit
can we jointly cope with new problems arising in the
course of world economic advances and achieve sustained
common development and prosperity.
No one should overlook the unevenness of world
development and the ever widening gap between
developed and developing countries. Caught in the web of
relentless international competition, the least-developed
countries are in distress, and the risk of marginalization
is looming large. To make matters worse, the amount of
official development assistance from richer countries is
shrinking every year, with more stringent conditions
attached. The coffers of the United Nations Capital
Development Fund are drying up, and future prospects are
grim indeed. The international community, and especially
the developed countries, are duty-bound to take effective
measures to reverse this dire situation. The promotion of
economic development and the prosperity of all countries,
and the elimination of poverty should always be at the top
of the United Nations agenda.
Strengthening international cooperation in the field
of the environment and development is a vital link in
global efforts to achieve sustainable development.
Four years after the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development, the public has become
increasingly aware of the importance of environmental
protection. Sustainable development has become a major
objective in the socio-economic development strategies of
all countries. However, international cooperation in this
domain is disappointingly lagging. Developed countries
have failed to live up to their pledges under Agenda 21 in
terms of funding and technology transfer, yet they
demand that developing countries accept obligations
exceeding their capability at their present level of
development. It is hoped that next year’s special session
on environment and development will be able to resolve
these issues.
15


Poverty, unemployment, the problem of refugees,
crime, over-population, environmental deterioration, drug
abuse and terrorism — these scourges remain formidable
and impede global stability and development. In the face of
these challenges, all countries should not only carry out
social development policies commensurate with their own
national conditions, but should also actively cooperate with
one another in line with the principles of mutual respect,
equality and mutual benefit. The United Nations needs to
enhance its social programmes focusing on developing
countries.
The international community at large should press for
the implementation of the follow-up actions of the Cairo
International Conference on Population and Development,
the Copenhagen World Summit for Social Development and
the Beijing Fourth World Conference on Women in favour
of universal social development.
Our Organization has gone through vicissitudes in the
course of half a century. Enormous changes have taken
place on the world scene. It is imperative for the United
Nations to carry out appropriate rational reforms so that it
can better perform the noble mission of the times and usher
a better world into the twenty-first century.
All reforms must be conducive to realizing the
purposes and principles of the Charter and to improving the
efficiency of the United Nations. They must also contribute
to a more positive and effective United Nations role in
promoting world peace and common development. They
must conform to the principle of the sovereign equality of
all States, and reflect the aspirations of the developing
countries, which comprise more than two-thirds of the
membership. Democratic consultations should be practiced
throughout this process. We are confident that we will be
able to achieve a broad consensus as long as all of us
engage in patient deliberations in the spirit of openness and
fair play, and with a readiness to consider all legitimate
concerns.
The United Nations continues to be plagued by a
serious financial crisis. The Organization cannot function
normally without firm and reliable fiscal resources. We call
on the major countries whose financial contributions to the
Organization are in arrears to fulfil the financial obligations
set forth in the Charter by unconditionally paying up in full
without further delay.
Major progress has been made in the field of arms
control and disarmament since the last session of the
General Assembly. The Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty resulting from two and a half years of negotiations
has finally been adopted by the General Assembly.China
actively participated in the Treaty negotiations and
displayed maximum flexibility, thereby contributing
significantly to the final conclusion of the Treaty. We
have always stood for the complete prohibition and
thorough destruction of nuclear weapons. In our view, the
comprehensive test-ban Treaty is only a first step in the
entire process of comprehensive nuclear disarmament.
There are still large stockpiles of nuclear arms in the
world. Some nuclear Powers still refuse to undertake not
to be the first to use such weapons. We still have a long
way to go, and must continue to work strenuously in
order to achieve the ultimate goal of the total elimination
of nuclear weapons.
In order to expedite nuclear disarmament and free
ourselves from the danger of nuclear war forever, I wish
to reiterate the following calls on behalf of the Chinese
Government: first, the major nuclear Powers should
renounce their policy of nuclear deterrence; those
possessing huge nuclear arsenals should continue to cut
back their stockpiles drastically.
Secondly, all nuclear States should assume the
obligation not to be the first to use nuclear weapons at
any time or under any circumstances; they should
unconditionally renounce the use or threat of use of such
weapons against non-nuclear States or nuclear-free zones;
and they should conclude international instruments to that
effect without delay.
Thirdly, those States which have deployed nuclear
weapons overseas should withdraw them completely; all
nuclear States should pledge support for moves to set up
nuclear-free zones; they should respect the status of such
zones and assume corresponding obligations.
Fourthly, all States should refrain from developing
or deploying weapons systems in outer space and missile
defence systems that undermine strategic security and
stability.
Fifthly, all States should negotiate with a view to
concluding an international convention on the complete
prohibition and total destruction of nuclear weapons.
Since mankind was able to produce nuclear weapons
in the twentieth century, it is fully capable of abolishing
them in the twenty-first century. The Chinese Government
and people are ready to join hands with all Governments
16


and peoples of the world to strive for the realization of this
lofty goal.
My country continues to press forward along the road
of reform, opening up and modernization. Our economy
maintains a healthy momentum. The macroeconomic
environment continues to improve. We anticipate a growth
rate of around 10 per cent this year. Inflation will be kept
below 10 per cent. Despite severe natural disasters in some
parts of the country, we have still managed to gather a
bumper harvest of summer crops this year. Grain output for
the entire year is expected to top the previous year’s
figures. The Ninth Five-Year Plan for National Economic
and Social Development and the Outline of the Long-Range
Objectives to the Year 2010 were inaugurated this year.
They depict a promising future for China’s modernization
drive at the turn of the century. By the year 2000, when our
population will have had a net increase of 300 million, we
expect to quadruple our 1980 per capita gross national
product. And by the year 2010 our gross national product
is anticipated to be twice that of the year 2000. Then we
will have put in place a viable socialist market economy.
Seventeen years of reform and opening up have
brought about a fourfold increase in our gross national
product. Our overall national strength will grow further in
another 15 years. Yet China will still be a developing
country with relatively low ranking in terms of indicators
such as per capita gross national product. China’s
development will only help to bolster the elements making
for peace. We pose no threat to anyone anywhere, but will
only help to strengthen the cause of world peace, stability
and development. On the other hand, if China fails to
achieve economic development and its population of 1.2
billion is mired in poverty, that would indeed be ominous
for world peace and stability.
China will resume the exercise of sovereignty over
Hong Kong as from 1 July 1997. This will be a milestone
in the great cause of our national reunification. It is also a
good example of how countries can peacefully resolve
issues left over by history. Preparations are under way to
put into effect our resumption of the exercise of sovereignty
over Hong Kong. We are fully capable of ensuring a
smooth transfer of government and transition in Hong
Kong. After Hong Kong’s return to the embrace of the
motherland, we will put into effect the policy of “one
country, two systems”. As a Special Administrative Region
of the People’s Republic of China, and in conformity with
the Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative
Region, Hong Kong will be administered by the Hong
Kong people. It will enjoy a high degree of autonomy. The
existing social and economic system and way of life will
remain unchanged, and the laws currently in force in
Hong Kong will be basically maintained. Hong Kong will
retain its status as an international trade, financial and
shipping centre, free port and separate customs territory.
Its long-term stability and prosperity will be guaranteed.
Foreign economic interests in Hong Kong will be
accommodated.
Twenty-five years ago, at its twenty-sixth session,
the General Assembly adopted the historic resolution
2758 (XXVI), solemnly declaring the restoration to the
People’s Republic of China all its lawful rights in the
United Nations. That resolution thoroughly settled the
question of China’s representation in the United Nation in
all aspects — political, legal and procedural.
There is but one China in the world and Taiwan is
an inalienable part of its sacred territory. “Peaceful
reunification and one country with two systems” — this
is our unswerving guideline for the settlement of the
Taiwan question. This question involves a cardinal
principle of China’s sovereignty and territorial integrity
and the great task of reunification. It is a purely internal
affair of China which will brook no outside interference.
The Chinese Government and people are determined to
carry through the struggle against all attempts to split
their territory or create an independent Taiwan. No force
on Earth can hold back China’s great cause of
reunification.
The world is on the march at top speed. New
contradictions and problems are constantly arising. The
profound changes in the international scene have brought
forth rare opportunities as well as serious challenges. Let
us seize the opportunities, meet the challenges and push
forward the cause of peace and development. Such is the
glorious mission which our times have bestowed on us.
The Chinese Government and people are ready to join
with all other Governments and peoples in this endeavour.



﻿Last year we
took stock of half a century of United Nations history. The
rock we are pushing up the hill like Sisyphus always seems
to roll back a little. We must not be discouraged by this. It
remains our responsibility to do what we solemnly
reaffirmed on the fiftieth anniversary of the world
Organization: maintain peace and to help people who are
suffering from want and poverty.
You, Mr. President, have issued a warning to us all for
this fifty-first General Assembly. We must look beyond our
national borders, and think and act accordingly. After
making those anniversary promises, let us not fall back into
the old routine and rituals. The vision of a more peaceful
and more equitable world must not be lost.
The world Organization must continue to be the
world’s conscience. For who else other than this forum is
to keep watch to prevent murder and torture, to ensure that
refugees have the basic necessities of life and that our
children are protected and cared for?
The world is grossly unjust. From the moment of birth
millions of people have hardly any chance of living in
conditions worthy of humankind. No one can turn away
from this; it concerns us all. No country, no region and
no group of States can bear all of the world’s burdens and
troubles alone. All, even the strongest among us, need
solidarity, need the help of others. How can terrorism, for
instance, a cancer of our time, be stopped without
international cooperation?
Developments over the past 10 years have shown
there is no cause for resignation. There can be
progress — provided we pool our resources and act
together. That is the lesson of Bosnia, of South Africa
and of the Middle East, and of the historic achievements
in the field of disarmament in recent years. Every child
that is saved from death in Rwanda or Burundi, every
refugee able to return to his native village in Bosnia,
every rainforest area we can preserve, must strengthen our
hope. The one world requires us to act as one.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, a free election has been
held for the first time after four terrible years of war. It
has provided a crucial foundation for the country’s
recovery. Joint institutions must now be created without
delay. The future members of the three-person presidency
should meet in Sarajevo before the end of September.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) had a very difficult task supervising the
election in Bosnia. That organization’s scope for action
must be increased at the Lisbon Summit in December this
year. The OSCE remains an indispensable pillar of the
new peaceful order for Europe, which we believe to be
necessary now that the iron curtain has come down.
The forces working for peace in the region are
themselves not strong enough; there is still no self-
sustaining stability. In Bosnia and Herzegovina there can
be no permanent international police force — even the
60,000 troops of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO), of the United Nations and of all the other
countries cannot guarantee peace on the ground — but I
think that for a limited time that country continues to
require a “fire brigade”. This presupposes a fresh mandate
from the Security Council.
Germany is willing to provide a military
contribution. By admitting more than 320,000 war
refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina, Germany has
practised human solidarity. We also have more than
130,000 Yugoslav nationals, most of them from Kosovo,
who have to return to their native regions. This is a heavy
burden for us, including in financial terms. But we gave
7


temporary protection and shelter to these people on
humanitarian grounds, and we will not be found wanting in
this respect now that their repatriation is becoming possible.
Europe has been torn by fratricidal wars for centuries.
The current peaceful unification of that continent is a
message of hope for the whole world. The first of our
central and eastern European neighbours will soon belong
to the Euro-Atlantic institutions.
My country Germany owes its unity to the confidence
which the world placed in our policy of reconciliation and
good neighbourliness. In our eyes that implies a duty:
together with France, we will remain the motor of European
Union.
Addressing the Assembly in 1989, my predecessor
Hans-Dietrich Genscher extended a hand to Poland. Today
I turn to our Czech neighbours in particular and say that the
German-Czech declaration will be adopted shortly. Czechs
and Germans can look confidently to a common European
future.
The Russian people too must be winners in the process
of European unification. The special partnership which
NATO is seeking with Russia is of central importance for
peace and security in Europe. And that is why we want as
quickly as possible to draft the fundamentals of a charter
between NATO and Russia, as I suggested in Carcassonne
18 months ago at a meeting of the European Union foreign
ministers. Our offer stands. Russia should help shape
Europe’s future as an equal partner. That large and
important country must be given a place in Europe
commensurate with its size and importance.
Part of the European Union’s peace message is that
we Europeans stand for a policy of international
cooperation among equals, and for a global partnership for
development and the environment in the twenty-first
century. New opportunities for such a partnership derive
from the globalization of industry and technology. Never
have so many people experienced so much progress as in
the past 10 years. In the year 2020, if the present trend
continues, the 15 countries with the largest gross national
products will include nine of today’s developing countries.
The recipe is free markets, democracy, reliability of
the judicial system, and integration into the global
economy. This kind of good governance was rewarded with
$150 billion of private direct investment in 1995.
However, 90 per cent of that investment has gone to
only 12 countries, and the gap between the poor and the
rest of the world continues to widen. The World Summit
for Social Development put the number of poor people at
1.3 billion, nearly a quarter of the entire human race. This
calls for action from both sides, help from the community
of nations and self-help on the part of the countries
concerned. The one is the precondition for the other.
This evening I am having another meeting with my
African colleagues. I take a very keen interest in the
future of Europe’s vast neighbouring continent. We
should not see only Africa’s negative side but the hopeful
signs as well, and there are such signs. Democratization
is progressing, as shown by the fact that elections have
taken place or are scheduled in 17 countries this year.
Average economic growth has outpaced population
growth for the first time in many years. Life expectancy
has increased by more than 25 per cent since 1960, and
ever more children are going to school.
Germany supports Africa’s integration into the world
economy and the development of its own capabilities. The
United Nations New Agenda for the Development of
Africa in the 1990s is a sound foundation for these
efforts. The Secretary-General’s United Nations System-
wide Initiative on Africa should likewise be used by all
concerned as a basis for joint action.
However, much remains to be done. The ghastly
events in Rwanda must not be repeated in Burundi. On
the other hand, the United Nations should not be the
organization of first resort in every conflict situation. It
cannot solve every problem. Hence, the regional
organizations must assume a larger measure of
responsibility.
The Organization of African Unity, like the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, has
matured to a degree that commands respect. Germany,
with one eye on Burundi, has to date provided one
million deutsche mark in support of that organization’s
conflict prevention mechanism. High hopes have been
placed in the efforts of Julius Nyerere. The proposed
conference on the Great Lakes region has the support of
Germany and the European Union.
Germany will remain a good partner and friend to
the nations of Africa. That will also be my message at the
forthcoming second European Union-Southern African
Development Community (SADC) ministerial meeting in
Windhoek. The regionalization process in Africa is an
8


element of hope. The outstanding example is southern
Africa with the SADC. That region must become a
locomotive for the whole continent.
One neighbouring region whose fate touches Europe
is the Middle East. That is also the main reason for our
strong commitment in the whole Middle East region. For
historical reasons, Germany has a special relationship with
Israel; that remains unshakable. Bilaterally and through the
European Union we are the most important donor for the
Palestinians. Germany will maintain that commitment. I
confirmed this in my recent meetings with Israeli Foreign
Minister Levy and with President Yasser Arafat in Bonn.
Terrorists should not be given any chance to block the
path to peace. The sealing off of Gaza and the West Bank
must be eased and discontinued as soon as possible. That
is our common endeavour. The struggle against terrorism
must remain at the top of the international agenda. I
urgently appeal to all concerned to resume the peace
process without delay. There is no alternative.
It has been estimated that the world’s population will
number about 10 billion in 2030. For their sake, for the
sake of our children and grandchildren, we must take steps
today to ensure that the Earth remains habitable. Peace and
human dignity, economic progress and protection of the
natural foundations of life are inseparable. Without social
justice, without any vision for the world’s economic
progress, we shall not be able to break the vicious circle of
poverty, environmental destruction and population
explosion.
We have no time to lose. Every second three babies
are born, and every year the world’s population increases
by nearly 100 million. All of them need food, clothing,
schools and a home. Every minute about 12 acres of
tropical rain forest are lost, an area the size of 40 football
pitches.
Antoine de Saint-Exupéry warned that the human race
had not inherited the Earth from its fathers but had
borrowed it from its children. We became acutely aware of
this at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro. North and
South, East and West, are struggling to survive together in
spaceship Earth, whose blue protective shield is becoming
increasingly fragile.
Our task now is to convert that environmental
awareness into environmental action. The year 1997 will be
crucial for such action. The special session of the General
Assembly devoted to environment and development must
chart the course for the next millennium in order to
restore the balance between man, nature and the economy.
Germany’s industrial community has voluntarily
undertaken to reduce its carbon dioxide emissions by
20 per cent by the year 2005. Since 1990, Germany has
reduced those emissions by nearly 13 per cent and
thereby has led the way for the rest of the world.
We are contributing 312 million deutsche mark to
the pilot programme to protect Brazil’s tropical forests.
That represents 60 per cent of the total contributions
made so far. We appeal to the community of nations to
become more heavily involved in this programme. We
can only succeed together or fail together.
At the 1997 climate conference in Japan we must
achieve the objective agreed upon in Berlin 12 months
ago: the adoption of a substantive and binding protocol to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions. At the recent Geneva
conference, the great majority of nations came out in
favour of specific targets and time limits. This is
encouraging.
I wish to thank all members once again for
supporting our efforts to have the secretariat of the
Framework Convention on Climate Change established in
Bonn. May I also ask members to support our proposal
that the secretariat of the Framework Convention to
Combat Desertification likewise be located in Bonn, as it
has to cooperate closely with the climate secretariat. The
United Nations will find that living and working
conditions in our country are good.
The Rio Declaration on Environment and
Development rightly makes people the focal point of all
efforts. We must continue to concentrate on combating
poverty and providing basic and vocational education.
Even if that is not the kind of subject that makes
headlines, it is and will remain, together with
peacekeeping, one of our principal tasks.
Equal opportunities for women must not remain
mere theory.
Nothing is more powerful than an idea whose time
has come, is a saying that applies to human dignity and
human rights. The fall of the Berlin Wall showed that the
people’s pursuit of freedom and personal happiness is, in
the long run, stronger than any dictatorship. That is why
the worldwide defence of human rights will likewise not
be in vain.
It all boils down to something quite natural: that we
treat one another as humans and that we do not inflict upon
others what we would not like to have inflicted upon
ourselves. Murderers and torturers must not be allowed to
sleep peacefully. Mladic´ and Karadzic´, and all for whom
arrest warrants have been issued, deserve to be brought
before the International Tribunal in The Hague. Germany
calls for the early convening of a conference to establish an
international criminal court.
There is a core of human rights that are common to us
all and that are universally valid. This fact received
international confirmation at the Vienna Conference on
Human Rights. There can and should be no withdrawal
from that position.
With the East-West confrontation now consigned to
the past, intercultural dialogue assumes ever-greater
significance. Close to 2.5 million Muslims are living in
Germany. If only for this reason, it is of special importance
to develop greater mutual understanding between
Christianity and Islam.
A subject very close to my heart, as former Minister
of Justice, is the protection of our children, the weakest
members of society. Universal Children’s Day was
observed on 20 September. Its motto: “Children have
rights”. What do those rights look like in reality? Every day
35,000 children die of hunger. Twelve million children do
not live beyond the age of 5. Two million are forced into
prostitution. Two hundred thousand children around the
world are used as soldiers in war. Millions of them are used
as cheap labour.
The Stockholm conference on sexual abuse of children
has awakened world opinion, and I should like to thank the
Swedish Government for having hosted and organized this
conference, which shocked us all into action. The atrocious
way many of our children are being treated is a disgrace —
a disgrace — to our civilization. The Stockholm Plan of
Action must be followed by global action. This we owe to
our children. And I should like to make it very clear that
anyone who violates the weakest members of society —
children, that is — deserves to be outlawed by society.
Peace is not everything, but without peace everything
is nothing. These words originate from the time when East
and West faced each other armed to the teeth. In the
meantime the nightmare of a nuclear inferno has been
dispelled. Yesterday’s signing of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty was another momentous step in
this process, I believe, after half a century of international
debate and protest against nuclear testing.
In expressing my thanks to Australia I appeal to all
nations to ratify the Treaty as soon as possible. Since the
end of the Second World War upwards of 2,000 nuclear
tests have been carried out. We now have the chance to
put a stop to them once and for all. Anyone who rejects
something good because they will only accept something
perfect should be mindful of their responsibility to future
generations. We cannot force the atomic genie back into
the bottle, but we owe it to our children and
grandchildren to tame it — at least to tame it.
The total abolition of all chemical weapons is of
similar consequence. The Chemical Weapons Convention
must enter into force next spring. All nations, and
especially those with the largest stockpiles of such
weapons, must meet their tremendous responsibility and
ratify the Convention as soon as possible.
I should also like to touch upon an issue that I take
a very personal, keen interest in, and that is a totally
different kind of mass-destruction weapon: anti-personnel
mines. I travelled to Mozambique and Cambodia and took
a look at the situation there. Hundreds of millions of such
anti-personnel mines are still in the ground. Year in, year
out they kill and maim 20,000 people and make entire
regions permanently uninhabitable. These treacherous
tools of murder must be banned.
Germany has completely renounced anti-personnel
mines and imposed a unilateral, open-ended ban on
exports. Residual stocks are to be destroyed by the end of
1997. In my Seven-Point Programme of Action I have
proposed a number of measures to maintain the
momentum generated in Geneva. My main objective —
because I think the motto should be “first things first” —
is to improve the efficiency of mine clearance. We will
attend a conference in Canada very soon which deals with
the political aspects of this issue, trying to ban land-
mines. But we should also at the same time try to
concentrate on improving the efficiency of mine
clearance, that is, testing and using mechanical clearance
equipment. We quickly need machinery that can be mass-
produced in order to remove this plague without harming
people. I do not know whether anyone here has watched
a mine-clearance operation. It is done by people and can
be compared to trying to remove a sand-dune with a
spoon. I think it is incredible that highly developed
10


nations such as ours and many others are not able to
produce a piece of machinery for a large-scale de-mining
operation. I want to focus the technical knowledge that we
have to make this matter progress as quickly as possible.
If we want to win peace, we must not only consider
conflict prevention; we must also pay greater attention to
the situation after the termination of military hostilities.
Peace-building was the subject of the international
conference that we sponsored in Berlin in July. That
conference produced a number of interesting and tangible
results, which we are making available to all Member
States in the form of a report. Together with other countries
we intend to submit to members during this session of the
General Assembly a draft resolution on peace consolidation
through practical steps towards disarmament. Whether in
Bosnia, Rwanda or Angola, all previous efforts will prove
in vain unless we can prevent a resurgence of violence.
Most of the burden is borne by the 26,000 or so Blue
Helmets and civilian personnel making up the peacekeeping
missions, as well as by the countless courageous staff of
non-governmental organizations who are doing their job all
over the world under difficult conditions. Speaking here in
the United Nations, I should like to express my sincere
thanks to the non-governmental organizations. We are
proud of them.
In our resolution marking the fiftieth anniversary of
the United Nations, we solemnly undertook to pass on to
the next millennium a United Nations organization equipped
and financed to perform its tasks. The greatest political
significance attaches to reform of the Security Council, in
whose work we have been closely involved over the last
two years. This, the principal guardian of world peace, still
bears the countenance of the year 1945, but it now needs a
new one for the year 2000. It is a question of enhancing
that body’s legitimacy, credibility and effectiveness. After
a three-year debate the time has come to put the various
elements together and start the restructuring process, to now
get things done after having analysed what can be done.
We are pleased that a large number of Member States are
in favour of a permanent seat for Germany on the Security
Council. I really believe that the time is approaching when
the General Assembly will have to decide.
What continues to require our immediate attention is
the financial crisis. The Organization’s rationalization and
reform are indispensable and urgent. A glance at the books
is enough to tell us that. The regular United Nations budget
shows zero growth. The Secretariat has lost more than
1,000 posts, and further reductions will follow next year.
So much has already been achieved.
I therefore take this opportunity to thank the
Secretary-General and his staff, who, both at headquarters
and in the field, continue to achieve outstanding results
despite the reductions in their numbers and the constant
lack of funds. I should like to thank them very warmly.
I wish to add another word if I may. The United
Nations, in its actions and decisions, can be only as
strong as its Members allow it to be. People tend to
overlook that fact so readily when they criticize this
Organization. I stress this point because I think that the
outside world has a distorted image of the United Nations.
The United Nations is us, the Member States. We can
only achieve what we want to achieve together.
I am afraid that I must repeat that we will have to
save and rationalize further still. The need for reform is
no justification for refusing to pay contributions, however.
Moreover, special rights also imply special duties. The
German-American philosopher Hans Jonas said that
responsibility is the most important principle of the new
age. Let us act in accordance with that principle.


﻿My country is especially pleased at the
President’s election to lead the General Assembly. He
represents a great country that plays an important role in
the Non-Aligned Movement and the Group of 77 and I
am glad that he is to preside over our work during this
crucial period for our Organization.
17


I should also like to endorse the remarks made by
Ireland’s Foreign Minister in the name of the European
Union.
Last year, we celebrated the first half century of the
United Nations existence, during which its energies were
devoted, with a success universally acknowledged, to the
organization of international society. A mammoth collective
undertaking has been accomplished and the United Nations
has become the keystone of an international system founded
on law and the peaceful settlement of conflicts. This
collective undertaking owes much to the determined action
of successive Secretaries-General, and I should like to pay
a special and warm tribute here to Mr. Boutros-Ghali,
whose determination, vision of the future and firmness have
given our Organization a presence and vitality rarely
achieved. He deserves our confidence.
Today, as the century reaches its turning point, the
Organization is confronted with another major challenge:
globalization. In every sphere, the ideas and realities to
which we were accustomed are changing at a pace
unequalled in human history. The movement of people, of
ideas and images, and of goods is accelerating as distances
shrink. At the same time, the standardization of cultural
practices — and the legitimate reactions this provokes —
the general spread of low-cost high technologies and
intensified competition bring into question the positions that
have been achieved and the functioning, if not the very
foundation, of international society. At the same time, the
production of wealth is increasing tenfold and scientific
progress is growing rapidly, while unexpected opportunities
for development are being given to new nations.
But these benefits have adverse effects. The control
fragile States have over their development is being eroded,
national legislation is becoming inapplicable and the notion
of territorial integrity is changing in meaning. In short,
national authorities are too often reduced to powerlessness
by transnational phenomena over which they have only
scant control. If we are not careful, we are going to be
living in a world without criteria, without values, without
references, in which some — the strongest and the
richest — will be in a position to decide alone on the future
of the planet. It should come as no surprise that, in these
circumstances, the United Nations has many detractors.
Our Organization is in effect a privileged forum in
which the framework of a genuine international society can
be built, a framework that frees the forces of creativity and
development and represses the forces of violence and
oppression. It is up to all of us present here to enable the
United Nations to play that role and to ensure peace,
security and progress in these new circumstances and in
keeping with its mandate. Rest assured that France, a
founding Member of the Organization and permanent
member of the Security Council, will devote all its
energies to this task and will be in the front ranks of this
new fight.
Our world is confronted today with terrible problems
that know no borders and, sadly, spare no population:
terrorism, crime and drugs. The fight against these
scourges is foremost in our concerns and high on the
international agenda. Accordingly, an uncompromising
fight against terrorism, whatever its forms, perpetrators
and motives, constitutes our priority. This is why I
convened a conference on terrorism in Paris last July that
brought together the G-7 countries and Russia. We
adopted 25 practical, specific recommendations. They will
be implemented by each State and will strengthen
international cooperation against terrorism. Therefore,
today I make a solemn call on the entire international
community to join wholeheartedly in this fight.
We must also react without weakness to the
challenge of organized crime, in the knowledge that it
knows how to make the fullest use of the possibilities that
have been opened up by the liberalization of trade. For it
is the very foundation of our societies and institutions that
it endangers today.
International cooperation is indispensable to stem
this phenomenon. France, pursuing the path mapped out
by the Canadian presidency, has drafted a corpus of legal
and operational recommendations with its G-7 partners
and Russia to improve the effectiveness of the fight
against this scourge. These should guide in particular the
action of the States most affected by transnational
organized crime. France recently strengthened its financial
legislation against money-laundering. All States should
pay particular attention to this phenomenon, which is one
of the hardest forms of organized crime to counter.
One of the most loathsome aspects of organized
crime is that which targets our children. A world summit
on combating the sexual exploitation of children was
recently held in Stockholm. That is good, but it is still not
enough. Everyone must now make a commitment to
implementing effective measures for immediate
application. I urge all States represented here to act
quickly and with determination in this area which, more
than any other, affects our future. The Assembly may rest
assured of France’s political resolve.
18


Drugs are a formidable threat today because of the
ravages they inflict on young people. International
cooperation must be solid. The producer and consumer
countries must recognize their shared responsibility. The
international community must therefore continue to pursue
convergent policies to reduce the supply of illegal
substances and the demand for them. The European Union
has chosen such a global policy and has launched large-
scale actions in close coordination with international
institutions, in particular the United Nations International
Drug Control Programme. France strongly supports the
proposal to convene a special session of the General
Assembly devoted to drugs in 1998.
These new perils do not supplant the traditional
challenges, which our Organization must address with
sustained vigilance and unwavering firmness. Peace-keeping
remains the central function of our Organization under the
terms of the founding Charter. The mission of the United
Nations to soothe tensions, separate combatants and resolve
conflicts remains fundamental.
The panoply of available instruments is becoming
more diversified. Recent additions to conventional peace-
keeping missions include activities to consolidate peace,
preventive diplomacy measures and even regional
conferences — such as I hope will soon take place with
regard to the situation in the Great Lakes region.
Sanctions constitute one of these instruments. They are
a useful weapon, but they penalize populations and must
therefore be used with prudence and moderation, follow
strict criteria and — I stress this — always be limited in
time. Only under those conditions can sanctions, which are
sometimes necessary to prevent something worse, continue
to be used by our Organization with the required
legitimacy.
Of course, we cannot refer to the traditional challenges
to peace without speaking about current regional conflicts.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, where my country has paid a
heavy tribute, France is pleased that elections could be held,
imperfect though they were. That represents an essential
stage in the return to peace provided for by the agreements
signed in Paris in 1995.
But peace still has to be consolidated, devastated
territories be reconstructed, refugees encouraged to return
and a civilian society rebuilt. To that end, France has
proposed a plan of consolidated action by the international
community with a time-frame of two years. With this goal
in mind, we will very shortly be hosting an international
conference in Paris to examine, and I hope adopt, this
proposal.
Similarly, the peace process in the Middle East
seems to be at a crucial stage. I wish here to express my
anxiety about it. I certainly believe the process to be
irreversible, but I am also aware of the precariousness of
the gains and the urgency of the need for long-term
solutions. We are half-way there. I say “we”, because this
process concerns not just Arabs and Israelis but all of us
here.
For France, peace in the Middle East is built upon
dialogue between equal partners, respect for the identity
of each and the right of peoples to the free determination
of their destiny, the affirmation of their independence, and
security. That is why — and I wish to emphasize this
point — France believes that there will be no lasting
peace in the region, based on an exchange of land for
peace, unless the right of the Palestinian people to self-
determination is respected, together with their legitimate
aspirations for a State.
We believe that a just and balanced agreement
between Israelis and Palestinians cannot avoid the issues
of Jerusalem, refugees and the settlements in the
Palestinian territories. Finally, a lasting peace presupposes
that Israel is assured of its existence within secure and
recognized borders.
France believes that complete withdrawal from the
Golan Heights in exchange for total peace constitutes the
basis of an agreement between Syria and Israel, and that
Lebanon must regain full and complete sovereignty over
the whole of its territory.
Based on these principles, France intends to have a
greater and more active presence than ever in the Middle
East, with which it has close and long-standing relations.
It will pursue this policy in close consultation with its
European partners. Furthermore, Europe must have a
place, alongside the two sponsors of the peace process,
commensurate with the major contribution it is making to
the region’s development.
While we are endeavouring to build peace in areas
in crisis, our efforts are no less ambitious for the entire
European continent. In building step by step what we call
an “architecture of security“, we are really offering the
international community a pillar of peace. France is
making an important contribution to the establishment on
19


the European continent a system of global security that
leaves no one out on the edge.
The construction of peace in Europe began with the
construction of European institutions. It is being continued
by deepening the Union. The intergovernmental Conference
represents a decisive stage in this process, the forerunner of
expansion, which is vital to the stability and prosperity of
the continent.
France wishes to see the Union go still further by
giving substance to the European identity in security and
defence matters. To that end, we would like to see a
strengthening of the Western European Union and its
gradual rapprochement with the European Union.
The European identity is also based on the reform of
the Atlantic Alliance. France, after taking a decisive step,
is now working actively with its allies on the adaptation of
structures. This should allow the emergence of a genuine
European security and defence identity within the Alliance
and make it possible in practice for the Western European
Union, and therefore the European Union, to use the assets
of the Alliance for military action that Europeans decide to
undertake themselves. This reform is also the key to the
process of expanding the Alliance, with which France is
ready to assist. That expansion must naturally go hand-in-
hand with in-depth dialogue and cooperation with Russia.
The third and last aspect of the structure is the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), which is the sole forum for security in which all
the European States are represented on an equal footing.
That is why France believes that it is necessary to
strengthen the organization. We hope that the Lisbon
summit will provide the occasion to move towards the
drafting of a charter or treaty linking all the States of the
continent.
Important events therefore await us on the path that
we have mapped out, including the OSCE summit in
December and the NATO summit next year. The latter
should bring together all the European States for a
“pan-Europe day”, demonstrating the community of security
interests of all the countries on the continent, including
Russia and our North American allies whose role in
European security remains decisive. That is our ambition
for a Europe of security that leaves no one out and is safer
and more stable for the entire international community.
In this changing world, it is for the United Nations to
bring out the common values that will be the foundations
of civilization in the twenty-first century. It is thanks to
its actions that we hope to build a safer, less harsh world
for its inhabitants. First, we hope it will be a world in
which the spectre of nuclear war has faded. For many
years, public opinion called for a complete ban on nuclear
tests. It was a hope and a plan that was certainly worthy,
but remained blocked by the reality of East-West
confrontation.
France welcomes the signing of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, which I had the honour to sign
yesterday. This Treaty marks a major turning-point in the
world’s strategic balances.
It puts an end to the possibility of the nuclear-
weapon States’ developing new types of nuclear weapons,
and it makes a decisive contribution to the fight against
nuclear-weapon proliferation.
The Treaty thus opens the way to a more stable,
safer world which will cease to be haunted by the twin
dangers of the nuclear-arms race and the proliferation of
these weapons.
There is another development which I find
remarkable: the endorsement of human rights as a major
principle of international relations. And the United
Nations is at the centre of this development.
I should like in this regard to pay tribute to the
remarkable work done by the Commission on Human
Rights. In often difficult circumstances, it has pursued
with pragmatism and tenacity its patient efforts to awaken
consciences, to galvanize energies and to promote the rule
of law in concrete ways.
Our aim must not be to pronounce
excommunications or establish a blacklist, generally to no
effect. Rather, it must be to promote the protection of
individuals and the progress of law with due respect for
differences.
I should also like to reaffirm France’s determination
to see crimes against humanity punished. The
condemnation they warrant cannot brook any exception.
Together with others, France took the initiative of
proposing the establishment of the international criminal
Tribunal and the international Tribunal for Rwanda. I
wish to reaffirm France’s unqualified support for their
founding work, and its backing in order that the tribunals
might carry out their work in full.
20


Lastly, France is pleased that the foundations that have
thus been laid have helped to speed up the debates on the
establishment of an international criminal court, which we
earnestly desire and to which we attach a high priority.
There are other important areas which we have begun
to consider.
At this time when workers, money, factories and
commerce operate at a heightened pace, it is essential to
develop dialogue among the partners of economic life. This
is really the only solid basis on which to build social
protection that preserves the interests of all without harming
the growth of economies.
The fiftieth anniversary of the International Labour
Organisation (ILO) provided the opportunity to recall the
essential role of this organization in defining these minimal
norms, without which the economic world is but a vast
jungle.
Universality, however, must not lead to uniformity.
The definition of common values, accepted by all, is based
on respect for the identities that underpin the cultures of the
world. Our values will thus command all the more respect
for being expressed in all our respective languages.
Accordingly, we welcome the fact that the General
Assembly last year adopted a resolution on multilingualism
by a very large majority. Our civilizations, languages and
cultures, inherited from an often turbulent history, but of
irreplaceable richness, are a precious legacy for humankind.
The importance that my country ascribes to the
French-speaking community reflects its determination to
maintain the specificity and richness of the profoundly
original world view of several hundreds of millions of
people. We will not give this up.
The search for a new world ethic is not limited to
human rights but extends to the whole of international life.
Since 1945, international trade has been a powerful growth
factor, contributing to a large extent to the expansion of the
industrialized economies and to the success of the so-called
emerging countries. But here too we must have rules of the
game, acknowledged at the world level, so as to develop
and regulate trade, ensure that it is fair and prevent
unilateral conduct.
I should like to mention here the dangers of
unilateralism. Unilateralism: behind this technocratic word
lurks the temptation to impose the law of the strongest at
the expense of dialogue and negotiation.
France and Europe cannot accept that one country,
even if it is the most powerful, attempt to regulate world
trade by itself by means of decisions that have extra-
territorial scope. The World Trade Organization does not
allow it, and no one should doubt the firmness of French
and European reactions were such measures actually to be
implemented.
The globalization of the economy and the
liberalization of trade and investments have opened up
unprecedented prospects. However, we must take care not
to allow the gap to widen between the nations that trade,
invest and derive profit from this new factor and those
that remain on the sidelines of this new prosperity.
Each nation is responsible for itself and must create,
through rigorous public management and compliance with
its legislative rulings, optimum conditions for freeing
private initiative, a factor in economic and commercial
progress. But I do not believe that one can leave to
market forces alone the care of ensuring the development
of the poorest nations.
Here, too, the United Nations has an important role
to play. By its side, the wealthiest States must affirm their
solidarity in a tangible way: actively and effectively, this
solidarity must assist the developing countries without
becoming a substitute for them. On the threshold of a
new century, poverty and exclusion cannot constitute the
sole prospects for two-thirds of humankind. France, for its
part, will not accept this.
This commitment concerns Africa in particular,
where real prospects for progress are beginning to
emerge.
Africa has embarked with courage and perseverance
on the path to readjustment and recovery, which will
enable it to find its place again in the great flows of
world trade.
For the first time in a long time, Africa’s growth
rate has been on the order of 5 per cent these past two
years, higher than its demographic expansion, very high
though it is. This is a reassuring sign, attributable to the
efforts made by the African States themselves. They have
been able to cut public deficits, establish realistic
monetary parities, open up their markets and move
towards regional integration and democratization. Such
21


achievements, which are the result of structural reforms,
seem to us to justify our confidence. France believes in
Africa’s future.
Still, official development assistance must be
maintained and strengthened, but this assistance must be the
subject of many initiatives. France has taken such
initiatives within the European Union, the African
Development Bank, the International Development
Association and the International Monetary Fund.
Recently, at the summit of industrialized countries
held in Lyons, my country reaffirmed the need to increase
aid to the poorest countries, asking for more generous
treatment of debt for them, and for a new global partnership
to be defined between the developing countries and the
multilateral institutions.
In this new world context, we have to consider the
progress that the United Nations needs to make to be able
to meet its responsibilities for the next century.
France approves of the current discussions on
improving the representative character of the Security
Council, in particular with respect to Germany, Japan and
the States of the South.
Similarly, under the decisive impetus of the Secretary-
General, the Organization has embarked on a vast effort for
structural reform, the first results of which are beginning to
show.
It is not a matter of changing everything but of seeing
that every institution is in a position to make a useful
contribution to the collective work in its own sphere.
That is why the members of the G-7 have proposed
putting the savings realized through reforms into
development projects.
France would like to see the reform of the United
Nations economic and social sector concluded quickly so as
to strengthen the overall coherence of the Organization. To
that end, the roles and mandates of the specialized agencies
and commissions in particular should be better defined, and
waste and duplication eliminated.
These proposals are dictated solely by the wish to help
the United Nations better fulfil its mission of fighting
poverty and exclusion on a global scale.
In the case of the United Nations budget, many of us
are worried about the financial crisis that threatens to
paralyse the United Nations. The European Union has put
forward concrete proposals for overcoming this crisis. It
is now up to all States that have let their arrears
accumulate to assume their responsibilities.
Whatever some may say, the United Nations is still
one of our best chances for building a better world. Let
us not spoil it.





﻿May I begin by
congratulating Ambassador Razali of Malaysia on his
assumption of office as our General Assembly’s new
President and offer our thanks to his predecessor,
Ambassador Freitas do Amaral, for all his valuable work
during the fiftieth session.
The late twentieth century is an exciting time. For the
fortunate among us, the world has never offered more:
travel with unheard-of ease, a tantalizing cornucopia of
consumer goods, 100 or more television stations in our
homes, the Internet. But these fruits are denied the vast
majority of the planet’s population. The number of people
who live in absolute poverty is still growing. Their misery
is a challenge to all our consciences, and I want today to
talk about what we all, the developed countries as well as
the developing, can do for those trapped in poverty — what
we can do together to open the door to development.
But first of all I would like to say a few brief words
about four other issues of particular importance at this
moment in time.
First of all, Hong Kong. The year 1997 will be a
special one for Hong Kong. Less than 300 days from now
the world will witness history. The peaceful transfer of
sovereignty over a territory of 6 million free and prosperous
people is an event unparalleled in modern times. A transfer
on the basis of an international Treaty, registered here at
the United Nations — a Treaty between two members of
the Security Council, which guarantees that for 50 years
after 1997 there will be “one country, two systems” and
that “Hong Kong people will rule Hong Kong”. Let there
be no doubt of Britain’s continuing commitment to the
future of Hong Kong and its people, well into the next
century.
Thanks to the efforts of the Hong Kong people
themselves, the development of Hong Kong is one of the
world’s great success stories. The Chinese Government
has made clear its determination to preserve Hong Kong’s
prosperity, its stability and its way of life as a free and
open society based on the rule of law. For Britain, a
successful transfer will be the closing of a chapter, but
also a new beginning to our relations with both Hong
Kong and with China.
I suggest that all Members of the United Nations
have a stake in this historic exercise. As long as the
promises of the joint Declaration are turned into reality,
Hong Kong has a bright future, as part of China and as
one of the world’s leading cities, contributing enormously
to growth and prosperity throughout the Asia-Pacific
region. And I am sure that all here will join me in
welcoming that prospect.
I want also to take this opportunity to commend the
International Court of Justice in its fiftieth anniversary
year. The International Court has performed
groundbreaking work in settling disputes between States,
and I am proud that the United Kingdom has always been
among the States that accept its compulsory jurisdiction.
I hope that others will join us in pledging both moral and
material support to the International Court. The more who
accept that international law must be the foundation of
international relations, the safer we shall all be.
The world is safer today too with the historic
signature of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
Earlier this morning I had the privilege of signing the
Treaty for the United Kingdom. It shows that we can, by
acting with determination and by making sacrifices, reap
the benefits of the end of the cold war, and I firmly
believe that the Treaty can make an important
contribution to preventing the proliferation of nuclear
weapons and in promoting international security. The
Treaty was the product of a multilateral negotiation and
was adopted here in the General Assembly. But that alone
is not enough. If it is to be fully effective, it must
command universal support, and the United Kingdom will
now put in hand the steps to allow us to ratify the Treaty.
17


It is the sovereign right of every State to decide whether or
not to be bound by international agreements. But it is our
firm conviction that this Treaty is in the interests of all, and
I urge all States to give it their full support.
Meanwhile, other threats still loom large. The
insidious spectre of terrorism is a concern to all of us here,
and it is right that the United Nations should be the forum
for debate on this worldwide menace. The United Kingdom
is proposing for adoption at this session a United Nations
declaration which will spell out unequivocally that acts of
terrorism, and the financing, planning and incitement of
these acts, are contrary to the purposes and principles of the
United Nations. People who do these evil things and who
seek asylum under the United Nations refugee Convention
do not deserve to benefit from it.
The United Nations faces a critical year. It remains the
hope of people across the world in search of peace and
development. But the changes required to adapt and
strengthen the United Nations to meet the challenges of the
future have not yet been completed. This year must see a
solution to the financial crisis. Reform must be part of the
solution, including a thorough updating of the system of
assessing contributions to the United Nations, so that
contributions match real ability to pay. But all Members
must pay what they owe, both their assessments and their
arrears, and promptly; and the European Union’s proposals
are a good basis for negotiation. It will also be important to
achieve over the coming year a resolution to the long-
standing discussions of Security Council enlargement. In
short, the United Nations must be made fit for the new
millennium.
I turn now to my main theme. Three months ago, at
Lyons, the Group of Seven countries committed themselves
to a partnership for the economic development of the world.
This is not just a catchy slogan; it is a fresh approach to the
challenge of development, and what it means is that the
developing countries and the developed together would
share responsibility for creating the conditions that will
allow economies to grow, a shared agenda of measures that
we need to take to promote development.
For the countries of the developing world, this means
pursuing policies to enable economies to grow: taxes need
to be kept low, subsidies cannot be allowed to distort
markets, exports should not be impeded by heavy tariffs.
Domestic markets must be allowed to operate with as little
interference as possible. The goal must be to establish an
environment where the private sector can flourish, for the
private sector is the engine of growth.
In 1755, Adam Smith famously remarked that for
prosperity
“Little else is requisite ... but peace, easy taxes, and
tolerable administration of justice”.
This is still a valid recipe today — not easy to achieve,
but with the sound foundations of good government and
sensible macroeconomic policies, enterprise can flourish
anywhere. This is the challenge to the Governments of
the developing world.
What of the developed world’s side of the
bargain? — countries such as my own. Our responsibility
is to remove the shackles which hinder developing
economies as they try to enter the global market. Many of
the poorest countries are still caught in a mire of debt
they are unlikely ever to be able to pay off. This benefits
no one. The United Kingdom has long argued that, when
combined with macroeconomic reform of the kind I have
described, deep debt relief can kick-start the development
of the poorest economies. Some time ago, Britain helped
to identify steps that could be taken to lift the debt burden
from the poorest, most indebted countries: more debt
relief from bilateral creditors and getting the multilateral
agencies themselves to share more of the burden. Since
then the Paris Club of creditors has made an important
contribution by increasing debt forgiveness as agreed
following British proposals at the Naples Summit in 1994.
The multilateral agencies too have come up with some
useful proposals, such as the World Bank’s Trust Fund to
provide debt relief. I also welcome the International
Monetary Fund’s (IMF) commitment to continue
providing concessional finance through the enhanced
structural adjustment facility.
These measures to relieve debt need to be
implemented both flexibly and soon. The countries in
greatest need should be granted maximum relief as swiftly
as possible. I look forward to final agreement at the
annual meetings of the IMF and the World Bank next
week.
The private sector is the motor of development.
Private investment flows to the developing world are now
at record levels. The United Kingdom is the third largest
source of private investment. But these flows are still not
reaching the poorest countries. There is therefore a
continuing need for concessional aid to prime the pump
of homegrown development. We need to focus our efforts
on those countries where help is needed most and which
can make the best use of it. Help must primarily be
18


targeted at creating growth with equity, at developing
human resources to their full potential, at giving priority to
the needs of the poor: to health and education, to clean
water and small enterprises.
Increasingly this partnership in development amongst
us all has to deal with the growing problems of planet
survival: climate change, the environment, the future of the
world’s oceans and forests, and pandemic diseases.
Development which ignores these will not be sustainable.
The United Nations is a central forum for focusing the
attention and action of Governments and civil society on
these challenges as we enter the next century. Next year’s
General Assembly special session to review the Rio summit
on environment and development is one example.
But the best help that we in the developed world can
give to the developing is to buy what they produce, and to
do that we in the developed world must demolish the
barriers that we still maintain against imports from the
poorer countries of the developing world. When I look
around the world, I see many developing countries bursting
with exports that they have to sell: textiles, food,
manufactured goods. But tragically, the markets of the
richer countries of the developed world are often closed to
these exports. Last week’s report from the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD)
predicted that poor countries could triple their exports to the
North over the next 10 years if import quotas were phased
out — an extra $175 billion a year in income.
Protectionism is starving the developing economies of their
oxygen, the oxygen of growth.
The European Union’s record is better than most. We
already have a wide-ranging scheme to allow duty-free
imports from developing countries. But even so, the
European Union obstructs, for example, imports of
Palestinian cut flowers; it obstructs fruit juices from South
Africa, strawberry jam from Bulgaria. Other developed
countries are even less generous. The United States targets
imports of Mexican tomatoes; Japan restricts imports of rice
from South-East Asia. The list could go on.
We all know the difficulty of resisting powerful
domestic lobbies. They exist in Britain as elsewhere. But
this sort of protectionism is not simply selfish; it is also
short-sighted. Growth and prosperity in the developing
world will over time increase, not diminish, the wealth of
the industrialized world. Trade is not a zero-sum game. It
is a process which is mutually beneficial, mutually
enriching; and with prosperity comes stability and greater
security for us all.
This is not some fashionable nostrum dreamt up in
an ivory tower. It is a prescription which has already been
seen to work. Since 1945, under the auspices of the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), the
world economy has moved steadily towards more open
markets. And the result is clear: five decades of
unprecedented economic growth and prosperity. It is
incumbent upon us to spread this benefit more widely.
That is why I so warmly welcome the proposal put
forward by the Director-General of the World Trade
Organization. Mr. Ruggiero has proposed that the least-
developed countries be granted tariff-free access to the
markets of the developed world. I wholeheartedly
welcome this initiative. I hope that others will see its
compelling logic: the best hope the poor have for
sustained economic development is to be given the
freedom to export, the freedom to sell.
That freedom enables countries to grow. But free
trade is not just helpful to developing countries, it is a
global good, its benefits are spread wide, to the producers
and consumers in the developed and the developing world
alike, who can profit from the greater efficiency that free
trade engenders, and who can buy the best and cheapest
products available on the world markets. In short, free
trade benefits us all. That is why Britain is so firmly
committed to bringing the vision of global free trade to
reality by the year 2020.
Free trade begins at home. Cutting tariffs and other
import restrictions helps developing countries by cutting
the costs of production, boosting efficiency and thus
helping exports and growth. Combine these benefits with
the freedom to export granted by open markets in the
developed world, and developing countries and their
economies can enjoy a virtuous circle of development.
Free trade is therefore the catalyst for growth. This is not
just good economic theory. Greater efficiency and higher
growth mean more resources available for new hospitals
and new schools, better housing and cleaner water. Free
trade means real benefits for poor people.
I have described today a challenge for every one of
us here. Poverty is something we can all do something
about. In May, the Organisation for Economic
Cooperation and Development proposed that the
developed and developing worlds together should try to
cut the number of people living in absolute poverty by
half by 2015. Britain commits itself to that goal. It is
achievable.
19


At home, we must liberalize our economies, minimize
the burden of government and lift all restrictions on the free
operation of the market. In the global economy, we must
remove barriers to trade to allow the developing countries
to sell. We must help lift the millstone of debt from those
who can least bear it. We cannot allow the poorest
members of the world community to become marginalized.
We must do our utmost to enable all Members of the
United Nations to enjoy the fruits of integration into the
global economy. A revitalized United Nations has an
essential part to play.
I do not underestimate the difficulty of the tasks that
I have described. We can only confront them in partnership,
rich and poor together. If we all play our part, prosperity
can be placed within the grasp of even the poorest
countries.



﻿It gives me great pleasure to
congratulate Ambassador Razali on his election as
President of the General Assembly at its fifty-first
session. He is not present here, but I would like to say
that he is no stranger to India. We are fully cognizant of
his sagacity and skills and repose our confidence in his
ability to successfully guide the General Assembly during
its fifty-first session. May I also express my delegation’s
warm appreciation for the presidency of his predecessor,
His Excellency Mr. Diogo Freitas do Amaral, for a most
productive tenure as President of the Assembly in its
historic, landmark fiftieth year.
Six years ago I had the privilege of addressing the
historic forty-fifth session of this Assembly. We rejoiced
12


at the end of the cold war and believed that the animosities,
rivalries, suspicions and intrigues that had bedeviled the
past would now be overcome and the problems of the
world and their solutions could be addressed with greater,
perhaps pristine, clarity. We have welcomed the reduction
of global tensions and the opening up of new economic
possibilities between nations.
However, we cannot say that the new dawn has led to
a new and genuinely cooperative web of kinship and
collaboration. Regional conflicts and tensions continue to
occupy us. Development problems remain acute, and there
is less sensitivity to the genuine needs of struggling nations.
The voice of the rich and powerful nations rings louder
than ever, while the developing world feels itself more
marginalized and ignored than ever.
In these circumstances, it is even more necessary to
strive for a genuine spirit of joint international endeavour
in addressing the world’s problems. The United Nations is
the foremost embodiment of multilateralism. No single
nation or even group of nations today can expect to find
solutions to the world’s problems, nor are many problems
amenable to solutions in isolation. Global problems require
global institutions and global solutions. This role and duty
can fall only to the United Nations.
We are concerned at unilateral actions and at the
evident decline in the commitment to obligations under the
Charter of the United Nations. International cooperation is
necessary to meet the vast development needs of the
developing countries, to eliminate weapons of mass
destruction and to fight terrorism and crime. The United
Nations system, under which sovereign nations have joined
together to achieve their common objectives, is the
universal framework for international cooperation. The
Charter of the United Nations is the real basis for renewing
multilateralism. India recently joined 15 other Heads of
State or Government in stating that
“either nations move forward to strengthen
(multilateralism), or we risk having to face more
unilateralism and perhaps conflict and overt disregard
of international law and common values”.
The United Nations is at a crossroads. Its financial
crisis is the result of an unwarranted unwillingness on the
part of certain countries to pay their dues in full and on
time. Such deliberate targeting of the United Nations
represents the most acute threat to multilateral cooperation
and can do incalculable long-term damage.
Beyond the financial crisis of the United Nations
itself is the critical issue of financing global cooperation.
While the world remains confronted with enormous
problems of poverty, malnutrition, disease, ecological
degradation and waste, the will to contribute is on the
decline. Development assistance is at its lowest level in
decades. Negotiated replenishments of multilateral
development funds are not being honoured.
It is unfortunate that voices continue to be raised
questioning the role of the United Nations in the
economic growth and social development of developing
countries. It is necessary to restore to the United Nations,
in the coming century, the important role of eradicating
poverty and all the ills associated with it, of promoting
development and achieving social progress and better
living standards, with more freedom for all.
For this purpose, the multilateral economic system
needs to be reformed and the partnership of the United
Nations with other relevant institutions must to be
strengthened in order to achieve greater economic growth,
integration and sustainable development. The United
Nations and the Bretton Woods institutions need to
develop an effective partnership. While India welcomes
the initial, tentative steps towards such a partnership,
effective economic leadership requires that we work to
ensure a much closer relationship between global
economic institutions than has been the case so far.
Indeed, there is no alternative if the financing of long-
term global cooperation in economic and social fields is
to be assured. We need larger volumes of financial
assistance, greater predictability of resources and
unfettered access to the markets of developed countries.
It is also time that we energize our efforts to complete the
Agenda for Development and launch an effective follow-
up process, including in the context of the recent major
United Nations conferences.
India is unreservedly committed to the protection
and promotion of human rights. The profoundly
humanistic traditions of Indian civilization, with its
emphasis on tolerance, harmony, non-violence and the
inviolability of the individual, have been consolidated in
the Constitution of India, which is indeed a veritable bill
of human rights. All human rights are sacrosanct in India,
guaranteed by its Constitution, an independent judiciary,
a free press, public opinion vigorously expressed and an
independent National Human Rights Commission. To us
in India, the human rights of all segments of society are
sacrosanct and an article of faith rather than a policy.
13


We believe that international cooperation in the
protection and promotion of human rights should proceed
within the framework of respect for the sovereignty and
integrity of States. We deplore the selective use of human
rights issues as a form of political pressure, as an obstacle
to trade or as a condition for development assistance. Such
actions detract from the moral imperatives of human rights
promotion and impede the full realization of the human
rights of all people.
Human rights violations take many forms. Among the
most pernicious of them is terrorism. Terrorism seeks to
exploit the openness and freedom offered by democratic
societies to pursue narrow ends through the use of violence.
It must be combated by firm action at the national and
international level. We are dismayed when we hear certain
parties voice concern for the so-called rights of terrorists
while ignoring their persistent violation of the human rights
of their victims, including the right to life, freedom of
expression and the freedom to follow religious beliefs of
one’s own choice.
India took the lead in raising the issue of terrorism as
a threat to human rights almost five years ago. We are
pleased that despite initial and sometimes vocal opposition
by some western countries, terrorism is now accepted to be
the major threat to the enjoyment of human rights today. A
number of international declarations have been issued on
terrorism such as the Sharm el-Sheikh Declaration, and the
G-7 Lyons Declaration of 27 June 1996. We are
encouraged that the international community now
recognizes terrorism as a major challenge to democracy,
human rights and peace. In this context, India will pursue
its call to adopt a binding international convention to
combat terrorism.
Fifty years after the United Nations was established,
the threat to humanity posed by nuclear weapons continues
unabated. We believe that India’s security, as indeed that of
all countries, lies in a nuclear-weapon-free world.
The only way to achieve this ultimate security is to
ban the production, possession and use of nuclear weapons
within an agreed time-frame. Partial and half-hearted arms
control measures, such as the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) or the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT), defeat
this objective by legitimizing the possession of nuclear
weapons and permitting the non-explosive testing of nuclear
weapons by nuclear-weapon countries. India, therefore,
cannot be a party to such flawed arrangements.
Let me also emphasize that any effective
disarmament regime needs to be universal in its approach
and scope. The total elimination of all existing nuclear
weapons, as an indispensable step towards general and
complete disarmament under strict and efficient
international control, is the demand of the entire Non-
Aligned Movement, to which we fully subscribe. Partial
or regional approaches, as are sometimes put forward, do
not serve any useful purpose and can distract us from the
accepted goal.
At the same time, India remains committed to
participating fully and actively in any negotiations on a
treaty banning nuclear weapons and all types of tests, just
as it did in regard to the Chemical Weapons Convention.
India signed and deposited its instrument of
ratification of the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction two weeks
ago. India regrets that major chemical weapon producers
have been slow to ratify the Convention. We urge all
those countries which have still not done so to ratify the
Chemical Weapons Convention and to demonstrate their
readiness to move towards banning all weapons of mass
destruction.
India will work with all like-minded countries in
sponsoring draft resolutions on the establishment of an ad
hoc committee under the Conference on Disarmament for
beginning negotiations on a treaty banning nuclear
weapons in a time-bound framework. India expects all
countries, including those represented in the Canberra
Commission on the Elimination of Nuclear Weapons,
which support time-bound elimination of nuclear
weapons, to join in supporting such draft resolutions.
India will once again present the draft convention on
the prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons at this
session of the General Assembly. India believes that the
urgency of negotiating that convention has been greatly
enhanced by the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice regarding the illegality of the use of
nuclear weapons.
At the recent session of the Conference on
Disarmament, India joined 27 non-aligned and neutral
countries to present a phased programme for the
elimination of nuclear weapons by the year 2020. India
asks that all countries join us in propagating and
promoting this joint proposal, both at the fifty-first
session of the General Assembly and in other forums.
14


India is in favour of a non-discriminatory and
universal ban on anti-personnel mines, which cripple or kill
a large number of civilians.
The continued credibility of the United Nations
requires reform of the Organization to reflect present-day
realities. While the membership of the United Nations has
increased greatly, the voices of the newly sovereign
countries in decision-making in the United Nations remain
unheard. There is an imbalance in the authority and weight
of structures and organs, just as there is an imbalance in the
weight of different countries or groups. The General
Assembly, the sole universal organ of the United Nations,
needs to find greater resonance in other bodies of the
system.
The Security Council must be made more
representative in order to enhance its legitimacy and
effectiveness. The vast increase in the membership of the
United Nations since its founding, especially of the
developing countries, must find adequate representation in
the categories of permanent and non-permanent
membership. A comprehensive proposal by the Non-
Aligned Movement for the reform and restructuring of the
Security Council is already on the table. India supports the
expansion of both the permanent and the non-permanent
categories. We are against piecemeal or temporary solutions
which discriminate against developing countries. We
believe that the same yardstick must be applied to all
countries, developed or developing, from all regions or
groups, for induction as permanent members. We believe
that under any objectively derived criteria for the expansion
of permanent members, India would be an obvious
candidate.
Reform and expansion must be an integral part of a
common package. The restructuring of the Security Council
must give expression to the impulse for reform. The
reforms must address not only the failings of the past, but
also the needs of the future.
Peacekeeping is a significant area of United Nations
activities, very often the most visible symbol of the
Organization’s presence on the ground. India has
participated in over 25 peacekeeping operations on four
continents, including some of the most sensitive and
prolonged, starting with Korea in 1953 and 1954, and
including the operations in Viet Nam, Congo, the Middle
East, Cambodia, Haiti, Somalia, El Salvador, Mozambique
and Rwanda. Indian peacekeepers are currently in the field
in Angola, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Liberia and Kuwait.
Our participation has not been without cost. We have lost
100 peacekeepers for the United Nations cause. We have
also offered a fully-equipped brigade to the United
Nations standby arrangement. The performance of the
Indian troops has won universal recognition. India is one
of the few countries which can sustain large-scale troop
commitment over prolonged periods.
Our participation in United Nations peacekeeping
does not stem from considerations of narrow gain. We
have participated because we have been wanted and
because we have been asked, but most of all because of
our solidarity and empathy with the affected countries and
with the international community, as well as because of
our commitment to the United Nations and to the cause
of international peace and security.
India has offered its candidature for the non-
permanent seat on the Security Council from Asia for
1997 and 1998. Our candidature is rooted in the criteria
stipulated in the Charter: the principle of equity, our
unwavering commitment to the United Nations, and to the
cause of multilateralism, and our 50-year-long
contribution to the maintenance of international peace and
security and to the other purposes and principles of the
Organization. India has a unique record of supporting
United Nations activities against apartheid and
colonialism. We have richly contributed to the debates on
development, disarmament and human rights. We seek the
onerous responsibility of Council membership convinced
of the support of this Assembly.
I would like to take this opportunity to pay a warm
tribute to the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-
Ghali, for his successful stewardship during a most
difficult period. His services are a distinct asset to this
world body.
Let me briefly refer to India’s interaction with the
world. We have witnessed some remarkable changes in
the last few years. New vistas for greater cooperation are
now visible. The challenge lies in effectively seizing the
opportunities. We attach the highest importance to
developing cordial and friendly relations with our
neighbours with a view to promoting peace, stability and
mutual confidence in the region. We also seek to develop
stronger economic and commercial relations within the
region, for all-around prosperity. As current Chairman of
the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
(SAARC), it will be our endeavour to promote
multifaceted cooperation in all spheres.
15


The economic reforms embarked upon since 1991
have provided India with a new outward orientation that
seeks greater integration of India into the global
marketplace. Today, India is branching out and adding to
the substantive content of its relations with individual
countries of the region and beyond, developing and building
upon regional cooperation arrangements involving SAARC,
the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), the
ASEAN Regional Forum, the Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation Council (APEC) and the Indian Ocean Rim, to
name a few.
Convinced of the need and utility of enhanced South-
South cooperation, we accord the highest priority to our
relations with Africa, the Middle East and Central Asia. We
are proud to have been associated with Africa and its
causes in the United Nations since the inception of the
world body. We appreciate the role played by the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), which has striven to
find regional solutions to African problems. Its efforts must
be supplemented by the United Nations. The scramble for
Africa in the nineteenth century was for African land and
resources. We hope that the closing years of the present
century will see a scramble to redress African problems, the
genesis of which largely lies outside the region. The United
Nations must lead international efforts to meet Africa’s
needs and aspirations.
We are deeply concerned at the recent serious
incidents of violence in the West Bank and Gaza and by
Israeli authorities’ opening of a tunnel beneath Haram
Al-Sharif — the Temple Mount — in East Jerusalem,
which resulted in the tragic loss of several innocent lives
and large-scale injuries following violent clashes. The
current situation underlines the need for immediate and
effective measures to end the violence and to create a
climate that would enable purposeful negotiations based on
a recognition of the underlying causes of the conflict. These
developments also serve to emphasize the need to build
further on the agreements and understandings already
reached.
In the wave of the recent political changes in the
Middle East, India is encouraged by the reiteration by all
parties of their continued commitment to the Middle East
peace process based on the framework established by the
Madrid Conference. However, we are concerned that these
reaffirmations do not appear to have manifested themselves
in commensurate progress in the peace process. India urges
all parties to intensify their efforts towards realizing the
mutually agreed objectives of the Middle East peace
process, keeping in view that achieving durable peace and
stability in the Middle East requires solving the
Palestinian issue.
India has ties dating back to early history with
Afghanistan, a country with which we also share bonds of
kinship, culture and religion. We are deeply saddened by
the continued violence and loss of life in that country.
India stands for the unity, independence and territorial
integrity of Afghanistan. We urge all Afghan parties to
resolve their differences through early peaceful dialogue
and negotiations. We support the efforts of the Secretary-
General and his special representative to bring about a
solution in Afghanistan.
The Non-Aligned Movement figures firmly in
India’s world view and constitutes an important plank in
our foreign policy. We remain firmly committed to the
philosophy and values of the Non-Aligned Movement. For
us, non-alignment means independence of thought and
autonomy of choice. It also means working in cooperation
with the largest number of countries. Last year’s non-
aligned summit in Colombia reinforced our faith in the
ability and resilience of the Movement, its responsiveness
to change and its effectiveness in today’s global situation.
India will be privileged to host the next ministerial
conference of the non-aligned countries in New Delhi in
1997.
India is a progressive country charting a balanced
course between economic growth and social justice, and
science and tradition. It is committed to the values of
peace, non-violence, coexistence, pluralism, tolerance and
constructive cooperation. Culturally, India is a bridge
between traditional cultures and emergent trends.
Politically, India will remain anchored in a pluralistic,
liberal democracy that can provide space for all its
constituents and internal interlocutors.
Before I conclude, I am reminded of an ancient Rig
Vedic hymn which reads:
“O citizens of the world!
Live in harmony and concord
Be organized and cooperative
Speak with one voice
And make your resolutions with one Mind.”
May this invocation to harmony, cooperation,
consensus and solidarity continue to guide our
deliberations and actions.
16


﻿Allow
me first, Sir, to congratulate Mr. Razali Ismail on his
unanimous election as President of the General Assembly
at its fifty-first session and to wish him every success. I
would also like to thank his predecessor, Mr. Diogo Freitas
do Amaral, for the outstanding manner in which he carried
out his duties.
The succession of Governments, which is a defining
principle of Israeli democracy, has recently brought to
power a new Government in Israel. A section of the
international community has deemed this democratic Israeli
choice impertinent, suggesting that it would work against
regional peace. In response to this prejudice I would like to
make a simple statement: Israel is united in its quest for
peace. It is not a question of good people and peace-seekers
on one side and mischief-makers and people who reject
peace on the other. In Israel, those on the left and right
converge in their quest for peace, their sensibilities and
differences notwithstanding.
I wish to raise the recent history of the Israeli-Arab
peace process in order to dispel any ambiguity regarding
the practice of peace in Israel and to show that the new
majority cannot be disqualified from efforts to achieve
peace. The peace between Israel and Egypt is a founding
landmark of coexistence between Israelis and Arabs. The
Madrid Conference, to which I had the honour of
contributing, also bears the special stamp of the pioneers of
peace, to whose achievements the new majority in Israel are
the direct heirs.
The firm commitment of the Netanyahu Government
with respect to the Oslo accords is also closely tied to the
peace process, which our immediate neighbours, Egypt and
Jordan, helped to shape. However, my Government’s swift
engagement in the peace process has been minimized,
reduced and distorted. The meetings that the Prime
Minister and the Minister of Defence of the State of Israel
and I have had with the Chairman of the Palestinian
Authority have been met with sarcasm and given only
secondary importance. Those meetings dealt precisely
with the substance and the content of peace. They
initiated the ways and means necessary for the
achievement of peace. They amplified the resonance of
the Oslo accords and extended mutual Israeli-Palestinian
recognition to new sections of society and Israeli political
classes. It is Israel’s determination to reach peace
according to the policies and fundamental guidelines of
the new Government.
On its road to peace, the Government of Israel is
guided by several principles, which I would like to
expound. For us, security is neither an obsession nor a
blind belief. It touches upon our very existence in a
region where, unfortunately, threats and instability still
rage. Security must be the cornerstone in the architecture
of peace. It cannot, under any circumstances, tag along
behind a process in which terrorism and violence have not
yet spoken their last word.
Negotiations themselves, through their joint creative
energies, allow us to control the dangers and drifts. The
battle against terrorism and its infrastructures and its
sources of financing and assistance is not only for us to
fight. We solemnly call upon the United Nations
relentlessly to pursue active cooperation in the struggle
against terrorism and in condemning it unequivocally. It
is imperative to preserve the Israeli-Palestinian peace
process free from violence.
I have just returned from the Washington summit,
held at the initiative of President Clinton. On behalf of
the Government and the people of Israel, I wish, from this
rostrum, to thank the President and the Secretary of State
of the United States for their exemplary contribution to
peace by bringing the parties together and for their
profound commitment to reinvigorating the peace process.
In this respect the role and contribution of the United
States remain of great importance.
On Sunday the Israeli and Palestinian teams will
convene again in an attempt to resolve their differences in
respect of the various agreements. We are responsible to
our people and to our whole region in this matter. We
must therefore display good faith and mutual
understanding in order to fulfil our mission, and to send
out the message of stable peace and lasting security.
12


The Washington summit reconfirmed the principles
and guidelines for the negotiations. I associate myself
wholeheartedly with President Clinton’s statement that face-
to-face negotiations in a constructive atmosphere are the
key to resolving problems. A future free of hostility and the
renunciation of violence: these represent the very basis of
mutual efforts for peace.
The choice is in our hands. Will we opt for
cooperation, progress, real peace and security? Or will we
revert to the dark days of conflict, confrontation and
violence, thereby putting an end to all hope? For its part,
Israel has chosen hope.
Another major principle in our search for peace is the
will of the partners to allow a tangible peace to exist.
Regional cooperation is a critical factor in ensuring peace
and stability. Israel entertains no dreams of economic
hegemony; it wishes to play its fair role in the creation of
regional cooperation. This is a basic principle of
normalization. Peace and normalization are one and
indivisible. Consequently, if we are to follow the logic of
peace and dialogue, we cannot risk having normalization
taken hostage and brought to a halt.
Israel makes no secret that normalization of its
relations with the Arab world must be fully implemented.
This means comprehensive political and economic relations,
and the broadest possible intellectual, cultural and spiritual
acceptance. Some of our neighbours still view Israel as a
body foreign to the region. Normalization must erase
forever the residue of this ideological negation.
Normalization is the indispensable cement for keeping
together the edifice of peace.
One of our immediate goals is the resumption of
negotiations with Syria on the basis of the Madrid
principles, which inaugurated the dialogue between the two
countries. We recognize Syria’s important role in the
establishment of lasting peace in our region. From this
rostrum, we call upon President Al-Assad to resume
negotiations.
As to Lebanon, we have no territorial disputes with
Lebanon. We are committed to its sovereignty. Lebanon
can be fertile ground for the restoration of confidence and
the building of peace.
Egypt and its President, Mr. Hosni Mubarak, are our
partners in peace. They are the authors and actors that have
always been engaged in all stages of the peace process.
Jordan is unquestionably a decisive factor in the
building of peace in our region. A man of peace and
dialogue, His Majesty King Hussein has actively
supported the peace process and has provided a vital
guarantee of continuity. The Washington summit enjoyed
his complete support.
On the long path to peace, the country of Morocco,
the country of my birth and family roots, has always
walked and illuminated the path of Israeli-Arab
reconciliation. The vision displayed by His Majesty King
Hassan II has left its distinctive mark on the entire Arab-
Israeli dialogue. The Moroccan King will continue his
essential role and breathe into peace the remarkable
inspiration of his solidarity.
I would like to pay tribute also to the active support
of Tunisia. Oman, Qatar and, more recently, Mauritania
have all helped to consolidate peace efforts.
The peace process has benefitted from the
considerable support of the co-sponsors, the United States
and Russia, and from the active and positive contribution
of the European Union and Norway and of Powers such
as Japan and Canada.
Once again, I wish solemnly to reaffirm Israel’s
irreversible commitment and determination to pursue the
path of peace.
Since the dawn of history our region has been a
meeting point of diverse civilizations and cultures, a
vibrant wellspring of progress for all of humanity. At the
crossroads of continents and countries, the Middle East
must, in times of peace, discover again the genius of this
place and the richness of its edifying civilizations. Arabs
and Jews must pool their knowledge and wisdom to
regenerate their vocation as the promoters of life and
humanity.
Through international cooperation, Israel is sharing
with young countries from Africa to Asia, from Latin
America to China, its achievements and assets in the
fields of agriculture, health and science.
We hope that the day will come when a regional
security system will be established in the Middle East to
provide a cooperative multilateral response to all security
problems. The advantage of this regional approach is that
it is based on direct negotiations between the States of the
region. The first stage is to build confidence, and
thereafter we must put arms control and disarmament
13


mechanisms into place. For this reason, Israel welcomed the
establishment of the Arms Control and Regional Security
Working Group as part of the multilateral talks. We hope
that in the future this framework will encompass all States
of the Middle East.
Israel’s position is defined by a dual mandate: to set
ambitious objectives, and to pursue them pragmatically and
realistically. After peace and reconciliation have been
established among all the States of the region, Israel will
endeavour to establish in the Middle East a zone free of
chemical, biological and nuclear weapons as well as
ballistic missiles. This demilitarization will be subjected to
rigorous verification.
Negotiations to establish such a zone will commence
following the signing of bilateral peace accords between
Israel and all the countries of the region. In the meantime
Israel will implement confidence-building measures that
will increase openness and transparency and, thereby, make
a contribution to easing tensions and preventing all armed
conflict.
We generally prefer regional security arrangements.
However, Israel is in favour of the implementation of
certain aspects of international mechanisms for arms control
and disarmament where appropriate. Accordingly, Israel
signed the Convention on conventional weapons and
adopted a moratorium on the manufacture and export of
anti-personnel landmines. It has also signed the Treaty
against the use of chemical weapons and now the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. Israel will
consider ratification of that Treaty depending upon
developments in the region, particularly the adoption of that
Treaty by the major countries.
Israel has thus demonstrated its determination to be
involved, whenever possible, in the efforts of the
international community to prevent the spread of
conventional and non-conventional weapons.
Israel strongly desires to be an active and fully-fledged
member of the family of nations represented in this
Organization. We note with regret and deep disappointment
that the question of our membership in a regional group has
still not been resolved. Israel is thus deprived of the right
available to all States Members of the United Nations to
participate on an equal footing in all its activities. This
impairs the principle of equality among sovereign nations
under the Charter of the United Nations. I hope that this
injustice will be rectified and that Israel will finally be able
to act within this Organization on the same footing as all
other Member States.
It is with the subject of Jerusalem, whose very name
is invoked in so many prayers for peace, that I wish to
conclude. Jerusalem is the cradle of the three great
religions. We reaffirm this status daily by respecting and
ensuring total freedom of worship and spiritual expression
for all believers. It is an entirely shared religious reality
to which Israel has made a profound contribution.
Jerusalem, the horizon of our dreams and prayers,
has throughout our exile and dispersions constituted the
summit of our collective being. Capital of Israel, both in
ancient and modern times, never has Jerusalem been the
capital of any country other than Israel.
Rarely if ever has any sovereign State been denied
the right to freely determine its capital. Israel, the people
of peace restored to sovereignty after 2,000 years of exile,
has returned to the city of peace, Yerushalayim:
Jerusalem. Thereby it demonstrates its unswerving
devotion to its ancestral capital to renew its psalm of
peace: “Pray for the peace of Jerusalem”. We shall
tirelessly dedicate all our efforts to that search for peace.





﻿It gives me particular
pleasure to address the General Assembly at a session of
over which Malaysia has been elected to preside. Our two
countries are good friends, and Ambassador Razali is
personally known to and respected by us all. New Zealand
looks forward to a productive session under his leadership.
In just two weeks New Zealanders face a general
election. There are many subjects over which the various
political parties differ, but one thing remains quite clear: the
support of New Zealanders for the United Nations and the
rule of international law embodied in it.
For New Zealand, as for many other countries
represented here today — and especially smaller
countries — the primary purpose of the United Nations
remains to provide for a system of collective security. It
brings the nations of the world together in a grand coalition
to keep the peace, to help eliminate weapons of mass
destruction, to uphold human rights, to encourage good
governance, to protect the environment and to promote
economic and social development, including by
supporting the role of women.
Together, these activities, along with national and
regional initiatives, provide the underpinnings of the
system of collective security that we want to leave for our
children.
For New Zealanders, our confidence in the United
Nations was reaffirmed when, two weeks ago, the General
Assembly adopted the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty. It gave me much satisfaction to sign the Treaty
earlier today on behalf of the Government and the people
of New Zealand. Agreement on a test ban has been a
New Zealand objective for more than three decades and
one we promoted in this Assembly, together with
Australia and Mexico. It reflects deeply held convictions
on the part of all New Zealanders.
New Zealand has argued, and will continue to argue,
for a world without nuclear weapons. Our belief that
these weapons of mass destruction can and should be
eliminated has been reinforced by the experiences of our
region as a testing ground for nuclear weapons. I am glad
to say it is an era now happily behind us.
For New Zealand, the Treaty represents first of all
an end to nuclear testing in our region and worldwide.
But even more, it puts real obstacles in the way of any
State seeking to refine or develop a nuclear arsenal. We


have taken a significant step on the way to eliminating
nuclear weapons entirely. Now, however, we must look
ahead.
The International Court of Justice, in its recent
Advisory Opinion on the legality of the use or threat of use
of nuclear weapons, set out our obligation in this regard:
the obligation to pursue in good faith and to bring to a
conclusion negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament.
New Zealand believes that in 1997 all States, including
nuclear-weapon States, should pursue negotiations on a
phased programme of nuclear disarmament, with the
ultimate goals of the complete elimination of nuclear
weapons and a treaty on general and complete disarmament
under strict and effective international control.
We are better placed to make our contribution to such
negotiations because of the recent decision of the
Conference on Disarmament to admit New Zealand and 22
other countries as full members. As a reflection of the
importance we attach to its ongoing work, my Government
has now decided to appoint a full-time Disarmament
Ambassador to the Conference in Geneva.
Further steps towards a nuclear-free world are
recommended in the report of the Canberra Commission on
the Elimination of Nuclear Weapons, released last month.
We hope that report will energize discussions at the
national level, particularly in the nuclear-weapon States.
The aspirations of many States to be free of nuclear
weapons have found expression in the establishment of
what are now four nuclear-weapon-free zones. Taken
together, the four relevant treaties have the potential to
cover some 114 nations and 1.7 billion people. My
Government has given considerable thought to ways in
which cooperation between nuclear-weapon-free zones can
be advanced. We are working with other Governments on
a draft resolution to be submitted to the Assembly at this
session, and New Zealand hopes it will receive wide
support.
The disarmament arena is only one where the United
Nations must continue to address serious challenges to our
collective security. When my Government took office in
October 1990, the international community faced the
challenge presented by Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait. In the
heart of Europe, Yugoslavia was on the path to political
disintegration. Few of us imagined then, however, the
nightmare of Bosnia, the genocide to come in Rwanda or
the mass starvation and anarchy in Somalia. In response,
during our term on the Security Council in 1993 and 1994,
a record 75,000 United Nations peacekeepers were
deployed around the world, and Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait
was robustly countered by coalition action authorized by
the Security Council. New Zealand was part of that
coalition and is part of the current efforts to ensure that
Iraq complies with subsequent Council decisions. Recent
events show that we still need to be vigilant. Iraq must
recognize that there are limits to what the international
community will tolerate.
New Zealanders also serve in the former Yugoslavia
where, while the implementation of the Dayton accords
lies primarily with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO), the United Nations continues to play an
important role. Similarly, our personnel serve in Angola
and the Middle East.
New Zealanders are staunch supporters of the United
Nations role in international peacekeeping, despite the fact
that the overall record through the first half of this decade
has been mixed. There were successes, such as Cambodia,
Mozambique and El Salvador, and there were the
disappointments and bitter frustrations of Bosnia, Somalia
and Rwanda. I hesitate to call those operations failures.
To me, that would be to overlook the positive things they
achieved in extremely difficult circumstances and the
contributions made by so many dedicated and able people.
Those operations will be failures only if we fail to learn
from them. I think we have learned.
We have learned that, first, the United Nations must
be given the resources required to do the job. Secondly,
the Organization must be careful about mixing
enforcement tasks with peacekeeping, unless our
peacekeepers are appropriately configured from the outset
for the higher level of threat.
Thirdly, the Security Council should be wary of
adopting resolutions to which the Organization cannot
give effect. This creates a very corrosive credibility
problem.
My Government also considers that the United
Nations must continue its efforts to develop a capacity to
respond more rapidly. We commend the proposal to
establish a rapidly deployable operational headquarters
team and, indeed, have offered to contribute a highly
experienced officer to it.
Demining remains an important focus for New
Zealand. Mines pose an unacceptable threat to
peacekeeping operations and are a longer-term
2


humanitarian and development challenge. The United
Nations must make every effort to ensure that the necessary
resources are available for demining activities.
We have more than doubled our annual instalment to
the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Assistance in
Mine Clearance. This is in addition to our continuing
contribution of expertise in demining in Cambodia,
Mozambique and Angola, as well as here at United Nations
Headquarters.
Finally, we do not think the United Nations can write
itself out of the script when operations involving a potential
enforcement dimension are contemplated. If it did so, it
could quickly become irrelevant. The threats to international
peace and security in the future are likely to be every bit as
difficult as those of the recent past. The United Nations will
need to be able to respond effectively, not simply as a
rubber stamp for great-Power actions.
The tragic events of recent days in the West Bank and
Gaza show that peace there remains elusive. New Zealand
calls upon all parties to desist from actions that might derail
the Middle East peace process. Painstaking efforts have
gone into that process, and it offers a real hope for a long-
term solution to the problems that have bedeviled that
region. It must be supported and not jeopardized.
Human rights are the foundation of freedom and
justice, and the achievement of universal respect for human
rights is an essential prerequisite for international peace and
security.
In New Zealand we work hard to ensure that our own
house is in order. We are committed to ensuring that the
rights elaborated in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, the Covenants and other core human rights
instruments are a living reality for all New Zealanders, and
we are prepared to speak out when we see human rights
being violated in other parts of the world. At its heart, our
international human rights policy is geared to finding
tangible ways of protecting and promoting human rights
and good government.
In the Asia-Pacific region we are pleased by the
progress the United Nations is making in nurturing human
rights frameworks. We are also encouraged by the new
levels of cooperation and interaction being achieved by the
human rights commissions of the region.
New Zealand also sees a need to support individual
countries, international and regional organizations and non-
governmental organizations in their work to improve
human rights and the quality of governance. To this end
the Minister for Foreign Affairs has today announced the
establishment of an international good-government
programme. This new programme will markedly expand
our ability to support good government and human rights
capacity-building activities. It will work in tandem with
the existing Commonwealth Good Government Fund.
Consistent with United Nations principles, New
Zealand has also participated actively in the Action Group
of Commonwealth Ministers for the promotion of
principles of good governance established at the
Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting at Harare
in 1991 and reaffirmed at its Auckland meeting in 1995.
For my own part, I have been privileged to represent New
Zealand at several of the Action Group’s meetings and
during its recent mission to Gambia.
Such programmes, with the interlinked goals of
social progress and economic development, do not come
cheaply. The money spent on United Nations relief and
development greatly surpasses that spent on peacekeeping,
and so it should.
At the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro in 1992 it
was recognized that substantial new and additional
funding would be required for sustainable development
and the implementation of Agenda 21, the programme of
action that will take us into the next century.
I am pleased to be able to say that by next year New
Zealand will have increased its official development
assistance by almost one third since Rio. There will be a
24 per cent increase in our funding for United Nations
development agencies this year.
1997 will see the five-year review of Agenda 21. At
the special session of the General Assembly next June,
one important task will be to assess the effectiveness of
the bodies and institutions that have been established to
advance the aims set out in Agenda 21. The issues are
many, and all are important. But we need to focus efforts
and produce real results.
In this regard, the Commission on Sustainable
Development should have a strengthened role. It should
be the forum in which States can work to streamline the
environment-and-sustainable- development agenda.
All these challenges facing this unique Organization,
and our regard for it, highlight of course the urgent need
3


for reform. In particular, the Security Council must be
made more representative of the Organization’s membership
as it is today, not as it was 50 years ago. Its decision-
making procedures must be brought up to date.
Finding a sustainable basis for the financing of the
Organization remains long overdue. New Zealand has
dedicated itself to reform of both the Secretariat and the
intergovernmental machinery, not least through our
vigorous commitment to the work of the Open-ended High-
level Working Group on the Strengthening of the United
Nations System. The report of that group provides a
blueprint for action during this session. We also support the
Efficiency Board, and have made available to it the services
of a New Zealand expert in public-service restructuring.
We believe that New Zealand’s record, not only as a
prompt contributor of assessments, but also as a country
that has demonstrated its commitment to financial reform,
places it in a good position to make an effective
contribution to the work of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, in which we are
seeking membership at this year’s session of the General
Assembly.
The drive for reform of the United Nations system to
make it an effective instrument of the international
community for the next 50 years means no part of it can
remain immune from scrutiny.
A good deal of attention has been focused on the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the Secretariat.
We believe there is also scope for increasing the
effectiveness of the International Court of Justice. It is 50
years since the ICJ was established as the principal United
Nations judicial organ. To mark this important milestone in
the international rule of law, we should now finally
schedule a conference to adopt the statute for the
international criminal court. The creation of a permanent
court that will bring justice to victims of genocide, crimes
against humanity, war crimes and other serious international
crimes is surely a priority for us all.
I am grateful to have had this opportunity to reaffirm
New Zealand’s commitment to this Organization, and to
multilateralism, as the means for building a better world.






﻿The agenda of the General Assembly at
the current session reflects all the complexity of the stage
mankind is now going through, the essence of which is
the transition from bloc confrontation to multipolarity,
economic interdependence and the democratization of
international relations.
I would like to emphasize that during the past year
Russia made its contribution to the consolidation of this
very trend. At the domestic level, this means an
uncompromising continuation of the process of reforming
society. The results of the recent presidential elections in
our country have convincingly proved that Russia has
decisively embarked on the road to the future. The
majority of Russians voted for the continuation of
economic reform, for a State of law and for a policy of
openness and cooperation.
In our relations with the other Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) countries, we resolutely oppose
both the idea of restoring the Soviet Union, an idea based
on the denial of the sovereignty of the Commonwealth
States, and narrow-minded national isolationism. We
stand for the voluntary integration and unification of the
13


members of the Commonwealth and hold that it should not
be isolated from the rest of the world. We wish to ensure,
and we shall ensure, that the CIS will become an important
centre of world economic development and international
stability.
On a wider international plane, Russia is pursuing a
policy aimed at establishing a new world order firmly based
on the equality of all States, justice and universal security.
However, the establishment of such a world order is a slow
process, influenced by both objective and subjective factors.
It is only natural that the end of the cold war provided a
starting point for the transition to achieving a stable and
predictable peace at the global level.
But zones of regional conflict have expanded
drastically. The upsurge of terrorism has caused universal
shock, and the threat of proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction is emerging. The rejection of ideological,
military-force confrontation, brought about by the end of
the cold war, clearly proved insufficient to neutralize all
these dangers and risks.
Let us confess, at least to ourselves, that we will not
succeed here unless, first and foremost, we overcome the
inertia of the political mentality. Unfortunately, the
stereotypes that took root in the minds of several
generations of statesmen during the 40 years of the cold
war have not yet disappeared along with the dismantling of
strategic missiles and the destruction of thousands of tanks.
In this connection, I would like to single out three
conditions for the transformation of international relations
during the post-cold-war period.
First, we should see to it that the old fronts of bloc
confrontation are not replaced with new lines of division.
That is precisely why we accept neither the idea of the
expansion of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) military infrastructure to the area of the now
defunct Warsaw Treaty nor the efforts to make that alliance
the axis of a new European system. The enormous
possibilities for economic cooperation and the spiritual
enrichment of all the peoples of the continent can be
realized only through the creation of a genuinely
all-European system of international relations. The
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Lisbon summit must be an important stage in the
construction of such a Europe.
It is important to stress in general that the logic of a
multipolar world in the twenty-first century should differ
qualitatively from the schemes outlined by Metternich and
Bismarck. The way towards the establishment of a system
of comprehensive security is through learning the skills of
equal partnership between the various “poles”, rather than
through the revival of reflexes of rivalry and of balance
of power.
The threat of new lines of division is appearing not
only in Europe, but elsewhere. The understandable
intolerance of the extremism of certain Islamic groups and
factions must not develop into a categorization of the
Muslim world at large as an enemy of modern
civilization. This is probably one of the pressing
requirements of our day.
Russia advocates resolute opposition to extremist and
terrorist forces. They are especially dangerous when they
enjoy State support, and no effort should be spared to
prevent any State from rendering such support. This
cannot be justified. I believe it is time a universal
convention, covering all States without exception, were
elaborated within the United Nations, denying political
asylum anywhere to persons engaged in terrorist
activities. However, no sanctions should be used as a
means to punish peoples or as an instrument to overthrow
Governments. It is far more effective to offer prospects
for a better future to those who renounce extremism and
accept the norms of conduct by the world community.
The second condition for achieving a durable peace
is the emancipation from a mentality based on concepts
of leaders and followers. Such a mentality is fuelled by
illusions that some countries emerged from the cold war
as victors, and others as the vanquished. But this is not
the case. Peoples on both sides of the Iron Curtain jointly
strove to rid themselves of the policy of confrontation.
Meanwhile, the mentality based on leaders and followers
paves the way directly towards the establishment of a
unipolar world. Such a world-order model is unacceptable
today to the overwhelming majority of the international
community.
Finally, the third condition for the successful
movement towards stable peace lies in the coordinated
activities of the international community. Today, one of
the most important tasks is the settlement of regional and
local conflicts. In this regard, significant progress has
been achieved recently. Peace agreements are being
implemented in Bosnia. Initial important agreements have
been achieved for a durable peace in the Middle East. We
have managed to secure ceasefires in Transdniester,
Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Nagorny Karabakh. The
situation has improved somewhat in the conflict zones on
14


the African continent and in Latin America. But as yet no
breakthrough to a durable peace has been achieved in any
of these hotbeds of tension.
The future of the Middle East is a cause for grave
concern. Russia — one of the sponsors of the peace
process — cannot accept the sacrifice to tactical
considerations and internal political manoeuvres of the first
fruits of the peace negotiations, which were won at such a
great cost. The implementation of the Agreements reached
is the only realistic basis for maintaining the peace process.
The only possible way forward is to advance through
negotiation on the basis of the principle of “land for peace”,
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), as
well as resolution 425 (1978), which deals with Lebanon.
It should be clear that the danger of reverting to
confrontation becomes greater as the artificial pause in the
peace process continues. When negotiators are silent, lethal
weapons begin to awake.
We appreciate the peacemaking efforts of the United
States of America, the European Union, France, Egypt and
other members of the international community and we
support an even closer partnership in peacemaking. That is
the most effective way to promote peace-building in the
Middle East.
The Bosnian settlement has entered a new and crucial
stage since the elections of 14 September. The prospects for
a lasting peace have become greater, but the risk of slipping
into a new spiral of hostility and confrontation remains. I
call upon all the Bosnian parties to take full advantage of
the chance for peace created by the international
community. At the same time, the United Nations, the
OSCE, members of the Contact Group and the High
Representative should immediately take a just and balanced
approach to resolving outstanding problems. Assistance for
the social and economic reconstruction of Bosnia and
Herzegovina should be intensified considerably and
conditions created for the return of refugees.
The time has also come to look beyond the horizon of
the Paris agreements. There would seem to be a need for a
large-scale and prolonged civilian peacemaking operation in
which the United Nations and its specialized agencies will
play an important role. The international military and police
presence, to which Russia contributes, should remain a
factor in the peace process for a given period after
December 1996.
The lifting of sanctions against the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and the Bosnian
Serbs is an indispensable condition for a successful peace
in the former Yugoslavia. I hope that, in the near future,
a Yugoslav delegation will take its place in this Hall, as
it has at the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe.
The programme of disarmament, security and
stability for the twenty-first century should become one of
the major axes of transition period strategy. The adoption
of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty is one
huge step in this direction. Russia has just signed the
Treaty and we believe that it is of fundamental
importance for all countries with nuclear capability to
accede to it. However, it should clearly be understood that
testing by any country of a nuclear explosive device
before the Treaty enters into force will radically change
the international situation and greatly prejudice the Treaty
itself, and may compel many countries to revise their
attitude to it.
I should like to draw the attention of the Treaty’s
opponents to the fact that it will not only contribute to the
promotion of nuclear non-proliferation, but will
objectively stimulate a gradual transition to nuclear
disarmament on a multilateral basis. That is the purpose
of President Yeltsin’s proposal to conclude a treaty on
nuclear security and stability with the participation of all
the nuclear Powers. We invite interested States to begin
exchanging views on the issue. Our suggestion that
nuclear arsenals be located only on the territories of the
nuclear Powers in question remains current.
The strengthening of the non-proliferation regime for
weapons of mass destruction depends directly upon
reliable prevention of the illicit traffic in fissile materials.
The Moscow Summit of the Eight on Nuclear Safety and
Security, convened as a result of a Russian initiative,
contributed significantly to a solution of this problem. I
call on all United Nations Member States to become
involved in the implementation of the Moscow
agreements.
The rights of an individual should occupy a central
place in any new concept of international security.
Strengthening the international human-rights protection
mechanism could ensure the observance of these rights.
Its oversight and preventive functions should be
consolidated and made more practical. However,
legitimate efforts to ensure respect for human rights
cannot serve political purposes. It is too delicate an area
to be invaded by political speculation and objectives.
15


My comments apply fully to the protection of the
rights of national minorities. The relevance of this problem
is evident in today’s world. The complexity of the
situation — let us be frank — requires a link between the
protection of the rights of national minorities and
observance of the principle of the territorial integrity of
States. Russia is directing its policy at precisely such a link.
My comments also apply to the Baltic States. While
recognizing the sovereignty of those countries and their
territorial integrity, Russia cannot remain indifferent to the
discriminatory practices pursued against the
Russian-speaking populations in Estonia and Latvia. While
acknowledging measures that have already been taken to
improve the situation, we believe that the United Nations
and other international organizations should intensify and
systematize their work for the protection of the rights of
national minorities.
How do we implement this strategy for creating a new
world order? Despite the importance of bilateral relations
and successful regional organizations, the United Nations
remains the principal mechanism capable of ensuring the
transition from a bipolar and confrontational world to a
multipolar and democratic one. In such circumstances, the
significance of the United Nations as a centre for
coordinating the actions of States is increasing. During the
formation of a multipolar system, the United Nations is
called upon to serve as a kind of safety net, minimizing the
destructive effects of the changes and directing them
towards democratic evolution.
The major task of the United Nations remains the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Furthermore, the principal tools available to the
Organization must be political and diplomatic. I remind the
Assembly of this fact because, during the past few years
within the United Nations, a “sanctions syndrome” has
begun to emerge: a desire to apply sanctions and other
coercive measures more broadly and actively, sometimes
ignoring existing political and diplomatic avenues. We are
convinced that the United Nations should take such
measures only in exceptional cases, after all other means
have been genuinely exhausted.
On the whole, there is a need to modernize the United
Nations sanctions mechanisms. Today, for example, no
specific procedure is provided for lifting sanctions, and, as
experience has demonstrated, this is extremely important.
The humanitarian damage caused by sanctions and the
damage to third countries should be minimized.
It is extremely important to emphasize that the
United Nations must be maintained as the sole
Organization that can authorize the use of force. Any
actions of that nature taken in circumvention of the
Security Council must be totally precluded.
The United Nations can and must work purposefully
towards establishing a new global legal framework. To
give impetus to such work Russia has proposed the
holding in 1999 of a third peace conference. This idea
already has the support of a significant number of States.
I believe that the time has come to discuss this initiative
in a constructive and substantive manner.
Past experience shows the need for new approaches
by the United Nations to peacekeeping operations. We
can already discern a pyramid regulating the relations of
the United Nations with regional organizations. Without
the development of such relations the United Nations may
not be able to withstand the burden of peacemaking
actions. I refer specifically to a pyramid, because it is of
fundamental importance to do no harm to the Security
Council, which bears the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace.
We are counting on significantly more attention
being paid by the United Nations to conflicts in the area
of the Commonwealth of Independent States. So far, the
major role in this respect has been played by Russia and
its Commonwealth partners.
In view of present circumstances, Russia calls on the
United Nations to address the Afghan conflict. In that
multinational and long-suffering country, a truly critical
situation has arisen, and we have to do everything
possible to prevent the country from disintegrating. The
Afghan tragedy, like the endless series of internal
conflicts in Rwanda and Liberia, is the most convincing
argument for the development of a United Nations policy
of national reconciliation diplomacy.
To cope with all these tasks, the United Nations
itself must be updated and adapted to these new
conditions. Reform is long overdue, and it is not a single
measure that is required but a process that encompasses
the entire United Nations system. Reform of the United
Nations requires clearly defined goals: first, that it carry
out its activities in a timely manner; and secondly, that its
structure be optimized in order to enhance the
effectiveness of the Organization.
16


A great deal has already been done to implement
reform. The Secretary-General has made a considerable
contribution to these efforts, and Russia supports the
continuation of this difficult and protracted effort.
It is a well-established tradition to conclude statements
before this Assembly by saying that the current session
must play a special role in strengthening peace and that
peoples are expecting us to make decisions. I am confident
that this session of the General Assembly will live up to the
expectations of Governments and the hopes of peoples: that
all of us will take a new step in humankind’s difficult
transition towards a world united in its diversity, a world
that is open to universal economic and spiritual
development, a world that promises security and stability —
a world in which States cooperate on an equal footing. Let
us work together for the sake of this goal.





﻿Three years ago I had the honour
of being the first American President born after the
founding of the United Nations to address the General
Assembly. In its fifty-first year, the United Nations has not
yet realized all its founders’ aspirations. But the ideals of
the United Nations Charter — peace, freedom, tolerance
and prosperity — now touch more people in more nations
than ever before.
Now we find ourselves at a turning point in history
when the blocs and barriers that long defined the world are
giving way to an age of remarkable possibility — a time
when more of our children and more nations will be able to
live out their dreams than ever before. But this is also an
age of new threats — threats from terrorists, from rogue
States that support them, threats from ethnic, religious,
racial and tribal hatreds, threats from international
criminals and drug traffickers — all of whom will be
more dangerous if they gain access to weapons of mass
destruction.
The challenge before us, plainly, is twofold: to seize
the new opportunities for more people to enjoy peace and
freedom, security and prosperity and to move strongly
and swiftly against the dangers that change has produced.
This week and in this place, we take a giant step
forward. By overwhelming global consensus, we will
make a solemn commitment to end all nuclear tests for all
time.
Before entering this Hall, I had the great honour to
be the first leader to sign the Comprehensive Test-Ban
Treaty (CTBT). I did so, with some pride, with this pen,
for this pen is the very one that President Kennedy used
to help bring the limited test-ban Treaty to life 33 years
ago.
This Comprehensive Test-Ban Treaty will help
prevent the nuclear Powers from developing more
advanced and more dangerous weapons. It will limit the
ability of other States to acquire such devices themselves.
It points us towards a century in which the roles and risks
of nuclear weapons can be further reduced and ultimately
eliminated.
I want to thank all those who helped bring us to this
day, especially the Chairman of the comprehensive test-


ban negotiating Committee, Netherlands Ambassador
Ramaker, and the Government of Australia, which took the
lead at the United Nations.
I thank the Secretary-General for the remarks he made
this morning in establishing the criteria and standards in
support of the United Nations as the depository of the
Treaty.
The signatures of the world’s declared nuclear
Powers — the United States, China, France, Russia and the
United Kingdom — along with those of the vast majority
of its nations, will immediately create an international norm
against nuclear testing even before the Treaty formally
enters into force.
The CTBT is the shared work of hard negotiation.
Some have complained that it does not mandate total
nuclear disarmament by a date certain. I would say to them:
“Do not forsake the benefits of this achievement by
ignoring the tremendous progress we have already made
towards that goal.” Today there are no Russian missiles
pointed at America and no American missiles pointed at
Russia.
Through the START Treaties we are cutting our
nuclear arsenals by two thirds. Ukraine, Belarus and
Kazakstan are giving up the nuclear weapons left on their
land after the Soviet Union dissolved.
We are working with the newly independent States to
improve security at nuclear facilities and to convert nuclear
weapons to peaceful uses.
The United States and other nuclear-weapon States
have embraced the South Pacific and African nuclear-free
zones. Now half the world’s land area is nuclear free by
international agreement. And the world community
extended indefinitely the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
Yet some of the very changes that had made this
progress possible have also created new risks. The breakup
of the Soviet Union left nuclear materials dispersed
throughout the newly independent States. As barriers have
come down around the world the danger of nuclear
smuggling has gone up. So even as we reduce the global
stockpiles of weapons of mass destruction, we must also
reduce the danger that lethal materials could wind up in the
wrong hands, while developing effective defences for our
people if that should happen.
The United States has six priority goals to further lift
the threat of nuclear weapons destruction and the threat of
weapons of mass destruction, and to limit their dangerous
spread.
First, we must protect our people from chemical
attack and make it harder for rogue States and terrorists
to brandish poison gas by bringing the chemical weapons
Convention into force as soon as possible. I thank the
nations here that have ratified the chemical weapons
Convention. I deeply regret that the United States Senate
has not yet voted on the Convention, but I want to assure
you and people throughout the world that I will not let
this treaty die, and we will join the ranks of nation
determined to prevent the spread of chemical weapons.
Secondly, we must reduce the risk that an outlaw
State or organization could build a nuclear device by
negotiating a treaty to freeze the production of fissile
materials for use in nuclear weapons. The Conference on
Disarmament should take up this challenge immediately.
The United States, Russia, France and the United
Kingdom already have halted production of fissile
materials for weapons. I urge other nations to end the
unsafeguarded production of these materials pending
completion of the treaty.
Thirdly, we must continue to reduce our nuclear
arsenals. When Russia ratifies START II, President
Yeltsin and I are all ready to discuss the possibilities of
further cuts, as well as limiting and monitoring nuclear
warheads and materials. This will help make deep
reductions irreversible.
Fourthly, we must reinforce our efforts against the
spread of nuclear weapons by strengthening the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). We
should give the International Atomic Energy Agency a
stronger role and sharper tools for conducting worldwide
inspections. Our law enforcement and customs officials
should cooperate more in the fight against nuclear
smuggling. And I urge all nations that have not signed the
NPT to do so without delay.
Fifthly, we must better protect our people from those
who would use disease as a weapon of war, by giving the
biological weapons Convention the means to strengthen
compliance, including on-site investigations when we
believe such weapons may have been used or when
suspicious outbreaks of disease occur. We should aim to
complete this task by 1998.
2

Finally, we must end the carnage caused by
anti-personnel landmines, the hidden killers that murder and
maim more than 25,000 people a year. In May, I announced
a series of actions the United States would take towards
this goal. Today, I renew my appeal for the swift
negotiation of a worldwide ban on the use, stockpiling,
production, and transfer of anti-personnel landmines. Our
children deserve to walk the Earth in safety.
Thirty-three years ago, at the height of the cold war,
President Kennedy spoke at American University in
Washington. Peace was the topic of his address, but not an
abstract ideal of peace. Instead, he urged us to focus on
“a more practical, attainable peace — based not on a
sudden revolution in human nature but on a gradual
evolution in human institutions — on a series of
concrete actions and effective agreements which are in
the interests of all concerned.”
It was in that same speech that he announced that talks
would shortly begin in Moscow on a comprehensive test-
ban treaty.
President Kennedy’s vision exceeded the possibilities
of his time, but his words speak to us still. As we sign our
names to the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty —
the longest-sought, hardest-fought prize in arms control
history — let us summon the confidence of earlier pioneers
and set our sights on the challenges of the new century.
Over the past three years we have moved in the right
direction in meeting those challenges. In Bosnia, where the
war is over and where just 10 days ago its people went to
the polls in peace, we have moved in the right direction.
Now we must help Bosnia build a unified, democratic, and
peaceful future.
In Haiti, where the dictators are gone, democracy is
back and the exodus of refugees has ended, we have move
in the right direction. Now we must help the Haitian people
seize the full benefits of freedom and forge a more
prosperous future. In the Middle East and in Northern
Ireland, there is progress towards lasting peace, and we are
moving in the right direction. Now we must support
continued progress between Israel and Palestinians, and we
must broaden the circle of peace to include more of Israel’s
neighbours. We must help to give the children of Belfast
the chance to live out normal lives.
In the fact that democracy, open markets and peace
are taking hold around the world, we are moving in the
right direction. Here in the Americas, every nation but
one has raised freedom’s flag. In Central Europe, in
Russia, Ukraine and the other new independent States, the
forces of reform have earned all our respect and will
continue to have the support of the United States. Now
we must begin to welcome Europe’s new democracies
into the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO),
strengthen NATO’s partnership with Russia and build a
secure and undivided Europe.
In Asia, South Korea, Japan, China and America
working together persuaded North Korea to freeze its
nuclear programme under international monitoring. Now,
in the wake of provocative actions by North Korea, we
must pursue a permanent peace for all the Korean people.
Our planet is safer because of our common efforts to
close Chernobyl, to address the challenges of climate
change, to protect the world’s forests and oceans. Now
we must uphold our duty as custodians of our
environment so that our children will inherit an even
healthier planet.
All of us must continue our historic efforts to build
a better, more global trading system for the twenty-first
century. We have made remarkable progress, but there is
more to do in opening markets, in creating millions of
new jobs for all our people.
In this time of challenge and change, the United
Nations is more important than ever before, because our
world is more interdependent than ever before. Most
Americans know this. Unfortunately, some Americans, in
their longing to be free of the world’s problems, and
perhaps to focus more on our own problems, ignore what
the United Nations has done, ignore the benefits of
cooperation. They ignore our own interdependence with
all of you in charting a better future. They ignore all that
the United Nations is doing to lift the lives of millions by
preserving the peace, vaccinating children, caring for
refugees, sharing the blessings of progress around the
world. They have made it difficult for the United States
to meet its obligations to the United Nations. But let me
reassure all of you: the vast majority of Americans
support the United Nations, not only because it reflects
our own ideals, but because it reinforces our interests. We
must continue to work to manifest the support that our
people feel. For the fifty-first year in a row, the United
States will be the largest financial contributor to the
United Nations. We are paying our dues, and I am
committed to paying off our accumulated obligations.
However, we also support the process of reform, which
has done great work in reforming and streamlining the
3


bureaucracy and reining in the budget, and it should
continue.
We also believe that all of us — the nations of the
world working together — must do more to fight terrorism.
Last year I asked the nations assembled here to commit to
a goal of zero tolerance for aggression, terrorism and
lawless behaviour. Frankly, we have not done that yet. Real
zero tolerance means giving no aid and no quarter to
terrorists who slaughter the innocent and drug traffickers
who poison our children, and doing everything we can to
prevent weapons of mass destruction from falling into the
wrong hands. Real zero tolerance requires us to isolate
States that refuse to play by the rules we have all accepted
for civilized behaviour. As long as Iraq threatens its
neighbours and its people, as long as Iran supports and
protects terrorists, as long as Libya refuses to give up the
people who blew up Pan Am 103, they should not become
full members of the family of nations.
The United States is pursuing a three-part strategy
against terrorists: abroad, by working more closely than
ever with like-minded nations; at home by giving our law
enforcement the toughest counter-terrorism tools available,
and by doing all we can to make our airports and the
aeroplanes that link us all together even safer. I have
requested more than $1 billion from our Congress to meet
these commitments, and we are implementing the United
States Vice President's aviation security plan to make those
travelling to, from and within the United States more
secure.
There are other steps we must take together. Last year,
I urged that together we crack down on money laundering
and front companies, shut down gray markets for guns,
explosives and false documents, open more law
enforcement centres around the world and strengthen
safeguards on lethal materials. In each of these areas we
have made progress, through the United Nations, at the
Summit of Peacemakers in Sharm el-Sheikh, at the Paris
terrorism conference and individually.
Now we should adopt the declaration on crime and
public security I proposed last year. It includes a no-
sanctuary pledge, so that we can say with one voice to the
terrorists, criminals and drug traffickers: “You have no
place to run, no place to hide.” I call on every Member to
ratify 11 international conventions that would help prevent
and punish terrorism and to criminalize the use of
explosives in terrorist attacks.
To every nation whose children fall prey to
drugs and every nation that makes those drugs: we must
do more to reduce demand and to take illegal drugs off
the market and off the streets. The United States will do
its part. Next week, I will target more than $100-million
worth of defence equipment, services and training to
Mexico, Colombia and other South American and
Caribbean countries.
These resources will help our friends stop the flow
of drugs at the source. Now I ask every nation that
exports the chemicals needed to make illicit drugs to
create an informal group whose members will work to
deny these chemicals to drug producers. We must not let
more drugs darken the dawn of the next century.
Our duty to fight all these forces of destruction is
directly linked to our efforts to reduce the threat of
weapons of mass destruction. We all know we are not
immune from this. We saw it when our friends in Japan
were subject to the murderous power of a small vial of
sarin gas unleashed in the Tokyo subway. We know a
small lump of plutonium is enough to build a nuclear
bomb. We know that more dangerous people have access
to materials of mass destruction because of the rapid
movement and open borders of this age. The quest to
eliminate these problems from the world’s arsenals and to
stop them from spreading has taken on a new and
powerful urgency for all of us.
So let us strengthen our determination to fight the
rogue States, the terrorists and the criminals who menace
our safety, our way of life and the potential of our
children in the twenty-first century. Let us recommit
ourselves to prevent them from acquiring weapons of
mass destruction. Let us work harder than ever to lift the
nuclear backdrop that has darkened the world’s stage for
too long now. Let us make these solemn tasks our
common obligation, our common commitment; if we do,
then together we will enter the twenty-first century
marching towards a better, safer world — the very better,
safer world the United Nations has sought to build for 51
years.




﻿I should like first to extend
warm congratulations to Mr. Razali Ismail on his election
to the presidency of the General Assembly at its fifty-first
session. We have no doubt that the session will benefit
from his known skills as he discharges his responsibilities.
I should also like to commend Mr. Diogo Freitas
do Amaral for the excellent work done during his term of
office.
I should also like to express to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, our continued confidence in his
guidance of the Organization.
Allow me at the outset of this, my first opportunity to
speak before the General Assembly, to express the deep
gratitude and appreciation of the people and Government of
South Africa for the decision taken by the Assembly at the
fiftieth session to relieve the new democratic Government
of South Africa of the burden of the contribution to the
United Nations budget accumulated over the period of two
decades when the apartheid regime was excluded from
participating in the work of the General Assembly. We
recognize that that action involved considerable sacrifice,
both for the United Nations and for its Member States, and
that it was also consistent with the historic commitment of
support for our struggle for democracy.
South Africa remains committed to achieving a world
free of all weapons of mass destruction and to addressing
the issue of the proliferation of conventional weapons. We
therefore welcome the adoption of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT), which we signed
yesterday.
Our support for the CTBT as an instrument of
disarmament and non-proliferation is based upon the view
that this Treaty is an integral part of a process which will
lead to the full implementation of the nuclear-disarmament
obligations set out in article VI of the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
An important milestone along this road was the
adoption of the Pelindaba Treaty creating the African
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone. This Treaty will contribute
greatly to measures aimed at achieving a world free from
nuclear weapons. Further steps are needed in the process to
bring the world closer to the ultimate goal of the
elimination of nuclear weapons. The next step is for
African States to cooperate with parties to the other
nuclear-weapon-free-zones in the Pacific and Latin
American regions with a view to promoting a southern
hemisphere-wide nuclear-weapon-free zone. We are
heartened by the unprecedented step of four nuclear-
weapon States’ signing the relevant Protocols of the
Pelindaba Treaty simultaneously with African States in
April 1996, while the fifth has indicated that it will sign
shortly. South Africa, as stated previously in other
forums, will also work for the commencement next year
of negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament on a
treaty banning the production of fissile material for
nuclear weapons.
South Africa also supports and will work for the
establishment of an ad hoc committee on nuclear
disarmament in the Conference on Disarmament. This
committee can identify and negotiate the necessary steps
by which we can achieve the ultimate goal of the eventual
elimination of nuclear weapons. We also look forward to
the early ratification of the Chemical Weapons
Convention by those States that have not yet done so.
It is not just the threat posed by all weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery that is of serious
concern to my Government, but also the build-up of
conventional weapons beyond a level which can be
considered legitimate for the purposes of self-defence.
Conventional weapons are, in fact, the cause of most of
the deaths and suffering of millions of people in conflicts
around the world today.
My Government would therefore like to encourage
all States Members of the United Nations to support and
participate in the United Nations Register of Conventional
Arms, and lend active support to General Assembly
resolution 50/70 B on small arms and its panel of
governmental experts mandated to assist the Secretary-
General to prepare a report on small arms. We would also
encourage Member States to support the worldwide
efforts to secure the elimination of anti-personnel
landmines. In order to alleviate the suffering caused by
landmines, my Government is committed to reinforcing
international cooperation. As a country with advanced
demining technology, we are pleased to be making a
modest contribution to international efforts to unearth
landmines.
South Africa will continue to cooperate in the
various international forums dedicated to the
non-proliferation of the technologies and equipment which
17


could be used in the development of weapons of mass
destruction, and in discouraging any destabilizing build up
of conventional weapons.
Our harrowing experience under the tyranny of
apartheid has imposed a duty on us to place a high
premium on the promotion of human rights. In this regard,
our Constitution contains an entrenched and fully justiciable
Bill of Rights. In addition, plans are advanced for the
establishment of an office on the status of women to
provide a mechanism within the Government to act as a
monitor to ensure that a gender perspective is integrated
into all publicly-funded policies and programmes. The
South African Government regards it as a priority to
contribute to the efforts of the international community to
combat the violation of human rights.
In South Africa, and in the region as a whole,
processes of democratization have released a host of
productive human and political resources. This has, in many
ways, contributed to the achievement of peace, security and
stability in our region.
Our vision for southern Africa is one of the highest
possible degree of economic cooperation, mutual assistance
and the joint planning of regional development initiatives,
leading to full economic integration.
Civil conflicts have ravaged many parts of Africa. We
welcome the positive developments which have taken place
in Rwanda and Sierra Leone. However, serious conflict
persists in Liberia, Burundi and Somalia. The South African
Government is committed to playing an active role in the
ongoing efforts of the international community to assist the
people of Burundi to bring about lasting peace and national
reconciliation. President Mandela recently appointed a
special representative for Burundi, who has been given the
task of searching for a viable solution in close coordination
with other special representatives and with countries in the
region. These efforts need to be supplemented by close
cooperation between the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) and the United Nations.
At the same time, we are heartened by the progress,
albeit tentative so far, towards peace in Angola.
Representatives of Member countries assembled here will
agree that the people of Angola deserve peace at last as an
instrument for — or rather, as an important ingredient of —
embarking on the road to sustainable economic
development and social advancement. Our Government
commends the efforts of the United Nations, and especially
those of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Angola, Maître Alioune Blondin Beye, who has with
tremendous patience and commitment guided the Angolan
peace process to the stage where it is today. We owe it to
the people of Angola to see this process through to its
logical conclusion.
Through the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and
Resolution, member States of the OAU are collectively
committed to restoring peace and security on our
continent. In support of the OAU mechanism, we are
pleased that the Southern African Development
Community has recently created an organ on politics,
defence and security. These efforts reflect Africa’s
primary concern with issues of preventive diplomacy and
conflict resolution.
South Africa welcomed the spirit of dialogue and
realism that had begun to characterize the relations
between Israel and Palestine and was hopeful that this
positive development would gradually replace the
centuries of conflict in the Middle East. That hope was
further reinforced by the Declaration of Principles on
Interim Self-Government Arrangements reached in Oslo.
My Government is concerned, however, that recent
developments in the Middle East are likely to reverse and
jeopardize the peace process. We therefore urge all the
players in the Middle East to rise to the occasion and, in
a spirit of reconciliation, to move steadfastly towards a
lasting peace in the region.
We are seriously concerned by the marginalization,
particularly of African countries among the least-
developed countries, from the process of globalization and
liberalization. In this regard, closer attention should be
given to the need to address the external debt burden of
the least-developed countries, especially those in Africa.
Problems associated with the debt burden and its
servicing still persist and frustrate the rate at which the
continent can extricate itself from the vicious cycle of
poverty.
We therefore welcome the Mid-term Review of the
Implementation of the United Nations New Agenda for
the Development of Africa in the 1990s and recognize the
importance of the United Nations System-wide Special
Initiative on Africa, as well as the need to underpin its
success through appropriate and adequate resources.
In this context we also welcome the designation of
1996 as the International Year for the Eradication of
Poverty. We hope that the international community will
18


realize this objective in clear recognition of the challenges
facing it.
We welcome the World Food Summit, which is to
convene in Rome in November 1996 and which will afford
the international community the opportunity to demonstrate
its commitment to ensuring that poverty eradication
strategies are fully integrated into all initiatives of the
United Nations system.
My Government is encouraged by the outcome of the
United Nations Conference on Human Settlements
(HABITAT II). The results of the Conference represent the
collaborative efforts of the international community to
develop a consensus view on the fundamental need to
provide access to adequate shelter and infrastructure for all
people. Continued support for initiatives at the national and
international level to realize and implement the necessary
follow-up to HABITAT II should now receive priority
attention.
It was an honour for South Africa to host the ninth
session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development (UNCTAD) in April 1996. My Government
believes that the sound basis for cooperation established by
UNCTAD IX and the call for partnership for growth and
development outlined in the Midrand Declaration must be
carried forward and implemented through the General
Assembly and other forums. South Africa is particularly
keen to ensure that the framework which we adopted at
Midrand for the reform of UNCTAD is translated into an
effective facility for the developing world.
South Africa also wishes to underscore the
fundamental importance of international cooperation in the
environmental and development fields. Sustained political
commitment through global partnership remains essential
for our continuing international cooperation efforts. It is for
this reason that we believe that the 1997 special session of
the General Assembly will provide an excellent opportunity
to reaffirm the principles and objectives of the Rio
Declaration’s Agenda 21.
South Africa, a country with a long coastline, has
considerable interest in matters relating to the law of the
sea. We are thus pleased that the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea and its implementing
Agreement have entered into force, and that the
International Sea-Bed Authority and related structures, of
which South Africa is proud to be a member, have been
established.
In my statement to the General Assembly during the
fiftieth session, I expressed the sincere hope that
significant progress would be made in bringing about the
establishment of an international criminal court. It is
therefore gratifying to see that the Preparatory Committee
on the Establishment of an International Criminal Court,
which was established during the fiftieth session, has
made much progress in bringing this idea to fruition.
What is now needed is to take this process forward by
holding as soon as possible a diplomatic conference
where the statute of the proposed court can be finalized.
It is widely acknowledged that the favourable
changes in the international climate are conducive to the
reform and modernization of the United Nations in order
to prepare the Organization to respond effectively to the
challenges of the twenty-first century.
I wish to recall that in his address on 23 October
1995 at the Special Commemorative Meeting of the
General Assembly, President Mandela, said:
“Indeed the United Nations has to reassess its
role, redefine its profile and reshape its
structures. It should truly reflect the diversity
of our universe and ensure equity among the
nations in the exercise of power within the
system of international relations in general, and
the Security Council in particular.” (Official
Records of the General Assembly, Fiftieth
Session, Plenary Meetings, 37th meeting, p. 6)
In this regard, my delegation wishes to register its
disappointment at the slow pace of advancement, with no
end in sight to the deliberations of the Working Group on
the question of equitable representation and increase in
the membership of the Security Council and other matters
relating to the Security Council. In this regard we support
the recommendation in the report of the Working Group
that the Group should continue with its work. We would
also urge Member States to demonstrate flexibility and
accommodation in their future deliberations and to display
the necessary political will in order to reach a common
understanding.
In the declaration that the Heads of State and
Government adopted on the occasion of the fiftieth
anniversary of the United Nations on 24 October 1995, it
was noted that
“In order to carry out its work effectively, the
United Nations must have adequate resources.
19


Member States must meet, in full and on time, their
obligation to bear the expenses of the Organization, as
apportioned by the General Assembly. That
apportionment should be established on the basis of
criteria agreed to and considered to be fair by Member
States.” (A/50/48, para. 15)
My delegation has taken note of the progress of the
Working Group on the financial situation in highlighting the
problems facing the Organization, and urges all Member
States to pay what is legally due as soon as possible in
order that we may direct our energies to the real problems
facing the world at this time. As we approach the twenty-
first century, let us together resolve to redefine the role and
shape of the United Nations and render this institution
better equipped to carry out the important task of advancing
peace and development in the world.



﻿Please allow me first of all to offer my sincere
congratulations to Ambassador Razali Ismail on his election
to the presidency of the General Assembly at its current
session. I am convinced that with his outstanding ability
and rich experience he will fulfil this lofty mission with
distinction. I would also like to express my thanks to
Mr. Diogo Freitas do Amaral for the important contribution
he made during his presidency of the last session.
The 1990s are a period of momentous transition,
during which international relations are undergoing the most
far-reaching changes since the Second World War. The
collapse and disappearance of the bipolar structure has
rekindled hope that the world will become a community of
countries with equal rights for all, rather than one
dominated by a single big Power. Multipolarity is gaining
momentum in a global as well as a regional context. Major
Powers are readjusting their relationships. On the other
hand, the multitude of developing countries have become
increasingly aware of the need to bolster their strength
through concerted efforts. The Non-Aligned Movement
continues to uphold the ideals and principles of
independence, independent decision-making and
non-affiliation with blocs, and is vigorously pushing for
a new just and democratic international order of peace
and equality. Regional economic organizations, which are
displaying great vitality, are expanding their role in
promoting regional cooperation and development in their
respective areas.
Asia’s upsurge is having a significant impact on the
world’s political and economic configurations. The world
is deeply impressed with the vigorous economic
development of Asia, East Asia in particular. The
convening of the first Asia-Europe meeting highlighted
the changes now being seen and marked an important
new beginning for an equal, cooperative relationship
between Asia and Europe. As the world moves towards
multipolarity, the forces for peace are bolstered. The call
for dialogue and cooperation, as against confrontation and
conflict, has become louder.
In the Asia-Pacific region, efforts to maintain peace
and stability and promote common development through
dialogue, consultation and cooperation have yielded
positive results. An agreement on confidence-building in
the military field along border areas has been concluded
between China on the one hand, and the Russian
Federation, Kazakstan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan on the
other; this agreement governs a boundary over 3,000
kilometres in length. The Association of South-East Asian
Nations (ASEAN) Regional Forum has succeeded in
bringing Asia-Pacific countries together to consider
security issues facing the region. The Asia-Pacific
Economic Cooperation Council (APEC) has become a
useful mechanism for promoting trade and investment
liberalization as well as economic and technological
cooperation in the region.
The past year has seen peace returning to a number
of war-torn countries and regions. We are pleased to note
that the peace accord reached between the belligerents in
Bosnia and Herzegovina is being implemented, and that
Yugoslavia and Croatia have normalized their relations.
It is hoped that peace will soon be fully restored to the
region of the former Yugoslavia in order to put an end to
the prolonged conflict in that part of Europe.
The impact on Africa of the drastic changes in the
post-cold war international situation is waning. Africa is
entering a new historical era in which it is striving for
peace, stability and development. Many burning issues in
Africa have already been or are in the process of being
settled gradually. At the same time, however, some
14


countries and regions are still plagued by the scourge of
war. We hope that the international community will
continue to give attention and attach importance to African
issues so as to help bring lasting peace and development to
the whole African continent at an early date.
But the path towards peace is tortuous. After some
major gains in preceding years, the Middle East peace
process has hit snags again. China is concerned at this
development. We hope that all the parties concerned will
strive for an early comprehensive and just settlement of this
issue by strictly observing the agreements already reached
and resuming negotiations and dialogue on the basis of the
relevant United Nations resolutions.
Peace should have prevailed in the post-cold-war
world, in which equal members of the international
community should respect each other’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity, refrain from invading each other or
interfering in each other’s internal affairs, and live in
harmony with each other, in a spirit of seeking common
ground and putting aside differences. However, the reality
is that the world today is far from tranquil because the
cold-war mentality dies hard and hegemonism has
repeatedly raised its ugly head. Interference in other
countries’ internal affairs under various pretexts, and
indulgence in sanctions-wielding or even the use of force
are trampling on the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and all accepted norms of
international relations, thereby threatening and undermining
world peace and stability. Recent controversies in
international forums, generated by the issue of sanctions,
signify that in the context of a growing trend towards
multipolarity, hegemonism and power politics will become
increasingly untenable.
The vigorous expansion of international trade and
investment and the rapid advance of science and technology
have led to closer economic ties between countries and
regions, thus accelerating the process of economic
globalization. This presents a rare opportunity to both
developed and developing countries. By riding the tide of
globalization and relying on their own unremitting efforts,
some developing countries have achieved sustained and
rapid economic growth, thereby giving a great impetus to
world economic growth. These and other changes on the
world scene have widened the prospects of international
cooperation.
Regrettably, however, a counter-current of trade
protectionism has recently arisen in the ranks of developed
countries, designed to curtail the development of developing
countries and exclude them from the decision-making
process on major world economic issues. Any act
prejudicial to developing countries will in the final
analysis undermine the interests of developed countries.
International economic exchanges and cooperation should
be built on the basis of mutual complementarity. Facing
the tide of economic globalization, neither developed nor
developing countries should resort to trade protectionism.
Rather, both should make the necessary readjustments and
reforms in the light of their own national conditions in
order to promote their welfare and keep out of harm’s
way. Only by enhancing international exchanges and
cooperation on the basis of equality and mutual benefit
can we jointly cope with new problems arising in the
course of world economic advances and achieve sustained
common development and prosperity.
No one should overlook the unevenness of world
development and the ever widening gap between
developed and developing countries. Caught in the web of
relentless international competition, the least-developed
countries are in distress, and the risk of marginalization
is looming large. To make matters worse, the amount of
official development assistance from richer countries is
shrinking every year, with more stringent conditions
attached. The coffers of the United Nations Capital
Development Fund are drying up, and future prospects are
grim indeed. The international community, and especially
the developed countries, are duty-bound to take effective
measures to reverse this dire situation. The promotion of
economic development and the prosperity of all countries,
and the elimination of poverty should always be at the top
of the United Nations agenda.
Strengthening international cooperation in the field
of the environment and development is a vital link in
global efforts to achieve sustainable development.
Four years after the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development, the public has become
increasingly aware of the importance of environmental
protection. Sustainable development has become a major
objective in the socio-economic development strategies of
all countries. However, international cooperation in this
domain is disappointingly lagging. Developed countries
have failed to live up to their pledges under Agenda 21 in
terms of funding and technology transfer, yet they
demand that developing countries accept obligations
exceeding their capability at their present level of
development. It is hoped that next year’s special session
on environment and development will be able to resolve
these issues.
15


Poverty, unemployment, the problem of refugees,
crime, over-population, environmental deterioration, drug
abuse and terrorism — these scourges remain formidable
and impede global stability and development. In the face of
these challenges, all countries should not only carry out
social development policies commensurate with their own
national conditions, but should also actively cooperate with
one another in line with the principles of mutual respect,
equality and mutual benefit. The United Nations needs to
enhance its social programmes focusing on developing
countries.
The international community at large should press for
the implementation of the follow-up actions of the Cairo
International Conference on Population and Development,
the Copenhagen World Summit for Social Development and
the Beijing Fourth World Conference on Women in favour
of universal social development.
Our Organization has gone through vicissitudes in the
course of half a century. Enormous changes have taken
place on the world scene. It is imperative for the United
Nations to carry out appropriate rational reforms so that it
can better perform the noble mission of the times and usher
a better world into the twenty-first century.
All reforms must be conducive to realizing the
purposes and principles of the Charter and to improving the
efficiency of the United Nations. They must also contribute
to a more positive and effective United Nations role in
promoting world peace and common development. They
must conform to the principle of the sovereign equality of
all States, and reflect the aspirations of the developing
countries, which comprise more than two-thirds of the
membership. Democratic consultations should be practiced
throughout this process. We are confident that we will be
able to achieve a broad consensus as long as all of us
engage in patient deliberations in the spirit of openness and
fair play, and with a readiness to consider all legitimate
concerns.
The United Nations continues to be plagued by a
serious financial crisis. The Organization cannot function
normally without firm and reliable fiscal resources. We call
on the major countries whose financial contributions to the
Organization are in arrears to fulfil the financial obligations
set forth in the Charter by unconditionally paying up in full
without further delay.
Major progress has been made in the field of arms
control and disarmament since the last session of the
General Assembly. The Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty resulting from two and a half years of negotiations
has finally been adopted by the General Assembly.China
actively participated in the Treaty negotiations and
displayed maximum flexibility, thereby contributing
significantly to the final conclusion of the Treaty. We
have always stood for the complete prohibition and
thorough destruction of nuclear weapons. In our view, the
comprehensive test-ban Treaty is only a first step in the
entire process of comprehensive nuclear disarmament.
There are still large stockpiles of nuclear arms in the
world. Some nuclear Powers still refuse to undertake not
to be the first to use such weapons. We still have a long
way to go, and must continue to work strenuously in
order to achieve the ultimate goal of the total elimination
of nuclear weapons.
In order to expedite nuclear disarmament and free
ourselves from the danger of nuclear war forever, I wish
to reiterate the following calls on behalf of the Chinese
Government: first, the major nuclear Powers should
renounce their policy of nuclear deterrence; those
possessing huge nuclear arsenals should continue to cut
back their stockpiles drastically.
Secondly, all nuclear States should assume the
obligation not to be the first to use nuclear weapons at
any time or under any circumstances; they should
unconditionally renounce the use or threat of use of such
weapons against non-nuclear States or nuclear-free zones;
and they should conclude international instruments to that
effect without delay.
Thirdly, those States which have deployed nuclear
weapons overseas should withdraw them completely; all
nuclear States should pledge support for moves to set up
nuclear-free zones; they should respect the status of such
zones and assume corresponding obligations.
Fourthly, all States should refrain from developing
or deploying weapons systems in outer space and missile
defence systems that undermine strategic security and
stability.
Fifthly, all States should negotiate with a view to
concluding an international convention on the complete
prohibition and total destruction of nuclear weapons.
Since mankind was able to produce nuclear weapons
in the twentieth century, it is fully capable of abolishing
them in the twenty-first century. The Chinese Government
and people are ready to join hands with all Governments
16


and peoples of the world to strive for the realization of this
lofty goal.
My country continues to press forward along the road
of reform, opening up and modernization. Our economy
maintains a healthy momentum. The macroeconomic
environment continues to improve. We anticipate a growth
rate of around 10 per cent this year. Inflation will be kept
below 10 per cent. Despite severe natural disasters in some
parts of the country, we have still managed to gather a
bumper harvest of summer crops this year. Grain output for
the entire year is expected to top the previous year’s
figures. The Ninth Five-Year Plan for National Economic
and Social Development and the Outline of the Long-Range
Objectives to the Year 2010 were inaugurated this year.
They depict a promising future for China’s modernization
drive at the turn of the century. By the year 2000, when our
population will have had a net increase of 300 million, we
expect to quadruple our 1980 per capita gross national
product. And by the year 2010 our gross national product
is anticipated to be twice that of the year 2000. Then we
will have put in place a viable socialist market economy.
Seventeen years of reform and opening up have
brought about a fourfold increase in our gross national
product. Our overall national strength will grow further in
another 15 years. Yet China will still be a developing
country with relatively low ranking in terms of indicators
such as per capita gross national product. China’s
development will only help to bolster the elements making
for peace. We pose no threat to anyone anywhere, but will
only help to strengthen the cause of world peace, stability
and development. On the other hand, if China fails to
achieve economic development and its population of 1.2
billion is mired in poverty, that would indeed be ominous
for world peace and stability.
China will resume the exercise of sovereignty over
Hong Kong as from 1 July 1997. This will be a milestone
in the great cause of our national reunification. It is also a
good example of how countries can peacefully resolve
issues left over by history. Preparations are under way to
put into effect our resumption of the exercise of sovereignty
over Hong Kong. We are fully capable of ensuring a
smooth transfer of government and transition in Hong
Kong. After Hong Kong’s return to the embrace of the
motherland, we will put into effect the policy of “one
country, two systems”. As a Special Administrative Region
of the People’s Republic of China, and in conformity with
the Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative
Region, Hong Kong will be administered by the Hong
Kong people. It will enjoy a high degree of autonomy. The
existing social and economic system and way of life will
remain unchanged, and the laws currently in force in
Hong Kong will be basically maintained. Hong Kong will
retain its status as an international trade, financial and
shipping centre, free port and separate customs territory.
Its long-term stability and prosperity will be guaranteed.
Foreign economic interests in Hong Kong will be
accommodated.
Twenty-five years ago, at its twenty-sixth session,
the General Assembly adopted the historic resolution
2758 (XXVI), solemnly declaring the restoration to the
People’s Republic of China all its lawful rights in the
United Nations. That resolution thoroughly settled the
question of China’s representation in the United Nation in
all aspects — political, legal and procedural.
There is but one China in the world and Taiwan is
an inalienable part of its sacred territory. “Peaceful
reunification and one country with two systems” — this
is our unswerving guideline for the settlement of the
Taiwan question. This question involves a cardinal
principle of China’s sovereignty and territorial integrity
and the great task of reunification. It is a purely internal
affair of China which will brook no outside interference.
The Chinese Government and people are determined to
carry through the struggle against all attempts to split
their territory or create an independent Taiwan. No force
on Earth can hold back China’s great cause of
reunification.
The world is on the march at top speed. New
contradictions and problems are constantly arising. The
profound changes in the international scene have brought
forth rare opportunities as well as serious challenges. Let
us seize the opportunities, meet the challenges and push
forward the cause of peace and development. Such is the
glorious mission which our times have bestowed on us.
The Chinese Government and people are ready to join
with all other Governments and peoples in this endeavour.



﻿Last year we
took stock of half a century of United Nations history. The
rock we are pushing up the hill like Sisyphus always seems
to roll back a little. We must not be discouraged by this. It
remains our responsibility to do what we solemnly
reaffirmed on the fiftieth anniversary of the world
Organization: maintain peace and to help people who are
suffering from want and poverty.
You, Mr. President, have issued a warning to us all for
this fifty-first General Assembly. We must look beyond our
national borders, and think and act accordingly. After
making those anniversary promises, let us not fall back into
the old routine and rituals. The vision of a more peaceful
and more equitable world must not be lost.
The world Organization must continue to be the
world’s conscience. For who else other than this forum is
to keep watch to prevent murder and torture, to ensure that
refugees have the basic necessities of life and that our
children are protected and cared for?
The world is grossly unjust. From the moment of birth
millions of people have hardly any chance of living in
conditions worthy of humankind. No one can turn away
from this; it concerns us all. No country, no region and
no group of States can bear all of the world’s burdens and
troubles alone. All, even the strongest among us, need
solidarity, need the help of others. How can terrorism, for
instance, a cancer of our time, be stopped without
international cooperation?
Developments over the past 10 years have shown
there is no cause for resignation. There can be
progress — provided we pool our resources and act
together. That is the lesson of Bosnia, of South Africa
and of the Middle East, and of the historic achievements
in the field of disarmament in recent years. Every child
that is saved from death in Rwanda or Burundi, every
refugee able to return to his native village in Bosnia,
every rainforest area we can preserve, must strengthen our
hope. The one world requires us to act as one.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, a free election has been
held for the first time after four terrible years of war. It
has provided a crucial foundation for the country’s
recovery. Joint institutions must now be created without
delay. The future members of the three-person presidency
should meet in Sarajevo before the end of September.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) had a very difficult task supervising the
election in Bosnia. That organization’s scope for action
must be increased at the Lisbon Summit in December this
year. The OSCE remains an indispensable pillar of the
new peaceful order for Europe, which we believe to be
necessary now that the iron curtain has come down.
The forces working for peace in the region are
themselves not strong enough; there is still no self-
sustaining stability. In Bosnia and Herzegovina there can
be no permanent international police force — even the
60,000 troops of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO), of the United Nations and of all the other
countries cannot guarantee peace on the ground — but I
think that for a limited time that country continues to
require a “fire brigade”. This presupposes a fresh mandate
from the Security Council.
Germany is willing to provide a military
contribution. By admitting more than 320,000 war
refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina, Germany has
practised human solidarity. We also have more than
130,000 Yugoslav nationals, most of them from Kosovo,
who have to return to their native regions. This is a heavy
burden for us, including in financial terms. But we gave
7


temporary protection and shelter to these people on
humanitarian grounds, and we will not be found wanting in
this respect now that their repatriation is becoming possible.
Europe has been torn by fratricidal wars for centuries.
The current peaceful unification of that continent is a
message of hope for the whole world. The first of our
central and eastern European neighbours will soon belong
to the Euro-Atlantic institutions.
My country Germany owes its unity to the confidence
which the world placed in our policy of reconciliation and
good neighbourliness. In our eyes that implies a duty:
together with France, we will remain the motor of European
Union.
Addressing the Assembly in 1989, my predecessor
Hans-Dietrich Genscher extended a hand to Poland. Today
I turn to our Czech neighbours in particular and say that the
German-Czech declaration will be adopted shortly. Czechs
and Germans can look confidently to a common European
future.
The Russian people too must be winners in the process
of European unification. The special partnership which
NATO is seeking with Russia is of central importance for
peace and security in Europe. And that is why we want as
quickly as possible to draft the fundamentals of a charter
between NATO and Russia, as I suggested in Carcassonne
18 months ago at a meeting of the European Union foreign
ministers. Our offer stands. Russia should help shape
Europe’s future as an equal partner. That large and
important country must be given a place in Europe
commensurate with its size and importance.
Part of the European Union’s peace message is that
we Europeans stand for a policy of international
cooperation among equals, and for a global partnership for
development and the environment in the twenty-first
century. New opportunities for such a partnership derive
from the globalization of industry and technology. Never
have so many people experienced so much progress as in
the past 10 years. In the year 2020, if the present trend
continues, the 15 countries with the largest gross national
products will include nine of today’s developing countries.
The recipe is free markets, democracy, reliability of
the judicial system, and integration into the global
economy. This kind of good governance was rewarded with
$150 billion of private direct investment in 1995.
However, 90 per cent of that investment has gone to
only 12 countries, and the gap between the poor and the
rest of the world continues to widen. The World Summit
for Social Development put the number of poor people at
1.3 billion, nearly a quarter of the entire human race. This
calls for action from both sides, help from the community
of nations and self-help on the part of the countries
concerned. The one is the precondition for the other.
This evening I am having another meeting with my
African colleagues. I take a very keen interest in the
future of Europe’s vast neighbouring continent. We
should not see only Africa’s negative side but the hopeful
signs as well, and there are such signs. Democratization
is progressing, as shown by the fact that elections have
taken place or are scheduled in 17 countries this year.
Average economic growth has outpaced population
growth for the first time in many years. Life expectancy
has increased by more than 25 per cent since 1960, and
ever more children are going to school.
Germany supports Africa’s integration into the world
economy and the development of its own capabilities. The
United Nations New Agenda for the Development of
Africa in the 1990s is a sound foundation for these
efforts. The Secretary-General’s United Nations System-
wide Initiative on Africa should likewise be used by all
concerned as a basis for joint action.
However, much remains to be done. The ghastly
events in Rwanda must not be repeated in Burundi. On
the other hand, the United Nations should not be the
organization of first resort in every conflict situation. It
cannot solve every problem. Hence, the regional
organizations must assume a larger measure of
responsibility.
The Organization of African Unity, like the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, has
matured to a degree that commands respect. Germany,
with one eye on Burundi, has to date provided one
million deutsche mark in support of that organization’s
conflict prevention mechanism. High hopes have been
placed in the efforts of Julius Nyerere. The proposed
conference on the Great Lakes region has the support of
Germany and the European Union.
Germany will remain a good partner and friend to
the nations of Africa. That will also be my message at the
forthcoming second European Union-Southern African
Development Community (SADC) ministerial meeting in
Windhoek. The regionalization process in Africa is an
8


element of hope. The outstanding example is southern
Africa with the SADC. That region must become a
locomotive for the whole continent.
One neighbouring region whose fate touches Europe
is the Middle East. That is also the main reason for our
strong commitment in the whole Middle East region. For
historical reasons, Germany has a special relationship with
Israel; that remains unshakable. Bilaterally and through the
European Union we are the most important donor for the
Palestinians. Germany will maintain that commitment. I
confirmed this in my recent meetings with Israeli Foreign
Minister Levy and with President Yasser Arafat in Bonn.
Terrorists should not be given any chance to block the
path to peace. The sealing off of Gaza and the West Bank
must be eased and discontinued as soon as possible. That
is our common endeavour. The struggle against terrorism
must remain at the top of the international agenda. I
urgently appeal to all concerned to resume the peace
process without delay. There is no alternative.
It has been estimated that the world’s population will
number about 10 billion in 2030. For their sake, for the
sake of our children and grandchildren, we must take steps
today to ensure that the Earth remains habitable. Peace and
human dignity, economic progress and protection of the
natural foundations of life are inseparable. Without social
justice, without any vision for the world’s economic
progress, we shall not be able to break the vicious circle of
poverty, environmental destruction and population
explosion.
We have no time to lose. Every second three babies
are born, and every year the world’s population increases
by nearly 100 million. All of them need food, clothing,
schools and a home. Every minute about 12 acres of
tropical rain forest are lost, an area the size of 40 football
pitches.
Antoine de Saint-Exupéry warned that the human race
had not inherited the Earth from its fathers but had
borrowed it from its children. We became acutely aware of
this at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro. North and
South, East and West, are struggling to survive together in
spaceship Earth, whose blue protective shield is becoming
increasingly fragile.
Our task now is to convert that environmental
awareness into environmental action. The year 1997 will be
crucial for such action. The special session of the General
Assembly devoted to environment and development must
chart the course for the next millennium in order to
restore the balance between man, nature and the economy.
Germany’s industrial community has voluntarily
undertaken to reduce its carbon dioxide emissions by
20 per cent by the year 2005. Since 1990, Germany has
reduced those emissions by nearly 13 per cent and
thereby has led the way for the rest of the world.
We are contributing 312 million deutsche mark to
the pilot programme to protect Brazil’s tropical forests.
That represents 60 per cent of the total contributions
made so far. We appeal to the community of nations to
become more heavily involved in this programme. We
can only succeed together or fail together.
At the 1997 climate conference in Japan we must
achieve the objective agreed upon in Berlin 12 months
ago: the adoption of a substantive and binding protocol to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions. At the recent Geneva
conference, the great majority of nations came out in
favour of specific targets and time limits. This is
encouraging.
I wish to thank all members once again for
supporting our efforts to have the secretariat of the
Framework Convention on Climate Change established in
Bonn. May I also ask members to support our proposal
that the secretariat of the Framework Convention to
Combat Desertification likewise be located in Bonn, as it
has to cooperate closely with the climate secretariat. The
United Nations will find that living and working
conditions in our country are good.
The Rio Declaration on Environment and
Development rightly makes people the focal point of all
efforts. We must continue to concentrate on combating
poverty and providing basic and vocational education.
Even if that is not the kind of subject that makes
headlines, it is and will remain, together with
peacekeeping, one of our principal tasks.
Equal opportunities for women must not remain
mere theory.
Nothing is more powerful than an idea whose time
has come, is a saying that applies to human dignity and
human rights. The fall of the Berlin Wall showed that the
people’s pursuit of freedom and personal happiness is, in
the long run, stronger than any dictatorship. That is why
the worldwide defence of human rights will likewise not
be in vain.
It all boils down to something quite natural: that we
treat one another as humans and that we do not inflict upon
others what we would not like to have inflicted upon
ourselves. Murderers and torturers must not be allowed to
sleep peacefully. Mladic´ and Karadzic´, and all for whom
arrest warrants have been issued, deserve to be brought
before the International Tribunal in The Hague. Germany
calls for the early convening of a conference to establish an
international criminal court.
There is a core of human rights that are common to us
all and that are universally valid. This fact received
international confirmation at the Vienna Conference on
Human Rights. There can and should be no withdrawal
from that position.
With the East-West confrontation now consigned to
the past, intercultural dialogue assumes ever-greater
significance. Close to 2.5 million Muslims are living in
Germany. If only for this reason, it is of special importance
to develop greater mutual understanding between
Christianity and Islam.
A subject very close to my heart, as former Minister
of Justice, is the protection of our children, the weakest
members of society. Universal Children’s Day was
observed on 20 September. Its motto: “Children have
rights”. What do those rights look like in reality? Every day
35,000 children die of hunger. Twelve million children do
not live beyond the age of 5. Two million are forced into
prostitution. Two hundred thousand children around the
world are used as soldiers in war. Millions of them are used
as cheap labour.
The Stockholm conference on sexual abuse of children
has awakened world opinion, and I should like to thank the
Swedish Government for having hosted and organized this
conference, which shocked us all into action. The atrocious
way many of our children are being treated is a disgrace —
a disgrace — to our civilization. The Stockholm Plan of
Action must be followed by global action. This we owe to
our children. And I should like to make it very clear that
anyone who violates the weakest members of society —
children, that is — deserves to be outlawed by society.
Peace is not everything, but without peace everything
is nothing. These words originate from the time when East
and West faced each other armed to the teeth. In the
meantime the nightmare of a nuclear inferno has been
dispelled. Yesterday’s signing of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty was another momentous step in
this process, I believe, after half a century of international
debate and protest against nuclear testing.
In expressing my thanks to Australia I appeal to all
nations to ratify the Treaty as soon as possible. Since the
end of the Second World War upwards of 2,000 nuclear
tests have been carried out. We now have the chance to
put a stop to them once and for all. Anyone who rejects
something good because they will only accept something
perfect should be mindful of their responsibility to future
generations. We cannot force the atomic genie back into
the bottle, but we owe it to our children and
grandchildren to tame it — at least to tame it.
The total abolition of all chemical weapons is of
similar consequence. The Chemical Weapons Convention
must enter into force next spring. All nations, and
especially those with the largest stockpiles of such
weapons, must meet their tremendous responsibility and
ratify the Convention as soon as possible.
I should also like to touch upon an issue that I take
a very personal, keen interest in, and that is a totally
different kind of mass-destruction weapon: anti-personnel
mines. I travelled to Mozambique and Cambodia and took
a look at the situation there. Hundreds of millions of such
anti-personnel mines are still in the ground. Year in, year
out they kill and maim 20,000 people and make entire
regions permanently uninhabitable. These treacherous
tools of murder must be banned.
Germany has completely renounced anti-personnel
mines and imposed a unilateral, open-ended ban on
exports. Residual stocks are to be destroyed by the end of
1997. In my Seven-Point Programme of Action I have
proposed a number of measures to maintain the
momentum generated in Geneva. My main objective —
because I think the motto should be “first things first” —
is to improve the efficiency of mine clearance. We will
attend a conference in Canada very soon which deals with
the political aspects of this issue, trying to ban land-
mines. But we should also at the same time try to
concentrate on improving the efficiency of mine
clearance, that is, testing and using mechanical clearance
equipment. We quickly need machinery that can be mass-
produced in order to remove this plague without harming
people. I do not know whether anyone here has watched
a mine-clearance operation. It is done by people and can
be compared to trying to remove a sand-dune with a
spoon. I think it is incredible that highly developed
10


nations such as ours and many others are not able to
produce a piece of machinery for a large-scale de-mining
operation. I want to focus the technical knowledge that we
have to make this matter progress as quickly as possible.
If we want to win peace, we must not only consider
conflict prevention; we must also pay greater attention to
the situation after the termination of military hostilities.
Peace-building was the subject of the international
conference that we sponsored in Berlin in July. That
conference produced a number of interesting and tangible
results, which we are making available to all Member
States in the form of a report. Together with other countries
we intend to submit to members during this session of the
General Assembly a draft resolution on peace consolidation
through practical steps towards disarmament. Whether in
Bosnia, Rwanda or Angola, all previous efforts will prove
in vain unless we can prevent a resurgence of violence.
Most of the burden is borne by the 26,000 or so Blue
Helmets and civilian personnel making up the peacekeeping
missions, as well as by the countless courageous staff of
non-governmental organizations who are doing their job all
over the world under difficult conditions. Speaking here in
the United Nations, I should like to express my sincere
thanks to the non-governmental organizations. We are
proud of them.
In our resolution marking the fiftieth anniversary of
the United Nations, we solemnly undertook to pass on to
the next millennium a United Nations organization equipped
and financed to perform its tasks. The greatest political
significance attaches to reform of the Security Council, in
whose work we have been closely involved over the last
two years. This, the principal guardian of world peace, still
bears the countenance of the year 1945, but it now needs a
new one for the year 2000. It is a question of enhancing
that body’s legitimacy, credibility and effectiveness. After
a three-year debate the time has come to put the various
elements together and start the restructuring process, to now
get things done after having analysed what can be done.
We are pleased that a large number of Member States are
in favour of a permanent seat for Germany on the Security
Council. I really believe that the time is approaching when
the General Assembly will have to decide.
What continues to require our immediate attention is
the financial crisis. The Organization’s rationalization and
reform are indispensable and urgent. A glance at the books
is enough to tell us that. The regular United Nations budget
shows zero growth. The Secretariat has lost more than
1,000 posts, and further reductions will follow next year.
So much has already been achieved.
I therefore take this opportunity to thank the
Secretary-General and his staff, who, both at headquarters
and in the field, continue to achieve outstanding results
despite the reductions in their numbers and the constant
lack of funds. I should like to thank them very warmly.
I wish to add another word if I may. The United
Nations, in its actions and decisions, can be only as
strong as its Members allow it to be. People tend to
overlook that fact so readily when they criticize this
Organization. I stress this point because I think that the
outside world has a distorted image of the United Nations.
The United Nations is us, the Member States. We can
only achieve what we want to achieve together.
I am afraid that I must repeat that we will have to
save and rationalize further still. The need for reform is
no justification for refusing to pay contributions, however.
Moreover, special rights also imply special duties. The
German-American philosopher Hans Jonas said that
responsibility is the most important principle of the new
age. Let us act in accordance with that principle.


﻿My country is especially pleased at the
President’s election to lead the General Assembly. He
represents a great country that plays an important role in
the Non-Aligned Movement and the Group of 77 and I
am glad that he is to preside over our work during this
crucial period for our Organization.
17


I should also like to endorse the remarks made by
Ireland’s Foreign Minister in the name of the European
Union.
Last year, we celebrated the first half century of the
United Nations existence, during which its energies were
devoted, with a success universally acknowledged, to the
organization of international society. A mammoth collective
undertaking has been accomplished and the United Nations
has become the keystone of an international system founded
on law and the peaceful settlement of conflicts. This
collective undertaking owes much to the determined action
of successive Secretaries-General, and I should like to pay
a special and warm tribute here to Mr. Boutros-Ghali,
whose determination, vision of the future and firmness have
given our Organization a presence and vitality rarely
achieved. He deserves our confidence.
Today, as the century reaches its turning point, the
Organization is confronted with another major challenge:
globalization. In every sphere, the ideas and realities to
which we were accustomed are changing at a pace
unequalled in human history. The movement of people, of
ideas and images, and of goods is accelerating as distances
shrink. At the same time, the standardization of cultural
practices — and the legitimate reactions this provokes —
the general spread of low-cost high technologies and
intensified competition bring into question the positions that
have been achieved and the functioning, if not the very
foundation, of international society. At the same time, the
production of wealth is increasing tenfold and scientific
progress is growing rapidly, while unexpected opportunities
for development are being given to new nations.
But these benefits have adverse effects. The control
fragile States have over their development is being eroded,
national legislation is becoming inapplicable and the notion
of territorial integrity is changing in meaning. In short,
national authorities are too often reduced to powerlessness
by transnational phenomena over which they have only
scant control. If we are not careful, we are going to be
living in a world without criteria, without values, without
references, in which some — the strongest and the
richest — will be in a position to decide alone on the future
of the planet. It should come as no surprise that, in these
circumstances, the United Nations has many detractors.
Our Organization is in effect a privileged forum in
which the framework of a genuine international society can
be built, a framework that frees the forces of creativity and
development and represses the forces of violence and
oppression. It is up to all of us present here to enable the
United Nations to play that role and to ensure peace,
security and progress in these new circumstances and in
keeping with its mandate. Rest assured that France, a
founding Member of the Organization and permanent
member of the Security Council, will devote all its
energies to this task and will be in the front ranks of this
new fight.
Our world is confronted today with terrible problems
that know no borders and, sadly, spare no population:
terrorism, crime and drugs. The fight against these
scourges is foremost in our concerns and high on the
international agenda. Accordingly, an uncompromising
fight against terrorism, whatever its forms, perpetrators
and motives, constitutes our priority. This is why I
convened a conference on terrorism in Paris last July that
brought together the G-7 countries and Russia. We
adopted 25 practical, specific recommendations. They will
be implemented by each State and will strengthen
international cooperation against terrorism. Therefore,
today I make a solemn call on the entire international
community to join wholeheartedly in this fight.
We must also react without weakness to the
challenge of organized crime, in the knowledge that it
knows how to make the fullest use of the possibilities that
have been opened up by the liberalization of trade. For it
is the very foundation of our societies and institutions that
it endangers today.
International cooperation is indispensable to stem
this phenomenon. France, pursuing the path mapped out
by the Canadian presidency, has drafted a corpus of legal
and operational recommendations with its G-7 partners
and Russia to improve the effectiveness of the fight
against this scourge. These should guide in particular the
action of the States most affected by transnational
organized crime. France recently strengthened its financial
legislation against money-laundering. All States should
pay particular attention to this phenomenon, which is one
of the hardest forms of organized crime to counter.
One of the most loathsome aspects of organized
crime is that which targets our children. A world summit
on combating the sexual exploitation of children was
recently held in Stockholm. That is good, but it is still not
enough. Everyone must now make a commitment to
implementing effective measures for immediate
application. I urge all States represented here to act
quickly and with determination in this area which, more
than any other, affects our future. The Assembly may rest
assured of France’s political resolve.
18


Drugs are a formidable threat today because of the
ravages they inflict on young people. International
cooperation must be solid. The producer and consumer
countries must recognize their shared responsibility. The
international community must therefore continue to pursue
convergent policies to reduce the supply of illegal
substances and the demand for them. The European Union
has chosen such a global policy and has launched large-
scale actions in close coordination with international
institutions, in particular the United Nations International
Drug Control Programme. France strongly supports the
proposal to convene a special session of the General
Assembly devoted to drugs in 1998.
These new perils do not supplant the traditional
challenges, which our Organization must address with
sustained vigilance and unwavering firmness. Peace-keeping
remains the central function of our Organization under the
terms of the founding Charter. The mission of the United
Nations to soothe tensions, separate combatants and resolve
conflicts remains fundamental.
The panoply of available instruments is becoming
more diversified. Recent additions to conventional peace-
keeping missions include activities to consolidate peace,
preventive diplomacy measures and even regional
conferences — such as I hope will soon take place with
regard to the situation in the Great Lakes region.
Sanctions constitute one of these instruments. They are
a useful weapon, but they penalize populations and must
therefore be used with prudence and moderation, follow
strict criteria and — I stress this — always be limited in
time. Only under those conditions can sanctions, which are
sometimes necessary to prevent something worse, continue
to be used by our Organization with the required
legitimacy.
Of course, we cannot refer to the traditional challenges
to peace without speaking about current regional conflicts.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, where my country has paid a
heavy tribute, France is pleased that elections could be held,
imperfect though they were. That represents an essential
stage in the return to peace provided for by the agreements
signed in Paris in 1995.
But peace still has to be consolidated, devastated
territories be reconstructed, refugees encouraged to return
and a civilian society rebuilt. To that end, France has
proposed a plan of consolidated action by the international
community with a time-frame of two years. With this goal
in mind, we will very shortly be hosting an international
conference in Paris to examine, and I hope adopt, this
proposal.
Similarly, the peace process in the Middle East
seems to be at a crucial stage. I wish here to express my
anxiety about it. I certainly believe the process to be
irreversible, but I am also aware of the precariousness of
the gains and the urgency of the need for long-term
solutions. We are half-way there. I say “we”, because this
process concerns not just Arabs and Israelis but all of us
here.
For France, peace in the Middle East is built upon
dialogue between equal partners, respect for the identity
of each and the right of peoples to the free determination
of their destiny, the affirmation of their independence, and
security. That is why — and I wish to emphasize this
point — France believes that there will be no lasting
peace in the region, based on an exchange of land for
peace, unless the right of the Palestinian people to self-
determination is respected, together with their legitimate
aspirations for a State.
We believe that a just and balanced agreement
between Israelis and Palestinians cannot avoid the issues
of Jerusalem, refugees and the settlements in the
Palestinian territories. Finally, a lasting peace presupposes
that Israel is assured of its existence within secure and
recognized borders.
France believes that complete withdrawal from the
Golan Heights in exchange for total peace constitutes the
basis of an agreement between Syria and Israel, and that
Lebanon must regain full and complete sovereignty over
the whole of its territory.
Based on these principles, France intends to have a
greater and more active presence than ever in the Middle
East, with which it has close and long-standing relations.
It will pursue this policy in close consultation with its
European partners. Furthermore, Europe must have a
place, alongside the two sponsors of the peace process,
commensurate with the major contribution it is making to
the region’s development.
While we are endeavouring to build peace in areas
in crisis, our efforts are no less ambitious for the entire
European continent. In building step by step what we call
an “architecture of security“, we are really offering the
international community a pillar of peace. France is
making an important contribution to the establishment on
19


the European continent a system of global security that
leaves no one out on the edge.
The construction of peace in Europe began with the
construction of European institutions. It is being continued
by deepening the Union. The intergovernmental Conference
represents a decisive stage in this process, the forerunner of
expansion, which is vital to the stability and prosperity of
the continent.
France wishes to see the Union go still further by
giving substance to the European identity in security and
defence matters. To that end, we would like to see a
strengthening of the Western European Union and its
gradual rapprochement with the European Union.
The European identity is also based on the reform of
the Atlantic Alliance. France, after taking a decisive step,
is now working actively with its allies on the adaptation of
structures. This should allow the emergence of a genuine
European security and defence identity within the Alliance
and make it possible in practice for the Western European
Union, and therefore the European Union, to use the assets
of the Alliance for military action that Europeans decide to
undertake themselves. This reform is also the key to the
process of expanding the Alliance, with which France is
ready to assist. That expansion must naturally go hand-in-
hand with in-depth dialogue and cooperation with Russia.
The third and last aspect of the structure is the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), which is the sole forum for security in which all
the European States are represented on an equal footing.
That is why France believes that it is necessary to
strengthen the organization. We hope that the Lisbon
summit will provide the occasion to move towards the
drafting of a charter or treaty linking all the States of the
continent.
Important events therefore await us on the path that
we have mapped out, including the OSCE summit in
December and the NATO summit next year. The latter
should bring together all the European States for a
“pan-Europe day”, demonstrating the community of security
interests of all the countries on the continent, including
Russia and our North American allies whose role in
European security remains decisive. That is our ambition
for a Europe of security that leaves no one out and is safer
and more stable for the entire international community.
In this changing world, it is for the United Nations to
bring out the common values that will be the foundations
of civilization in the twenty-first century. It is thanks to
its actions that we hope to build a safer, less harsh world
for its inhabitants. First, we hope it will be a world in
which the spectre of nuclear war has faded. For many
years, public opinion called for a complete ban on nuclear
tests. It was a hope and a plan that was certainly worthy,
but remained blocked by the reality of East-West
confrontation.
France welcomes the signing of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, which I had the honour to sign
yesterday. This Treaty marks a major turning-point in the
world’s strategic balances.
It puts an end to the possibility of the nuclear-
weapon States’ developing new types of nuclear weapons,
and it makes a decisive contribution to the fight against
nuclear-weapon proliferation.
The Treaty thus opens the way to a more stable,
safer world which will cease to be haunted by the twin
dangers of the nuclear-arms race and the proliferation of
these weapons.
There is another development which I find
remarkable: the endorsement of human rights as a major
principle of international relations. And the United
Nations is at the centre of this development.
I should like in this regard to pay tribute to the
remarkable work done by the Commission on Human
Rights. In often difficult circumstances, it has pursued
with pragmatism and tenacity its patient efforts to awaken
consciences, to galvanize energies and to promote the rule
of law in concrete ways.
Our aim must not be to pronounce
excommunications or establish a blacklist, generally to no
effect. Rather, it must be to promote the protection of
individuals and the progress of law with due respect for
differences.
I should also like to reaffirm France’s determination
to see crimes against humanity punished. The
condemnation they warrant cannot brook any exception.
Together with others, France took the initiative of
proposing the establishment of the international criminal
Tribunal and the international Tribunal for Rwanda. I
wish to reaffirm France’s unqualified support for their
founding work, and its backing in order that the tribunals
might carry out their work in full.
20


Lastly, France is pleased that the foundations that have
thus been laid have helped to speed up the debates on the
establishment of an international criminal court, which we
earnestly desire and to which we attach a high priority.
There are other important areas which we have begun
to consider.
At this time when workers, money, factories and
commerce operate at a heightened pace, it is essential to
develop dialogue among the partners of economic life. This
is really the only solid basis on which to build social
protection that preserves the interests of all without harming
the growth of economies.
The fiftieth anniversary of the International Labour
Organisation (ILO) provided the opportunity to recall the
essential role of this organization in defining these minimal
norms, without which the economic world is but a vast
jungle.
Universality, however, must not lead to uniformity.
The definition of common values, accepted by all, is based
on respect for the identities that underpin the cultures of the
world. Our values will thus command all the more respect
for being expressed in all our respective languages.
Accordingly, we welcome the fact that the General
Assembly last year adopted a resolution on multilingualism
by a very large majority. Our civilizations, languages and
cultures, inherited from an often turbulent history, but of
irreplaceable richness, are a precious legacy for humankind.
The importance that my country ascribes to the
French-speaking community reflects its determination to
maintain the specificity and richness of the profoundly
original world view of several hundreds of millions of
people. We will not give this up.
The search for a new world ethic is not limited to
human rights but extends to the whole of international life.
Since 1945, international trade has been a powerful growth
factor, contributing to a large extent to the expansion of the
industrialized economies and to the success of the so-called
emerging countries. But here too we must have rules of the
game, acknowledged at the world level, so as to develop
and regulate trade, ensure that it is fair and prevent
unilateral conduct.
I should like to mention here the dangers of
unilateralism. Unilateralism: behind this technocratic word
lurks the temptation to impose the law of the strongest at
the expense of dialogue and negotiation.
France and Europe cannot accept that one country,
even if it is the most powerful, attempt to regulate world
trade by itself by means of decisions that have extra-
territorial scope. The World Trade Organization does not
allow it, and no one should doubt the firmness of French
and European reactions were such measures actually to be
implemented.
The globalization of the economy and the
liberalization of trade and investments have opened up
unprecedented prospects. However, we must take care not
to allow the gap to widen between the nations that trade,
invest and derive profit from this new factor and those
that remain on the sidelines of this new prosperity.
Each nation is responsible for itself and must create,
through rigorous public management and compliance with
its legislative rulings, optimum conditions for freeing
private initiative, a factor in economic and commercial
progress. But I do not believe that one can leave to
market forces alone the care of ensuring the development
of the poorest nations.
Here, too, the United Nations has an important role
to play. By its side, the wealthiest States must affirm their
solidarity in a tangible way: actively and effectively, this
solidarity must assist the developing countries without
becoming a substitute for them. On the threshold of a
new century, poverty and exclusion cannot constitute the
sole prospects for two-thirds of humankind. France, for its
part, will not accept this.
This commitment concerns Africa in particular,
where real prospects for progress are beginning to
emerge.
Africa has embarked with courage and perseverance
on the path to readjustment and recovery, which will
enable it to find its place again in the great flows of
world trade.
For the first time in a long time, Africa’s growth
rate has been on the order of 5 per cent these past two
years, higher than its demographic expansion, very high
though it is. This is a reassuring sign, attributable to the
efforts made by the African States themselves. They have
been able to cut public deficits, establish realistic
monetary parities, open up their markets and move
towards regional integration and democratization. Such
21


achievements, which are the result of structural reforms,
seem to us to justify our confidence. France believes in
Africa’s future.
Still, official development assistance must be
maintained and strengthened, but this assistance must be the
subject of many initiatives. France has taken such
initiatives within the European Union, the African
Development Bank, the International Development
Association and the International Monetary Fund.
Recently, at the summit of industrialized countries
held in Lyons, my country reaffirmed the need to increase
aid to the poorest countries, asking for more generous
treatment of debt for them, and for a new global partnership
to be defined between the developing countries and the
multilateral institutions.
In this new world context, we have to consider the
progress that the United Nations needs to make to be able
to meet its responsibilities for the next century.
France approves of the current discussions on
improving the representative character of the Security
Council, in particular with respect to Germany, Japan and
the States of the South.
Similarly, under the decisive impetus of the Secretary-
General, the Organization has embarked on a vast effort for
structural reform, the first results of which are beginning to
show.
It is not a matter of changing everything but of seeing
that every institution is in a position to make a useful
contribution to the collective work in its own sphere.
That is why the members of the G-7 have proposed
putting the savings realized through reforms into
development projects.
France would like to see the reform of the United
Nations economic and social sector concluded quickly so as
to strengthen the overall coherence of the Organization. To
that end, the roles and mandates of the specialized agencies
and commissions in particular should be better defined, and
waste and duplication eliminated.
These proposals are dictated solely by the wish to help
the United Nations better fulfil its mission of fighting
poverty and exclusion on a global scale.
In the case of the United Nations budget, many of us
are worried about the financial crisis that threatens to
paralyse the United Nations. The European Union has put
forward concrete proposals for overcoming this crisis. It
is now up to all States that have let their arrears
accumulate to assume their responsibilities.
Whatever some may say, the United Nations is still
one of our best chances for building a better world. Let
us not spoil it.





﻿May I begin by
congratulating Ambassador Razali of Malaysia on his
assumption of office as our General Assembly’s new
President and offer our thanks to his predecessor,
Ambassador Freitas do Amaral, for all his valuable work
during the fiftieth session.
The late twentieth century is an exciting time. For the
fortunate among us, the world has never offered more:
travel with unheard-of ease, a tantalizing cornucopia of
consumer goods, 100 or more television stations in our
homes, the Internet. But these fruits are denied the vast
majority of the planet’s population. The number of people
who live in absolute poverty is still growing. Their misery
is a challenge to all our consciences, and I want today to
talk about what we all, the developed countries as well as
the developing, can do for those trapped in poverty — what
we can do together to open the door to development.
But first of all I would like to say a few brief words
about four other issues of particular importance at this
moment in time.
First of all, Hong Kong. The year 1997 will be a
special one for Hong Kong. Less than 300 days from now
the world will witness history. The peaceful transfer of
sovereignty over a territory of 6 million free and prosperous
people is an event unparalleled in modern times. A transfer
on the basis of an international Treaty, registered here at
the United Nations — a Treaty between two members of
the Security Council, which guarantees that for 50 years
after 1997 there will be “one country, two systems” and
that “Hong Kong people will rule Hong Kong”. Let there
be no doubt of Britain’s continuing commitment to the
future of Hong Kong and its people, well into the next
century.
Thanks to the efforts of the Hong Kong people
themselves, the development of Hong Kong is one of the
world’s great success stories. The Chinese Government
has made clear its determination to preserve Hong Kong’s
prosperity, its stability and its way of life as a free and
open society based on the rule of law. For Britain, a
successful transfer will be the closing of a chapter, but
also a new beginning to our relations with both Hong
Kong and with China.
I suggest that all Members of the United Nations
have a stake in this historic exercise. As long as the
promises of the joint Declaration are turned into reality,
Hong Kong has a bright future, as part of China and as
one of the world’s leading cities, contributing enormously
to growth and prosperity throughout the Asia-Pacific
region. And I am sure that all here will join me in
welcoming that prospect.
I want also to take this opportunity to commend the
International Court of Justice in its fiftieth anniversary
year. The International Court has performed
groundbreaking work in settling disputes between States,
and I am proud that the United Kingdom has always been
among the States that accept its compulsory jurisdiction.
I hope that others will join us in pledging both moral and
material support to the International Court. The more who
accept that international law must be the foundation of
international relations, the safer we shall all be.
The world is safer today too with the historic
signature of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
Earlier this morning I had the privilege of signing the
Treaty for the United Kingdom. It shows that we can, by
acting with determination and by making sacrifices, reap
the benefits of the end of the cold war, and I firmly
believe that the Treaty can make an important
contribution to preventing the proliferation of nuclear
weapons and in promoting international security. The
Treaty was the product of a multilateral negotiation and
was adopted here in the General Assembly. But that alone
is not enough. If it is to be fully effective, it must
command universal support, and the United Kingdom will
now put in hand the steps to allow us to ratify the Treaty.
17


It is the sovereign right of every State to decide whether or
not to be bound by international agreements. But it is our
firm conviction that this Treaty is in the interests of all, and
I urge all States to give it their full support.
Meanwhile, other threats still loom large. The
insidious spectre of terrorism is a concern to all of us here,
and it is right that the United Nations should be the forum
for debate on this worldwide menace. The United Kingdom
is proposing for adoption at this session a United Nations
declaration which will spell out unequivocally that acts of
terrorism, and the financing, planning and incitement of
these acts, are contrary to the purposes and principles of the
United Nations. People who do these evil things and who
seek asylum under the United Nations refugee Convention
do not deserve to benefit from it.
The United Nations faces a critical year. It remains the
hope of people across the world in search of peace and
development. But the changes required to adapt and
strengthen the United Nations to meet the challenges of the
future have not yet been completed. This year must see a
solution to the financial crisis. Reform must be part of the
solution, including a thorough updating of the system of
assessing contributions to the United Nations, so that
contributions match real ability to pay. But all Members
must pay what they owe, both their assessments and their
arrears, and promptly; and the European Union’s proposals
are a good basis for negotiation. It will also be important to
achieve over the coming year a resolution to the long-
standing discussions of Security Council enlargement. In
short, the United Nations must be made fit for the new
millennium.
I turn now to my main theme. Three months ago, at
Lyons, the Group of Seven countries committed themselves
to a partnership for the economic development of the world.
This is not just a catchy slogan; it is a fresh approach to the
challenge of development, and what it means is that the
developing countries and the developed together would
share responsibility for creating the conditions that will
allow economies to grow, a shared agenda of measures that
we need to take to promote development.
For the countries of the developing world, this means
pursuing policies to enable economies to grow: taxes need
to be kept low, subsidies cannot be allowed to distort
markets, exports should not be impeded by heavy tariffs.
Domestic markets must be allowed to operate with as little
interference as possible. The goal must be to establish an
environment where the private sector can flourish, for the
private sector is the engine of growth.
In 1755, Adam Smith famously remarked that for
prosperity
“Little else is requisite ... but peace, easy taxes, and
tolerable administration of justice”.
This is still a valid recipe today — not easy to achieve,
but with the sound foundations of good government and
sensible macroeconomic policies, enterprise can flourish
anywhere. This is the challenge to the Governments of
the developing world.
What of the developed world’s side of the
bargain? — countries such as my own. Our responsibility
is to remove the shackles which hinder developing
economies as they try to enter the global market. Many of
the poorest countries are still caught in a mire of debt
they are unlikely ever to be able to pay off. This benefits
no one. The United Kingdom has long argued that, when
combined with macroeconomic reform of the kind I have
described, deep debt relief can kick-start the development
of the poorest economies. Some time ago, Britain helped
to identify steps that could be taken to lift the debt burden
from the poorest, most indebted countries: more debt
relief from bilateral creditors and getting the multilateral
agencies themselves to share more of the burden. Since
then the Paris Club of creditors has made an important
contribution by increasing debt forgiveness as agreed
following British proposals at the Naples Summit in 1994.
The multilateral agencies too have come up with some
useful proposals, such as the World Bank’s Trust Fund to
provide debt relief. I also welcome the International
Monetary Fund’s (IMF) commitment to continue
providing concessional finance through the enhanced
structural adjustment facility.
These measures to relieve debt need to be
implemented both flexibly and soon. The countries in
greatest need should be granted maximum relief as swiftly
as possible. I look forward to final agreement at the
annual meetings of the IMF and the World Bank next
week.
The private sector is the motor of development.
Private investment flows to the developing world are now
at record levels. The United Kingdom is the third largest
source of private investment. But these flows are still not
reaching the poorest countries. There is therefore a
continuing need for concessional aid to prime the pump
of homegrown development. We need to focus our efforts
on those countries where help is needed most and which
can make the best use of it. Help must primarily be
18


targeted at creating growth with equity, at developing
human resources to their full potential, at giving priority to
the needs of the poor: to health and education, to clean
water and small enterprises.
Increasingly this partnership in development amongst
us all has to deal with the growing problems of planet
survival: climate change, the environment, the future of the
world’s oceans and forests, and pandemic diseases.
Development which ignores these will not be sustainable.
The United Nations is a central forum for focusing the
attention and action of Governments and civil society on
these challenges as we enter the next century. Next year’s
General Assembly special session to review the Rio summit
on environment and development is one example.
But the best help that we in the developed world can
give to the developing is to buy what they produce, and to
do that we in the developed world must demolish the
barriers that we still maintain against imports from the
poorer countries of the developing world. When I look
around the world, I see many developing countries bursting
with exports that they have to sell: textiles, food,
manufactured goods. But tragically, the markets of the
richer countries of the developed world are often closed to
these exports. Last week’s report from the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD)
predicted that poor countries could triple their exports to the
North over the next 10 years if import quotas were phased
out — an extra $175 billion a year in income.
Protectionism is starving the developing economies of their
oxygen, the oxygen of growth.
The European Union’s record is better than most. We
already have a wide-ranging scheme to allow duty-free
imports from developing countries. But even so, the
European Union obstructs, for example, imports of
Palestinian cut flowers; it obstructs fruit juices from South
Africa, strawberry jam from Bulgaria. Other developed
countries are even less generous. The United States targets
imports of Mexican tomatoes; Japan restricts imports of rice
from South-East Asia. The list could go on.
We all know the difficulty of resisting powerful
domestic lobbies. They exist in Britain as elsewhere. But
this sort of protectionism is not simply selfish; it is also
short-sighted. Growth and prosperity in the developing
world will over time increase, not diminish, the wealth of
the industrialized world. Trade is not a zero-sum game. It
is a process which is mutually beneficial, mutually
enriching; and with prosperity comes stability and greater
security for us all.
This is not some fashionable nostrum dreamt up in
an ivory tower. It is a prescription which has already been
seen to work. Since 1945, under the auspices of the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), the
world economy has moved steadily towards more open
markets. And the result is clear: five decades of
unprecedented economic growth and prosperity. It is
incumbent upon us to spread this benefit more widely.
That is why I so warmly welcome the proposal put
forward by the Director-General of the World Trade
Organization. Mr. Ruggiero has proposed that the least-
developed countries be granted tariff-free access to the
markets of the developed world. I wholeheartedly
welcome this initiative. I hope that others will see its
compelling logic: the best hope the poor have for
sustained economic development is to be given the
freedom to export, the freedom to sell.
That freedom enables countries to grow. But free
trade is not just helpful to developing countries, it is a
global good, its benefits are spread wide, to the producers
and consumers in the developed and the developing world
alike, who can profit from the greater efficiency that free
trade engenders, and who can buy the best and cheapest
products available on the world markets. In short, free
trade benefits us all. That is why Britain is so firmly
committed to bringing the vision of global free trade to
reality by the year 2020.
Free trade begins at home. Cutting tariffs and other
import restrictions helps developing countries by cutting
the costs of production, boosting efficiency and thus
helping exports and growth. Combine these benefits with
the freedom to export granted by open markets in the
developed world, and developing countries and their
economies can enjoy a virtuous circle of development.
Free trade is therefore the catalyst for growth. This is not
just good economic theory. Greater efficiency and higher
growth mean more resources available for new hospitals
and new schools, better housing and cleaner water. Free
trade means real benefits for poor people.
I have described today a challenge for every one of
us here. Poverty is something we can all do something
about. In May, the Organisation for Economic
Cooperation and Development proposed that the
developed and developing worlds together should try to
cut the number of people living in absolute poverty by
half by 2015. Britain commits itself to that goal. It is
achievable.
19


At home, we must liberalize our economies, minimize
the burden of government and lift all restrictions on the free
operation of the market. In the global economy, we must
remove barriers to trade to allow the developing countries
to sell. We must help lift the millstone of debt from those
who can least bear it. We cannot allow the poorest
members of the world community to become marginalized.
We must do our utmost to enable all Members of the
United Nations to enjoy the fruits of integration into the
global economy. A revitalized United Nations has an
essential part to play.
I do not underestimate the difficulty of the tasks that
I have described. We can only confront them in partnership,
rich and poor together. If we all play our part, prosperity
can be placed within the grasp of even the poorest
countries.



﻿It gives me great pleasure to
congratulate Ambassador Razali on his election as
President of the General Assembly at its fifty-first
session. He is not present here, but I would like to say
that he is no stranger to India. We are fully cognizant of
his sagacity and skills and repose our confidence in his
ability to successfully guide the General Assembly during
its fifty-first session. May I also express my delegation’s
warm appreciation for the presidency of his predecessor,
His Excellency Mr. Diogo Freitas do Amaral, for a most
productive tenure as President of the Assembly in its
historic, landmark fiftieth year.
Six years ago I had the privilege of addressing the
historic forty-fifth session of this Assembly. We rejoiced
12


at the end of the cold war and believed that the animosities,
rivalries, suspicions and intrigues that had bedeviled the
past would now be overcome and the problems of the
world and their solutions could be addressed with greater,
perhaps pristine, clarity. We have welcomed the reduction
of global tensions and the opening up of new economic
possibilities between nations.
However, we cannot say that the new dawn has led to
a new and genuinely cooperative web of kinship and
collaboration. Regional conflicts and tensions continue to
occupy us. Development problems remain acute, and there
is less sensitivity to the genuine needs of struggling nations.
The voice of the rich and powerful nations rings louder
than ever, while the developing world feels itself more
marginalized and ignored than ever.
In these circumstances, it is even more necessary to
strive for a genuine spirit of joint international endeavour
in addressing the world’s problems. The United Nations is
the foremost embodiment of multilateralism. No single
nation or even group of nations today can expect to find
solutions to the world’s problems, nor are many problems
amenable to solutions in isolation. Global problems require
global institutions and global solutions. This role and duty
can fall only to the United Nations.
We are concerned at unilateral actions and at the
evident decline in the commitment to obligations under the
Charter of the United Nations. International cooperation is
necessary to meet the vast development needs of the
developing countries, to eliminate weapons of mass
destruction and to fight terrorism and crime. The United
Nations system, under which sovereign nations have joined
together to achieve their common objectives, is the
universal framework for international cooperation. The
Charter of the United Nations is the real basis for renewing
multilateralism. India recently joined 15 other Heads of
State or Government in stating that
“either nations move forward to strengthen
(multilateralism), or we risk having to face more
unilateralism and perhaps conflict and overt disregard
of international law and common values”.
The United Nations is at a crossroads. Its financial
crisis is the result of an unwarranted unwillingness on the
part of certain countries to pay their dues in full and on
time. Such deliberate targeting of the United Nations
represents the most acute threat to multilateral cooperation
and can do incalculable long-term damage.
Beyond the financial crisis of the United Nations
itself is the critical issue of financing global cooperation.
While the world remains confronted with enormous
problems of poverty, malnutrition, disease, ecological
degradation and waste, the will to contribute is on the
decline. Development assistance is at its lowest level in
decades. Negotiated replenishments of multilateral
development funds are not being honoured.
It is unfortunate that voices continue to be raised
questioning the role of the United Nations in the
economic growth and social development of developing
countries. It is necessary to restore to the United Nations,
in the coming century, the important role of eradicating
poverty and all the ills associated with it, of promoting
development and achieving social progress and better
living standards, with more freedom for all.
For this purpose, the multilateral economic system
needs to be reformed and the partnership of the United
Nations with other relevant institutions must to be
strengthened in order to achieve greater economic growth,
integration and sustainable development. The United
Nations and the Bretton Woods institutions need to
develop an effective partnership. While India welcomes
the initial, tentative steps towards such a partnership,
effective economic leadership requires that we work to
ensure a much closer relationship between global
economic institutions than has been the case so far.
Indeed, there is no alternative if the financing of long-
term global cooperation in economic and social fields is
to be assured. We need larger volumes of financial
assistance, greater predictability of resources and
unfettered access to the markets of developed countries.
It is also time that we energize our efforts to complete the
Agenda for Development and launch an effective follow-
up process, including in the context of the recent major
United Nations conferences.
India is unreservedly committed to the protection
and promotion of human rights. The profoundly
humanistic traditions of Indian civilization, with its
emphasis on tolerance, harmony, non-violence and the
inviolability of the individual, have been consolidated in
the Constitution of India, which is indeed a veritable bill
of human rights. All human rights are sacrosanct in India,
guaranteed by its Constitution, an independent judiciary,
a free press, public opinion vigorously expressed and an
independent National Human Rights Commission. To us
in India, the human rights of all segments of society are
sacrosanct and an article of faith rather than a policy.
13


We believe that international cooperation in the
protection and promotion of human rights should proceed
within the framework of respect for the sovereignty and
integrity of States. We deplore the selective use of human
rights issues as a form of political pressure, as an obstacle
to trade or as a condition for development assistance. Such
actions detract from the moral imperatives of human rights
promotion and impede the full realization of the human
rights of all people.
Human rights violations take many forms. Among the
most pernicious of them is terrorism. Terrorism seeks to
exploit the openness and freedom offered by democratic
societies to pursue narrow ends through the use of violence.
It must be combated by firm action at the national and
international level. We are dismayed when we hear certain
parties voice concern for the so-called rights of terrorists
while ignoring their persistent violation of the human rights
of their victims, including the right to life, freedom of
expression and the freedom to follow religious beliefs of
one’s own choice.
India took the lead in raising the issue of terrorism as
a threat to human rights almost five years ago. We are
pleased that despite initial and sometimes vocal opposition
by some western countries, terrorism is now accepted to be
the major threat to the enjoyment of human rights today. A
number of international declarations have been issued on
terrorism such as the Sharm el-Sheikh Declaration, and the
G-7 Lyons Declaration of 27 June 1996. We are
encouraged that the international community now
recognizes terrorism as a major challenge to democracy,
human rights and peace. In this context, India will pursue
its call to adopt a binding international convention to
combat terrorism.
Fifty years after the United Nations was established,
the threat to humanity posed by nuclear weapons continues
unabated. We believe that India’s security, as indeed that of
all countries, lies in a nuclear-weapon-free world.
The only way to achieve this ultimate security is to
ban the production, possession and use of nuclear weapons
within an agreed time-frame. Partial and half-hearted arms
control measures, such as the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) or the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT), defeat
this objective by legitimizing the possession of nuclear
weapons and permitting the non-explosive testing of nuclear
weapons by nuclear-weapon countries. India, therefore,
cannot be a party to such flawed arrangements.
Let me also emphasize that any effective
disarmament regime needs to be universal in its approach
and scope. The total elimination of all existing nuclear
weapons, as an indispensable step towards general and
complete disarmament under strict and efficient
international control, is the demand of the entire Non-
Aligned Movement, to which we fully subscribe. Partial
or regional approaches, as are sometimes put forward, do
not serve any useful purpose and can distract us from the
accepted goal.
At the same time, India remains committed to
participating fully and actively in any negotiations on a
treaty banning nuclear weapons and all types of tests, just
as it did in regard to the Chemical Weapons Convention.
India signed and deposited its instrument of
ratification of the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction two weeks
ago. India regrets that major chemical weapon producers
have been slow to ratify the Convention. We urge all
those countries which have still not done so to ratify the
Chemical Weapons Convention and to demonstrate their
readiness to move towards banning all weapons of mass
destruction.
India will work with all like-minded countries in
sponsoring draft resolutions on the establishment of an ad
hoc committee under the Conference on Disarmament for
beginning negotiations on a treaty banning nuclear
weapons in a time-bound framework. India expects all
countries, including those represented in the Canberra
Commission on the Elimination of Nuclear Weapons,
which support time-bound elimination of nuclear
weapons, to join in supporting such draft resolutions.
India will once again present the draft convention on
the prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons at this
session of the General Assembly. India believes that the
urgency of negotiating that convention has been greatly
enhanced by the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice regarding the illegality of the use of
nuclear weapons.
At the recent session of the Conference on
Disarmament, India joined 27 non-aligned and neutral
countries to present a phased programme for the
elimination of nuclear weapons by the year 2020. India
asks that all countries join us in propagating and
promoting this joint proposal, both at the fifty-first
session of the General Assembly and in other forums.
14


India is in favour of a non-discriminatory and
universal ban on anti-personnel mines, which cripple or kill
a large number of civilians.
The continued credibility of the United Nations
requires reform of the Organization to reflect present-day
realities. While the membership of the United Nations has
increased greatly, the voices of the newly sovereign
countries in decision-making in the United Nations remain
unheard. There is an imbalance in the authority and weight
of structures and organs, just as there is an imbalance in the
weight of different countries or groups. The General
Assembly, the sole universal organ of the United Nations,
needs to find greater resonance in other bodies of the
system.
The Security Council must be made more
representative in order to enhance its legitimacy and
effectiveness. The vast increase in the membership of the
United Nations since its founding, especially of the
developing countries, must find adequate representation in
the categories of permanent and non-permanent
membership. A comprehensive proposal by the Non-
Aligned Movement for the reform and restructuring of the
Security Council is already on the table. India supports the
expansion of both the permanent and the non-permanent
categories. We are against piecemeal or temporary solutions
which discriminate against developing countries. We
believe that the same yardstick must be applied to all
countries, developed or developing, from all regions or
groups, for induction as permanent members. We believe
that under any objectively derived criteria for the expansion
of permanent members, India would be an obvious
candidate.
Reform and expansion must be an integral part of a
common package. The restructuring of the Security Council
must give expression to the impulse for reform. The
reforms must address not only the failings of the past, but
also the needs of the future.
Peacekeeping is a significant area of United Nations
activities, very often the most visible symbol of the
Organization’s presence on the ground. India has
participated in over 25 peacekeeping operations on four
continents, including some of the most sensitive and
prolonged, starting with Korea in 1953 and 1954, and
including the operations in Viet Nam, Congo, the Middle
East, Cambodia, Haiti, Somalia, El Salvador, Mozambique
and Rwanda. Indian peacekeepers are currently in the field
in Angola, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Liberia and Kuwait.
Our participation has not been without cost. We have lost
100 peacekeepers for the United Nations cause. We have
also offered a fully-equipped brigade to the United
Nations standby arrangement. The performance of the
Indian troops has won universal recognition. India is one
of the few countries which can sustain large-scale troop
commitment over prolonged periods.
Our participation in United Nations peacekeeping
does not stem from considerations of narrow gain. We
have participated because we have been wanted and
because we have been asked, but most of all because of
our solidarity and empathy with the affected countries and
with the international community, as well as because of
our commitment to the United Nations and to the cause
of international peace and security.
India has offered its candidature for the non-
permanent seat on the Security Council from Asia for
1997 and 1998. Our candidature is rooted in the criteria
stipulated in the Charter: the principle of equity, our
unwavering commitment to the United Nations, and to the
cause of multilateralism, and our 50-year-long
contribution to the maintenance of international peace and
security and to the other purposes and principles of the
Organization. India has a unique record of supporting
United Nations activities against apartheid and
colonialism. We have richly contributed to the debates on
development, disarmament and human rights. We seek the
onerous responsibility of Council membership convinced
of the support of this Assembly.
I would like to take this opportunity to pay a warm
tribute to the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-
Ghali, for his successful stewardship during a most
difficult period. His services are a distinct asset to this
world body.
Let me briefly refer to India’s interaction with the
world. We have witnessed some remarkable changes in
the last few years. New vistas for greater cooperation are
now visible. The challenge lies in effectively seizing the
opportunities. We attach the highest importance to
developing cordial and friendly relations with our
neighbours with a view to promoting peace, stability and
mutual confidence in the region. We also seek to develop
stronger economic and commercial relations within the
region, for all-around prosperity. As current Chairman of
the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
(SAARC), it will be our endeavour to promote
multifaceted cooperation in all spheres.
15


The economic reforms embarked upon since 1991
have provided India with a new outward orientation that
seeks greater integration of India into the global
marketplace. Today, India is branching out and adding to
the substantive content of its relations with individual
countries of the region and beyond, developing and building
upon regional cooperation arrangements involving SAARC,
the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), the
ASEAN Regional Forum, the Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation Council (APEC) and the Indian Ocean Rim, to
name a few.
Convinced of the need and utility of enhanced South-
South cooperation, we accord the highest priority to our
relations with Africa, the Middle East and Central Asia. We
are proud to have been associated with Africa and its
causes in the United Nations since the inception of the
world body. We appreciate the role played by the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), which has striven to
find regional solutions to African problems. Its efforts must
be supplemented by the United Nations. The scramble for
Africa in the nineteenth century was for African land and
resources. We hope that the closing years of the present
century will see a scramble to redress African problems, the
genesis of which largely lies outside the region. The United
Nations must lead international efforts to meet Africa’s
needs and aspirations.
We are deeply concerned at the recent serious
incidents of violence in the West Bank and Gaza and by
Israeli authorities’ opening of a tunnel beneath Haram
Al-Sharif — the Temple Mount — in East Jerusalem,
which resulted in the tragic loss of several innocent lives
and large-scale injuries following violent clashes. The
current situation underlines the need for immediate and
effective measures to end the violence and to create a
climate that would enable purposeful negotiations based on
a recognition of the underlying causes of the conflict. These
developments also serve to emphasize the need to build
further on the agreements and understandings already
reached.
In the wave of the recent political changes in the
Middle East, India is encouraged by the reiteration by all
parties of their continued commitment to the Middle East
peace process based on the framework established by the
Madrid Conference. However, we are concerned that these
reaffirmations do not appear to have manifested themselves
in commensurate progress in the peace process. India urges
all parties to intensify their efforts towards realizing the
mutually agreed objectives of the Middle East peace
process, keeping in view that achieving durable peace and
stability in the Middle East requires solving the
Palestinian issue.
India has ties dating back to early history with
Afghanistan, a country with which we also share bonds of
kinship, culture and religion. We are deeply saddened by
the continued violence and loss of life in that country.
India stands for the unity, independence and territorial
integrity of Afghanistan. We urge all Afghan parties to
resolve their differences through early peaceful dialogue
and negotiations. We support the efforts of the Secretary-
General and his special representative to bring about a
solution in Afghanistan.
The Non-Aligned Movement figures firmly in
India’s world view and constitutes an important plank in
our foreign policy. We remain firmly committed to the
philosophy and values of the Non-Aligned Movement. For
us, non-alignment means independence of thought and
autonomy of choice. It also means working in cooperation
with the largest number of countries. Last year’s non-
aligned summit in Colombia reinforced our faith in the
ability and resilience of the Movement, its responsiveness
to change and its effectiveness in today’s global situation.
India will be privileged to host the next ministerial
conference of the non-aligned countries in New Delhi in
1997.
India is a progressive country charting a balanced
course between economic growth and social justice, and
science and tradition. It is committed to the values of
peace, non-violence, coexistence, pluralism, tolerance and
constructive cooperation. Culturally, India is a bridge
between traditional cultures and emergent trends.
Politically, India will remain anchored in a pluralistic,
liberal democracy that can provide space for all its
constituents and internal interlocutors.
Before I conclude, I am reminded of an ancient Rig
Vedic hymn which reads:
“O citizens of the world!
Live in harmony and concord
Be organized and cooperative
Speak with one voice
And make your resolutions with one Mind.”
May this invocation to harmony, cooperation,
consensus and solidarity continue to guide our
deliberations and actions.
16


﻿Allow
me first, Sir, to congratulate Mr. Razali Ismail on his
unanimous election as President of the General Assembly
at its fifty-first session and to wish him every success. I
would also like to thank his predecessor, Mr. Diogo Freitas
do Amaral, for the outstanding manner in which he carried
out his duties.
The succession of Governments, which is a defining
principle of Israeli democracy, has recently brought to
power a new Government in Israel. A section of the
international community has deemed this democratic Israeli
choice impertinent, suggesting that it would work against
regional peace. In response to this prejudice I would like to
make a simple statement: Israel is united in its quest for
peace. It is not a question of good people and peace-seekers
on one side and mischief-makers and people who reject
peace on the other. In Israel, those on the left and right
converge in their quest for peace, their sensibilities and
differences notwithstanding.
I wish to raise the recent history of the Israeli-Arab
peace process in order to dispel any ambiguity regarding
the practice of peace in Israel and to show that the new
majority cannot be disqualified from efforts to achieve
peace. The peace between Israel and Egypt is a founding
landmark of coexistence between Israelis and Arabs. The
Madrid Conference, to which I had the honour of
contributing, also bears the special stamp of the pioneers of
peace, to whose achievements the new majority in Israel are
the direct heirs.
The firm commitment of the Netanyahu Government
with respect to the Oslo accords is also closely tied to the
peace process, which our immediate neighbours, Egypt and
Jordan, helped to shape. However, my Government’s swift
engagement in the peace process has been minimized,
reduced and distorted. The meetings that the Prime
Minister and the Minister of Defence of the State of Israel
and I have had with the Chairman of the Palestinian
Authority have been met with sarcasm and given only
secondary importance. Those meetings dealt precisely
with the substance and the content of peace. They
initiated the ways and means necessary for the
achievement of peace. They amplified the resonance of
the Oslo accords and extended mutual Israeli-Palestinian
recognition to new sections of society and Israeli political
classes. It is Israel’s determination to reach peace
according to the policies and fundamental guidelines of
the new Government.
On its road to peace, the Government of Israel is
guided by several principles, which I would like to
expound. For us, security is neither an obsession nor a
blind belief. It touches upon our very existence in a
region where, unfortunately, threats and instability still
rage. Security must be the cornerstone in the architecture
of peace. It cannot, under any circumstances, tag along
behind a process in which terrorism and violence have not
yet spoken their last word.
Negotiations themselves, through their joint creative
energies, allow us to control the dangers and drifts. The
battle against terrorism and its infrastructures and its
sources of financing and assistance is not only for us to
fight. We solemnly call upon the United Nations
relentlessly to pursue active cooperation in the struggle
against terrorism and in condemning it unequivocally. It
is imperative to preserve the Israeli-Palestinian peace
process free from violence.
I have just returned from the Washington summit,
held at the initiative of President Clinton. On behalf of
the Government and the people of Israel, I wish, from this
rostrum, to thank the President and the Secretary of State
of the United States for their exemplary contribution to
peace by bringing the parties together and for their
profound commitment to reinvigorating the peace process.
In this respect the role and contribution of the United
States remain of great importance.
On Sunday the Israeli and Palestinian teams will
convene again in an attempt to resolve their differences in
respect of the various agreements. We are responsible to
our people and to our whole region in this matter. We
must therefore display good faith and mutual
understanding in order to fulfil our mission, and to send
out the message of stable peace and lasting security.
12


The Washington summit reconfirmed the principles
and guidelines for the negotiations. I associate myself
wholeheartedly with President Clinton’s statement that face-
to-face negotiations in a constructive atmosphere are the
key to resolving problems. A future free of hostility and the
renunciation of violence: these represent the very basis of
mutual efforts for peace.
The choice is in our hands. Will we opt for
cooperation, progress, real peace and security? Or will we
revert to the dark days of conflict, confrontation and
violence, thereby putting an end to all hope? For its part,
Israel has chosen hope.
Another major principle in our search for peace is the
will of the partners to allow a tangible peace to exist.
Regional cooperation is a critical factor in ensuring peace
and stability. Israel entertains no dreams of economic
hegemony; it wishes to play its fair role in the creation of
regional cooperation. This is a basic principle of
normalization. Peace and normalization are one and
indivisible. Consequently, if we are to follow the logic of
peace and dialogue, we cannot risk having normalization
taken hostage and brought to a halt.
Israel makes no secret that normalization of its
relations with the Arab world must be fully implemented.
This means comprehensive political and economic relations,
and the broadest possible intellectual, cultural and spiritual
acceptance. Some of our neighbours still view Israel as a
body foreign to the region. Normalization must erase
forever the residue of this ideological negation.
Normalization is the indispensable cement for keeping
together the edifice of peace.
One of our immediate goals is the resumption of
negotiations with Syria on the basis of the Madrid
principles, which inaugurated the dialogue between the two
countries. We recognize Syria’s important role in the
establishment of lasting peace in our region. From this
rostrum, we call upon President Al-Assad to resume
negotiations.
As to Lebanon, we have no territorial disputes with
Lebanon. We are committed to its sovereignty. Lebanon
can be fertile ground for the restoration of confidence and
the building of peace.
Egypt and its President, Mr. Hosni Mubarak, are our
partners in peace. They are the authors and actors that have
always been engaged in all stages of the peace process.
Jordan is unquestionably a decisive factor in the
building of peace in our region. A man of peace and
dialogue, His Majesty King Hussein has actively
supported the peace process and has provided a vital
guarantee of continuity. The Washington summit enjoyed
his complete support.
On the long path to peace, the country of Morocco,
the country of my birth and family roots, has always
walked and illuminated the path of Israeli-Arab
reconciliation. The vision displayed by His Majesty King
Hassan II has left its distinctive mark on the entire Arab-
Israeli dialogue. The Moroccan King will continue his
essential role and breathe into peace the remarkable
inspiration of his solidarity.
I would like to pay tribute also to the active support
of Tunisia. Oman, Qatar and, more recently, Mauritania
have all helped to consolidate peace efforts.
The peace process has benefitted from the
considerable support of the co-sponsors, the United States
and Russia, and from the active and positive contribution
of the European Union and Norway and of Powers such
as Japan and Canada.
Once again, I wish solemnly to reaffirm Israel’s
irreversible commitment and determination to pursue the
path of peace.
Since the dawn of history our region has been a
meeting point of diverse civilizations and cultures, a
vibrant wellspring of progress for all of humanity. At the
crossroads of continents and countries, the Middle East
must, in times of peace, discover again the genius of this
place and the richness of its edifying civilizations. Arabs
and Jews must pool their knowledge and wisdom to
regenerate their vocation as the promoters of life and
humanity.
Through international cooperation, Israel is sharing
with young countries from Africa to Asia, from Latin
America to China, its achievements and assets in the
fields of agriculture, health and science.
We hope that the day will come when a regional
security system will be established in the Middle East to
provide a cooperative multilateral response to all security
problems. The advantage of this regional approach is that
it is based on direct negotiations between the States of the
region. The first stage is to build confidence, and
thereafter we must put arms control and disarmament
13


mechanisms into place. For this reason, Israel welcomed the
establishment of the Arms Control and Regional Security
Working Group as part of the multilateral talks. We hope
that in the future this framework will encompass all States
of the Middle East.
Israel’s position is defined by a dual mandate: to set
ambitious objectives, and to pursue them pragmatically and
realistically. After peace and reconciliation have been
established among all the States of the region, Israel will
endeavour to establish in the Middle East a zone free of
chemical, biological and nuclear weapons as well as
ballistic missiles. This demilitarization will be subjected to
rigorous verification.
Negotiations to establish such a zone will commence
following the signing of bilateral peace accords between
Israel and all the countries of the region. In the meantime
Israel will implement confidence-building measures that
will increase openness and transparency and, thereby, make
a contribution to easing tensions and preventing all armed
conflict.
We generally prefer regional security arrangements.
However, Israel is in favour of the implementation of
certain aspects of international mechanisms for arms control
and disarmament where appropriate. Accordingly, Israel
signed the Convention on conventional weapons and
adopted a moratorium on the manufacture and export of
anti-personnel landmines. It has also signed the Treaty
against the use of chemical weapons and now the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. Israel will
consider ratification of that Treaty depending upon
developments in the region, particularly the adoption of that
Treaty by the major countries.
Israel has thus demonstrated its determination to be
involved, whenever possible, in the efforts of the
international community to prevent the spread of
conventional and non-conventional weapons.
Israel strongly desires to be an active and fully-fledged
member of the family of nations represented in this
Organization. We note with regret and deep disappointment
that the question of our membership in a regional group has
still not been resolved. Israel is thus deprived of the right
available to all States Members of the United Nations to
participate on an equal footing in all its activities. This
impairs the principle of equality among sovereign nations
under the Charter of the United Nations. I hope that this
injustice will be rectified and that Israel will finally be able
to act within this Organization on the same footing as all
other Member States.
It is with the subject of Jerusalem, whose very name
is invoked in so many prayers for peace, that I wish to
conclude. Jerusalem is the cradle of the three great
religions. We reaffirm this status daily by respecting and
ensuring total freedom of worship and spiritual expression
for all believers. It is an entirely shared religious reality
to which Israel has made a profound contribution.
Jerusalem, the horizon of our dreams and prayers,
has throughout our exile and dispersions constituted the
summit of our collective being. Capital of Israel, both in
ancient and modern times, never has Jerusalem been the
capital of any country other than Israel.
Rarely if ever has any sovereign State been denied
the right to freely determine its capital. Israel, the people
of peace restored to sovereignty after 2,000 years of exile,
has returned to the city of peace, Yerushalayim:
Jerusalem. Thereby it demonstrates its unswerving
devotion to its ancestral capital to renew its psalm of
peace: “Pray for the peace of Jerusalem”. We shall
tirelessly dedicate all our efforts to that search for peace.





﻿It gives me particular
pleasure to address the General Assembly at a session of
over which Malaysia has been elected to preside. Our two
countries are good friends, and Ambassador Razali is
personally known to and respected by us all. New Zealand
looks forward to a productive session under his leadership.
In just two weeks New Zealanders face a general
election. There are many subjects over which the various
political parties differ, but one thing remains quite clear: the
support of New Zealanders for the United Nations and the
rule of international law embodied in it.
For New Zealand, as for many other countries
represented here today — and especially smaller
countries — the primary purpose of the United Nations
remains to provide for a system of collective security. It
brings the nations of the world together in a grand coalition
to keep the peace, to help eliminate weapons of mass
destruction, to uphold human rights, to encourage good
governance, to protect the environment and to promote
economic and social development, including by
supporting the role of women.
Together, these activities, along with national and
regional initiatives, provide the underpinnings of the
system of collective security that we want to leave for our
children.
For New Zealanders, our confidence in the United
Nations was reaffirmed when, two weeks ago, the General
Assembly adopted the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty. It gave me much satisfaction to sign the Treaty
earlier today on behalf of the Government and the people
of New Zealand. Agreement on a test ban has been a
New Zealand objective for more than three decades and
one we promoted in this Assembly, together with
Australia and Mexico. It reflects deeply held convictions
on the part of all New Zealanders.
New Zealand has argued, and will continue to argue,
for a world without nuclear weapons. Our belief that
these weapons of mass destruction can and should be
eliminated has been reinforced by the experiences of our
region as a testing ground for nuclear weapons. I am glad
to say it is an era now happily behind us.
For New Zealand, the Treaty represents first of all
an end to nuclear testing in our region and worldwide.
But even more, it puts real obstacles in the way of any
State seeking to refine or develop a nuclear arsenal. We


have taken a significant step on the way to eliminating
nuclear weapons entirely. Now, however, we must look
ahead.
The International Court of Justice, in its recent
Advisory Opinion on the legality of the use or threat of use
of nuclear weapons, set out our obligation in this regard:
the obligation to pursue in good faith and to bring to a
conclusion negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament.
New Zealand believes that in 1997 all States, including
nuclear-weapon States, should pursue negotiations on a
phased programme of nuclear disarmament, with the
ultimate goals of the complete elimination of nuclear
weapons and a treaty on general and complete disarmament
under strict and effective international control.
We are better placed to make our contribution to such
negotiations because of the recent decision of the
Conference on Disarmament to admit New Zealand and 22
other countries as full members. As a reflection of the
importance we attach to its ongoing work, my Government
has now decided to appoint a full-time Disarmament
Ambassador to the Conference in Geneva.
Further steps towards a nuclear-free world are
recommended in the report of the Canberra Commission on
the Elimination of Nuclear Weapons, released last month.
We hope that report will energize discussions at the
national level, particularly in the nuclear-weapon States.
The aspirations of many States to be free of nuclear
weapons have found expression in the establishment of
what are now four nuclear-weapon-free zones. Taken
together, the four relevant treaties have the potential to
cover some 114 nations and 1.7 billion people. My
Government has given considerable thought to ways in
which cooperation between nuclear-weapon-free zones can
be advanced. We are working with other Governments on
a draft resolution to be submitted to the Assembly at this
session, and New Zealand hopes it will receive wide
support.
The disarmament arena is only one where the United
Nations must continue to address serious challenges to our
collective security. When my Government took office in
October 1990, the international community faced the
challenge presented by Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait. In the
heart of Europe, Yugoslavia was on the path to political
disintegration. Few of us imagined then, however, the
nightmare of Bosnia, the genocide to come in Rwanda or
the mass starvation and anarchy in Somalia. In response,
during our term on the Security Council in 1993 and 1994,
a record 75,000 United Nations peacekeepers were
deployed around the world, and Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait
was robustly countered by coalition action authorized by
the Security Council. New Zealand was part of that
coalition and is part of the current efforts to ensure that
Iraq complies with subsequent Council decisions. Recent
events show that we still need to be vigilant. Iraq must
recognize that there are limits to what the international
community will tolerate.
New Zealanders also serve in the former Yugoslavia
where, while the implementation of the Dayton accords
lies primarily with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO), the United Nations continues to play an
important role. Similarly, our personnel serve in Angola
and the Middle East.
New Zealanders are staunch supporters of the United
Nations role in international peacekeeping, despite the fact
that the overall record through the first half of this decade
has been mixed. There were successes, such as Cambodia,
Mozambique and El Salvador, and there were the
disappointments and bitter frustrations of Bosnia, Somalia
and Rwanda. I hesitate to call those operations failures.
To me, that would be to overlook the positive things they
achieved in extremely difficult circumstances and the
contributions made by so many dedicated and able people.
Those operations will be failures only if we fail to learn
from them. I think we have learned.
We have learned that, first, the United Nations must
be given the resources required to do the job. Secondly,
the Organization must be careful about mixing
enforcement tasks with peacekeeping, unless our
peacekeepers are appropriately configured from the outset
for the higher level of threat.
Thirdly, the Security Council should be wary of
adopting resolutions to which the Organization cannot
give effect. This creates a very corrosive credibility
problem.
My Government also considers that the United
Nations must continue its efforts to develop a capacity to
respond more rapidly. We commend the proposal to
establish a rapidly deployable operational headquarters
team and, indeed, have offered to contribute a highly
experienced officer to it.
Demining remains an important focus for New
Zealand. Mines pose an unacceptable threat to
peacekeeping operations and are a longer-term
2


humanitarian and development challenge. The United
Nations must make every effort to ensure that the necessary
resources are available for demining activities.
We have more than doubled our annual instalment to
the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Assistance in
Mine Clearance. This is in addition to our continuing
contribution of expertise in demining in Cambodia,
Mozambique and Angola, as well as here at United Nations
Headquarters.
Finally, we do not think the United Nations can write
itself out of the script when operations involving a potential
enforcement dimension are contemplated. If it did so, it
could quickly become irrelevant. The threats to international
peace and security in the future are likely to be every bit as
difficult as those of the recent past. The United Nations will
need to be able to respond effectively, not simply as a
rubber stamp for great-Power actions.
The tragic events of recent days in the West Bank and
Gaza show that peace there remains elusive. New Zealand
calls upon all parties to desist from actions that might derail
the Middle East peace process. Painstaking efforts have
gone into that process, and it offers a real hope for a long-
term solution to the problems that have bedeviled that
region. It must be supported and not jeopardized.
Human rights are the foundation of freedom and
justice, and the achievement of universal respect for human
rights is an essential prerequisite for international peace and
security.
In New Zealand we work hard to ensure that our own
house is in order. We are committed to ensuring that the
rights elaborated in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, the Covenants and other core human rights
instruments are a living reality for all New Zealanders, and
we are prepared to speak out when we see human rights
being violated in other parts of the world. At its heart, our
international human rights policy is geared to finding
tangible ways of protecting and promoting human rights
and good government.
In the Asia-Pacific region we are pleased by the
progress the United Nations is making in nurturing human
rights frameworks. We are also encouraged by the new
levels of cooperation and interaction being achieved by the
human rights commissions of the region.
New Zealand also sees a need to support individual
countries, international and regional organizations and non-
governmental organizations in their work to improve
human rights and the quality of governance. To this end
the Minister for Foreign Affairs has today announced the
establishment of an international good-government
programme. This new programme will markedly expand
our ability to support good government and human rights
capacity-building activities. It will work in tandem with
the existing Commonwealth Good Government Fund.
Consistent with United Nations principles, New
Zealand has also participated actively in the Action Group
of Commonwealth Ministers for the promotion of
principles of good governance established at the
Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting at Harare
in 1991 and reaffirmed at its Auckland meeting in 1995.
For my own part, I have been privileged to represent New
Zealand at several of the Action Group’s meetings and
during its recent mission to Gambia.
Such programmes, with the interlinked goals of
social progress and economic development, do not come
cheaply. The money spent on United Nations relief and
development greatly surpasses that spent on peacekeeping,
and so it should.
At the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro in 1992 it
was recognized that substantial new and additional
funding would be required for sustainable development
and the implementation of Agenda 21, the programme of
action that will take us into the next century.
I am pleased to be able to say that by next year New
Zealand will have increased its official development
assistance by almost one third since Rio. There will be a
24 per cent increase in our funding for United Nations
development agencies this year.
1997 will see the five-year review of Agenda 21. At
the special session of the General Assembly next June,
one important task will be to assess the effectiveness of
the bodies and institutions that have been established to
advance the aims set out in Agenda 21. The issues are
many, and all are important. But we need to focus efforts
and produce real results.
In this regard, the Commission on Sustainable
Development should have a strengthened role. It should
be the forum in which States can work to streamline the
environment-and-sustainable- development agenda.
All these challenges facing this unique Organization,
and our regard for it, highlight of course the urgent need
3


for reform. In particular, the Security Council must be
made more representative of the Organization’s membership
as it is today, not as it was 50 years ago. Its decision-
making procedures must be brought up to date.
Finding a sustainable basis for the financing of the
Organization remains long overdue. New Zealand has
dedicated itself to reform of both the Secretariat and the
intergovernmental machinery, not least through our
vigorous commitment to the work of the Open-ended High-
level Working Group on the Strengthening of the United
Nations System. The report of that group provides a
blueprint for action during this session. We also support the
Efficiency Board, and have made available to it the services
of a New Zealand expert in public-service restructuring.
We believe that New Zealand’s record, not only as a
prompt contributor of assessments, but also as a country
that has demonstrated its commitment to financial reform,
places it in a good position to make an effective
contribution to the work of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, in which we are
seeking membership at this year’s session of the General
Assembly.
The drive for reform of the United Nations system to
make it an effective instrument of the international
community for the next 50 years means no part of it can
remain immune from scrutiny.
A good deal of attention has been focused on the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the Secretariat.
We believe there is also scope for increasing the
effectiveness of the International Court of Justice. It is 50
years since the ICJ was established as the principal United
Nations judicial organ. To mark this important milestone in
the international rule of law, we should now finally
schedule a conference to adopt the statute for the
international criminal court. The creation of a permanent
court that will bring justice to victims of genocide, crimes
against humanity, war crimes and other serious international
crimes is surely a priority for us all.
I am grateful to have had this opportunity to reaffirm
New Zealand’s commitment to this Organization, and to
multilateralism, as the means for building a better world.






﻿The agenda of the General Assembly at
the current session reflects all the complexity of the stage
mankind is now going through, the essence of which is
the transition from bloc confrontation to multipolarity,
economic interdependence and the democratization of
international relations.
I would like to emphasize that during the past year
Russia made its contribution to the consolidation of this
very trend. At the domestic level, this means an
uncompromising continuation of the process of reforming
society. The results of the recent presidential elections in
our country have convincingly proved that Russia has
decisively embarked on the road to the future. The
majority of Russians voted for the continuation of
economic reform, for a State of law and for a policy of
openness and cooperation.
In our relations with the other Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) countries, we resolutely oppose
both the idea of restoring the Soviet Union, an idea based
on the denial of the sovereignty of the Commonwealth
States, and narrow-minded national isolationism. We
stand for the voluntary integration and unification of the
13


members of the Commonwealth and hold that it should not
be isolated from the rest of the world. We wish to ensure,
and we shall ensure, that the CIS will become an important
centre of world economic development and international
stability.
On a wider international plane, Russia is pursuing a
policy aimed at establishing a new world order firmly based
on the equality of all States, justice and universal security.
However, the establishment of such a world order is a slow
process, influenced by both objective and subjective factors.
It is only natural that the end of the cold war provided a
starting point for the transition to achieving a stable and
predictable peace at the global level.
But zones of regional conflict have expanded
drastically. The upsurge of terrorism has caused universal
shock, and the threat of proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction is emerging. The rejection of ideological,
military-force confrontation, brought about by the end of
the cold war, clearly proved insufficient to neutralize all
these dangers and risks.
Let us confess, at least to ourselves, that we will not
succeed here unless, first and foremost, we overcome the
inertia of the political mentality. Unfortunately, the
stereotypes that took root in the minds of several
generations of statesmen during the 40 years of the cold
war have not yet disappeared along with the dismantling of
strategic missiles and the destruction of thousands of tanks.
In this connection, I would like to single out three
conditions for the transformation of international relations
during the post-cold-war period.
First, we should see to it that the old fronts of bloc
confrontation are not replaced with new lines of division.
That is precisely why we accept neither the idea of the
expansion of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) military infrastructure to the area of the now
defunct Warsaw Treaty nor the efforts to make that alliance
the axis of a new European system. The enormous
possibilities for economic cooperation and the spiritual
enrichment of all the peoples of the continent can be
realized only through the creation of a genuinely
all-European system of international relations. The
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Lisbon summit must be an important stage in the
construction of such a Europe.
It is important to stress in general that the logic of a
multipolar world in the twenty-first century should differ
qualitatively from the schemes outlined by Metternich and
Bismarck. The way towards the establishment of a system
of comprehensive security is through learning the skills of
equal partnership between the various “poles”, rather than
through the revival of reflexes of rivalry and of balance
of power.
The threat of new lines of division is appearing not
only in Europe, but elsewhere. The understandable
intolerance of the extremism of certain Islamic groups and
factions must not develop into a categorization of the
Muslim world at large as an enemy of modern
civilization. This is probably one of the pressing
requirements of our day.
Russia advocates resolute opposition to extremist and
terrorist forces. They are especially dangerous when they
enjoy State support, and no effort should be spared to
prevent any State from rendering such support. This
cannot be justified. I believe it is time a universal
convention, covering all States without exception, were
elaborated within the United Nations, denying political
asylum anywhere to persons engaged in terrorist
activities. However, no sanctions should be used as a
means to punish peoples or as an instrument to overthrow
Governments. It is far more effective to offer prospects
for a better future to those who renounce extremism and
accept the norms of conduct by the world community.
The second condition for achieving a durable peace
is the emancipation from a mentality based on concepts
of leaders and followers. Such a mentality is fuelled by
illusions that some countries emerged from the cold war
as victors, and others as the vanquished. But this is not
the case. Peoples on both sides of the Iron Curtain jointly
strove to rid themselves of the policy of confrontation.
Meanwhile, the mentality based on leaders and followers
paves the way directly towards the establishment of a
unipolar world. Such a world-order model is unacceptable
today to the overwhelming majority of the international
community.
Finally, the third condition for the successful
movement towards stable peace lies in the coordinated
activities of the international community. Today, one of
the most important tasks is the settlement of regional and
local conflicts. In this regard, significant progress has
been achieved recently. Peace agreements are being
implemented in Bosnia. Initial important agreements have
been achieved for a durable peace in the Middle East. We
have managed to secure ceasefires in Transdniester,
Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Nagorny Karabakh. The
situation has improved somewhat in the conflict zones on
14


the African continent and in Latin America. But as yet no
breakthrough to a durable peace has been achieved in any
of these hotbeds of tension.
The future of the Middle East is a cause for grave
concern. Russia — one of the sponsors of the peace
process — cannot accept the sacrifice to tactical
considerations and internal political manoeuvres of the first
fruits of the peace negotiations, which were won at such a
great cost. The implementation of the Agreements reached
is the only realistic basis for maintaining the peace process.
The only possible way forward is to advance through
negotiation on the basis of the principle of “land for peace”,
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), as
well as resolution 425 (1978), which deals with Lebanon.
It should be clear that the danger of reverting to
confrontation becomes greater as the artificial pause in the
peace process continues. When negotiators are silent, lethal
weapons begin to awake.
We appreciate the peacemaking efforts of the United
States of America, the European Union, France, Egypt and
other members of the international community and we
support an even closer partnership in peacemaking. That is
the most effective way to promote peace-building in the
Middle East.
The Bosnian settlement has entered a new and crucial
stage since the elections of 14 September. The prospects for
a lasting peace have become greater, but the risk of slipping
into a new spiral of hostility and confrontation remains. I
call upon all the Bosnian parties to take full advantage of
the chance for peace created by the international
community. At the same time, the United Nations, the
OSCE, members of the Contact Group and the High
Representative should immediately take a just and balanced
approach to resolving outstanding problems. Assistance for
the social and economic reconstruction of Bosnia and
Herzegovina should be intensified considerably and
conditions created for the return of refugees.
The time has also come to look beyond the horizon of
the Paris agreements. There would seem to be a need for a
large-scale and prolonged civilian peacemaking operation in
which the United Nations and its specialized agencies will
play an important role. The international military and police
presence, to which Russia contributes, should remain a
factor in the peace process for a given period after
December 1996.
The lifting of sanctions against the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and the Bosnian
Serbs is an indispensable condition for a successful peace
in the former Yugoslavia. I hope that, in the near future,
a Yugoslav delegation will take its place in this Hall, as
it has at the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe.
The programme of disarmament, security and
stability for the twenty-first century should become one of
the major axes of transition period strategy. The adoption
of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty is one
huge step in this direction. Russia has just signed the
Treaty and we believe that it is of fundamental
importance for all countries with nuclear capability to
accede to it. However, it should clearly be understood that
testing by any country of a nuclear explosive device
before the Treaty enters into force will radically change
the international situation and greatly prejudice the Treaty
itself, and may compel many countries to revise their
attitude to it.
I should like to draw the attention of the Treaty’s
opponents to the fact that it will not only contribute to the
promotion of nuclear non-proliferation, but will
objectively stimulate a gradual transition to nuclear
disarmament on a multilateral basis. That is the purpose
of President Yeltsin’s proposal to conclude a treaty on
nuclear security and stability with the participation of all
the nuclear Powers. We invite interested States to begin
exchanging views on the issue. Our suggestion that
nuclear arsenals be located only on the territories of the
nuclear Powers in question remains current.
The strengthening of the non-proliferation regime for
weapons of mass destruction depends directly upon
reliable prevention of the illicit traffic in fissile materials.
The Moscow Summit of the Eight on Nuclear Safety and
Security, convened as a result of a Russian initiative,
contributed significantly to a solution of this problem. I
call on all United Nations Member States to become
involved in the implementation of the Moscow
agreements.
The rights of an individual should occupy a central
place in any new concept of international security.
Strengthening the international human-rights protection
mechanism could ensure the observance of these rights.
Its oversight and preventive functions should be
consolidated and made more practical. However,
legitimate efforts to ensure respect for human rights
cannot serve political purposes. It is too delicate an area
to be invaded by political speculation and objectives.
15


My comments apply fully to the protection of the
rights of national minorities. The relevance of this problem
is evident in today’s world. The complexity of the
situation — let us be frank — requires a link between the
protection of the rights of national minorities and
observance of the principle of the territorial integrity of
States. Russia is directing its policy at precisely such a link.
My comments also apply to the Baltic States. While
recognizing the sovereignty of those countries and their
territorial integrity, Russia cannot remain indifferent to the
discriminatory practices pursued against the
Russian-speaking populations in Estonia and Latvia. While
acknowledging measures that have already been taken to
improve the situation, we believe that the United Nations
and other international organizations should intensify and
systematize their work for the protection of the rights of
national minorities.
How do we implement this strategy for creating a new
world order? Despite the importance of bilateral relations
and successful regional organizations, the United Nations
remains the principal mechanism capable of ensuring the
transition from a bipolar and confrontational world to a
multipolar and democratic one. In such circumstances, the
significance of the United Nations as a centre for
coordinating the actions of States is increasing. During the
formation of a multipolar system, the United Nations is
called upon to serve as a kind of safety net, minimizing the
destructive effects of the changes and directing them
towards democratic evolution.
The major task of the United Nations remains the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Furthermore, the principal tools available to the
Organization must be political and diplomatic. I remind the
Assembly of this fact because, during the past few years
within the United Nations, a “sanctions syndrome” has
begun to emerge: a desire to apply sanctions and other
coercive measures more broadly and actively, sometimes
ignoring existing political and diplomatic avenues. We are
convinced that the United Nations should take such
measures only in exceptional cases, after all other means
have been genuinely exhausted.
On the whole, there is a need to modernize the United
Nations sanctions mechanisms. Today, for example, no
specific procedure is provided for lifting sanctions, and, as
experience has demonstrated, this is extremely important.
The humanitarian damage caused by sanctions and the
damage to third countries should be minimized.
It is extremely important to emphasize that the
United Nations must be maintained as the sole
Organization that can authorize the use of force. Any
actions of that nature taken in circumvention of the
Security Council must be totally precluded.
The United Nations can and must work purposefully
towards establishing a new global legal framework. To
give impetus to such work Russia has proposed the
holding in 1999 of a third peace conference. This idea
already has the support of a significant number of States.
I believe that the time has come to discuss this initiative
in a constructive and substantive manner.
Past experience shows the need for new approaches
by the United Nations to peacekeeping operations. We
can already discern a pyramid regulating the relations of
the United Nations with regional organizations. Without
the development of such relations the United Nations may
not be able to withstand the burden of peacemaking
actions. I refer specifically to a pyramid, because it is of
fundamental importance to do no harm to the Security
Council, which bears the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace.
We are counting on significantly more attention
being paid by the United Nations to conflicts in the area
of the Commonwealth of Independent States. So far, the
major role in this respect has been played by Russia and
its Commonwealth partners.
In view of present circumstances, Russia calls on the
United Nations to address the Afghan conflict. In that
multinational and long-suffering country, a truly critical
situation has arisen, and we have to do everything
possible to prevent the country from disintegrating. The
Afghan tragedy, like the endless series of internal
conflicts in Rwanda and Liberia, is the most convincing
argument for the development of a United Nations policy
of national reconciliation diplomacy.
To cope with all these tasks, the United Nations
itself must be updated and adapted to these new
conditions. Reform is long overdue, and it is not a single
measure that is required but a process that encompasses
the entire United Nations system. Reform of the United
Nations requires clearly defined goals: first, that it carry
out its activities in a timely manner; and secondly, that its
structure be optimized in order to enhance the
effectiveness of the Organization.
16


A great deal has already been done to implement
reform. The Secretary-General has made a considerable
contribution to these efforts, and Russia supports the
continuation of this difficult and protracted effort.
It is a well-established tradition to conclude statements
before this Assembly by saying that the current session
must play a special role in strengthening peace and that
peoples are expecting us to make decisions. I am confident
that this session of the General Assembly will live up to the
expectations of Governments and the hopes of peoples: that
all of us will take a new step in humankind’s difficult
transition towards a world united in its diversity, a world
that is open to universal economic and spiritual
development, a world that promises security and stability —
a world in which States cooperate on an equal footing. Let
us work together for the sake of this goal.





﻿Three years ago I had the honour
of being the first American President born after the
founding of the United Nations to address the General
Assembly. In its fifty-first year, the United Nations has not
yet realized all its founders’ aspirations. But the ideals of
the United Nations Charter — peace, freedom, tolerance
and prosperity — now touch more people in more nations
than ever before.
Now we find ourselves at a turning point in history
when the blocs and barriers that long defined the world are
giving way to an age of remarkable possibility — a time
when more of our children and more nations will be able to
live out their dreams than ever before. But this is also an
age of new threats — threats from terrorists, from rogue
States that support them, threats from ethnic, religious,
racial and tribal hatreds, threats from international
criminals and drug traffickers — all of whom will be
more dangerous if they gain access to weapons of mass
destruction.
The challenge before us, plainly, is twofold: to seize
the new opportunities for more people to enjoy peace and
freedom, security and prosperity and to move strongly
and swiftly against the dangers that change has produced.
This week and in this place, we take a giant step
forward. By overwhelming global consensus, we will
make a solemn commitment to end all nuclear tests for all
time.
Before entering this Hall, I had the great honour to
be the first leader to sign the Comprehensive Test-Ban
Treaty (CTBT). I did so, with some pride, with this pen,
for this pen is the very one that President Kennedy used
to help bring the limited test-ban Treaty to life 33 years
ago.
This Comprehensive Test-Ban Treaty will help
prevent the nuclear Powers from developing more
advanced and more dangerous weapons. It will limit the
ability of other States to acquire such devices themselves.
It points us towards a century in which the roles and risks
of nuclear weapons can be further reduced and ultimately
eliminated.
I want to thank all those who helped bring us to this
day, especially the Chairman of the comprehensive test-


ban negotiating Committee, Netherlands Ambassador
Ramaker, and the Government of Australia, which took the
lead at the United Nations.
I thank the Secretary-General for the remarks he made
this morning in establishing the criteria and standards in
support of the United Nations as the depository of the
Treaty.
The signatures of the world’s declared nuclear
Powers — the United States, China, France, Russia and the
United Kingdom — along with those of the vast majority
of its nations, will immediately create an international norm
against nuclear testing even before the Treaty formally
enters into force.
The CTBT is the shared work of hard negotiation.
Some have complained that it does not mandate total
nuclear disarmament by a date certain. I would say to them:
“Do not forsake the benefits of this achievement by
ignoring the tremendous progress we have already made
towards that goal.” Today there are no Russian missiles
pointed at America and no American missiles pointed at
Russia.
Through the START Treaties we are cutting our
nuclear arsenals by two thirds. Ukraine, Belarus and
Kazakstan are giving up the nuclear weapons left on their
land after the Soviet Union dissolved.
We are working with the newly independent States to
improve security at nuclear facilities and to convert nuclear
weapons to peaceful uses.
The United States and other nuclear-weapon States
have embraced the South Pacific and African nuclear-free
zones. Now half the world’s land area is nuclear free by
international agreement. And the world community
extended indefinitely the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
Yet some of the very changes that had made this
progress possible have also created new risks. The breakup
of the Soviet Union left nuclear materials dispersed
throughout the newly independent States. As barriers have
come down around the world the danger of nuclear
smuggling has gone up. So even as we reduce the global
stockpiles of weapons of mass destruction, we must also
reduce the danger that lethal materials could wind up in the
wrong hands, while developing effective defences for our
people if that should happen.
The United States has six priority goals to further lift
the threat of nuclear weapons destruction and the threat of
weapons of mass destruction, and to limit their dangerous
spread.
First, we must protect our people from chemical
attack and make it harder for rogue States and terrorists
to brandish poison gas by bringing the chemical weapons
Convention into force as soon as possible. I thank the
nations here that have ratified the chemical weapons
Convention. I deeply regret that the United States Senate
has not yet voted on the Convention, but I want to assure
you and people throughout the world that I will not let
this treaty die, and we will join the ranks of nation
determined to prevent the spread of chemical weapons.
Secondly, we must reduce the risk that an outlaw
State or organization could build a nuclear device by
negotiating a treaty to freeze the production of fissile
materials for use in nuclear weapons. The Conference on
Disarmament should take up this challenge immediately.
The United States, Russia, France and the United
Kingdom already have halted production of fissile
materials for weapons. I urge other nations to end the
unsafeguarded production of these materials pending
completion of the treaty.
Thirdly, we must continue to reduce our nuclear
arsenals. When Russia ratifies START II, President
Yeltsin and I are all ready to discuss the possibilities of
further cuts, as well as limiting and monitoring nuclear
warheads and materials. This will help make deep
reductions irreversible.
Fourthly, we must reinforce our efforts against the
spread of nuclear weapons by strengthening the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). We
should give the International Atomic Energy Agency a
stronger role and sharper tools for conducting worldwide
inspections. Our law enforcement and customs officials
should cooperate more in the fight against nuclear
smuggling. And I urge all nations that have not signed the
NPT to do so without delay.
Fifthly, we must better protect our people from those
who would use disease as a weapon of war, by giving the
biological weapons Convention the means to strengthen
compliance, including on-site investigations when we
believe such weapons may have been used or when
suspicious outbreaks of disease occur. We should aim to
complete this task by 1998.
2

Finally, we must end the carnage caused by
anti-personnel landmines, the hidden killers that murder and
maim more than 25,000 people a year. In May, I announced
a series of actions the United States would take towards
this goal. Today, I renew my appeal for the swift
negotiation of a worldwide ban on the use, stockpiling,
production, and transfer of anti-personnel landmines. Our
children deserve to walk the Earth in safety.
Thirty-three years ago, at the height of the cold war,
President Kennedy spoke at American University in
Washington. Peace was the topic of his address, but not an
abstract ideal of peace. Instead, he urged us to focus on
“a more practical, attainable peace — based not on a
sudden revolution in human nature but on a gradual
evolution in human institutions — on a series of
concrete actions and effective agreements which are in
the interests of all concerned.”
It was in that same speech that he announced that talks
would shortly begin in Moscow on a comprehensive test-
ban treaty.
President Kennedy’s vision exceeded the possibilities
of his time, but his words speak to us still. As we sign our
names to the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty —
the longest-sought, hardest-fought prize in arms control
history — let us summon the confidence of earlier pioneers
and set our sights on the challenges of the new century.
Over the past three years we have moved in the right
direction in meeting those challenges. In Bosnia, where the
war is over and where just 10 days ago its people went to
the polls in peace, we have moved in the right direction.
Now we must help Bosnia build a unified, democratic, and
peaceful future.
In Haiti, where the dictators are gone, democracy is
back and the exodus of refugees has ended, we have move
in the right direction. Now we must help the Haitian people
seize the full benefits of freedom and forge a more
prosperous future. In the Middle East and in Northern
Ireland, there is progress towards lasting peace, and we are
moving in the right direction. Now we must support
continued progress between Israel and Palestinians, and we
must broaden the circle of peace to include more of Israel’s
neighbours. We must help to give the children of Belfast
the chance to live out normal lives.
In the fact that democracy, open markets and peace
are taking hold around the world, we are moving in the
right direction. Here in the Americas, every nation but
one has raised freedom’s flag. In Central Europe, in
Russia, Ukraine and the other new independent States, the
forces of reform have earned all our respect and will
continue to have the support of the United States. Now
we must begin to welcome Europe’s new democracies
into the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO),
strengthen NATO’s partnership with Russia and build a
secure and undivided Europe.
In Asia, South Korea, Japan, China and America
working together persuaded North Korea to freeze its
nuclear programme under international monitoring. Now,
in the wake of provocative actions by North Korea, we
must pursue a permanent peace for all the Korean people.
Our planet is safer because of our common efforts to
close Chernobyl, to address the challenges of climate
change, to protect the world’s forests and oceans. Now
we must uphold our duty as custodians of our
environment so that our children will inherit an even
healthier planet.
All of us must continue our historic efforts to build
a better, more global trading system for the twenty-first
century. We have made remarkable progress, but there is
more to do in opening markets, in creating millions of
new jobs for all our people.
In this time of challenge and change, the United
Nations is more important than ever before, because our
world is more interdependent than ever before. Most
Americans know this. Unfortunately, some Americans, in
their longing to be free of the world’s problems, and
perhaps to focus more on our own problems, ignore what
the United Nations has done, ignore the benefits of
cooperation. They ignore our own interdependence with
all of you in charting a better future. They ignore all that
the United Nations is doing to lift the lives of millions by
preserving the peace, vaccinating children, caring for
refugees, sharing the blessings of progress around the
world. They have made it difficult for the United States
to meet its obligations to the United Nations. But let me
reassure all of you: the vast majority of Americans
support the United Nations, not only because it reflects
our own ideals, but because it reinforces our interests. We
must continue to work to manifest the support that our
people feel. For the fifty-first year in a row, the United
States will be the largest financial contributor to the
United Nations. We are paying our dues, and I am
committed to paying off our accumulated obligations.
However, we also support the process of reform, which
has done great work in reforming and streamlining the
3


bureaucracy and reining in the budget, and it should
continue.
We also believe that all of us — the nations of the
world working together — must do more to fight terrorism.
Last year I asked the nations assembled here to commit to
a goal of zero tolerance for aggression, terrorism and
lawless behaviour. Frankly, we have not done that yet. Real
zero tolerance means giving no aid and no quarter to
terrorists who slaughter the innocent and drug traffickers
who poison our children, and doing everything we can to
prevent weapons of mass destruction from falling into the
wrong hands. Real zero tolerance requires us to isolate
States that refuse to play by the rules we have all accepted
for civilized behaviour. As long as Iraq threatens its
neighbours and its people, as long as Iran supports and
protects terrorists, as long as Libya refuses to give up the
people who blew up Pan Am 103, they should not become
full members of the family of nations.
The United States is pursuing a three-part strategy
against terrorists: abroad, by working more closely than
ever with like-minded nations; at home by giving our law
enforcement the toughest counter-terrorism tools available,
and by doing all we can to make our airports and the
aeroplanes that link us all together even safer. I have
requested more than $1 billion from our Congress to meet
these commitments, and we are implementing the United
States Vice President's aviation security plan to make those
travelling to, from and within the United States more
secure.
There are other steps we must take together. Last year,
I urged that together we crack down on money laundering
and front companies, shut down gray markets for guns,
explosives and false documents, open more law
enforcement centres around the world and strengthen
safeguards on lethal materials. In each of these areas we
have made progress, through the United Nations, at the
Summit of Peacemakers in Sharm el-Sheikh, at the Paris
terrorism conference and individually.
Now we should adopt the declaration on crime and
public security I proposed last year. It includes a no-
sanctuary pledge, so that we can say with one voice to the
terrorists, criminals and drug traffickers: “You have no
place to run, no place to hide.” I call on every Member to
ratify 11 international conventions that would help prevent
and punish terrorism and to criminalize the use of
explosives in terrorist attacks.
To every nation whose children fall prey to
drugs and every nation that makes those drugs: we must
do more to reduce demand and to take illegal drugs off
the market and off the streets. The United States will do
its part. Next week, I will target more than $100-million
worth of defence equipment, services and training to
Mexico, Colombia and other South American and
Caribbean countries.
These resources will help our friends stop the flow
of drugs at the source. Now I ask every nation that
exports the chemicals needed to make illicit drugs to
create an informal group whose members will work to
deny these chemicals to drug producers. We must not let
more drugs darken the dawn of the next century.
Our duty to fight all these forces of destruction is
directly linked to our efforts to reduce the threat of
weapons of mass destruction. We all know we are not
immune from this. We saw it when our friends in Japan
were subject to the murderous power of a small vial of
sarin gas unleashed in the Tokyo subway. We know a
small lump of plutonium is enough to build a nuclear
bomb. We know that more dangerous people have access
to materials of mass destruction because of the rapid
movement and open borders of this age. The quest to
eliminate these problems from the world’s arsenals and to
stop them from spreading has taken on a new and
powerful urgency for all of us.
So let us strengthen our determination to fight the
rogue States, the terrorists and the criminals who menace
our safety, our way of life and the potential of our
children in the twenty-first century. Let us recommit
ourselves to prevent them from acquiring weapons of
mass destruction. Let us work harder than ever to lift the
nuclear backdrop that has darkened the world’s stage for
too long now. Let us make these solemn tasks our
common obligation, our common commitment; if we do,
then together we will enter the twenty-first century
marching towards a better, safer world — the very better,
safer world the United Nations has sought to build for 51
years.




﻿I should like first to extend
warm congratulations to Mr. Razali Ismail on his election
to the presidency of the General Assembly at its fifty-first
session. We have no doubt that the session will benefit
from his known skills as he discharges his responsibilities.
I should also like to commend Mr. Diogo Freitas
do Amaral for the excellent work done during his term of
office.
I should also like to express to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, our continued confidence in his
guidance of the Organization.
Allow me at the outset of this, my first opportunity to
speak before the General Assembly, to express the deep
gratitude and appreciation of the people and Government of
South Africa for the decision taken by the Assembly at the
fiftieth session to relieve the new democratic Government
of South Africa of the burden of the contribution to the
United Nations budget accumulated over the period of two
decades when the apartheid regime was excluded from
participating in the work of the General Assembly. We
recognize that that action involved considerable sacrifice,
both for the United Nations and for its Member States, and
that it was also consistent with the historic commitment of
support for our struggle for democracy.
South Africa remains committed to achieving a world
free of all weapons of mass destruction and to addressing
the issue of the proliferation of conventional weapons. We
therefore welcome the adoption of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT), which we signed
yesterday.
Our support for the CTBT as an instrument of
disarmament and non-proliferation is based upon the view
that this Treaty is an integral part of a process which will
lead to the full implementation of the nuclear-disarmament
obligations set out in article VI of the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
An important milestone along this road was the
adoption of the Pelindaba Treaty creating the African
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone. This Treaty will contribute
greatly to measures aimed at achieving a world free from
nuclear weapons. Further steps are needed in the process to
bring the world closer to the ultimate goal of the
elimination of nuclear weapons. The next step is for
African States to cooperate with parties to the other
nuclear-weapon-free-zones in the Pacific and Latin
American regions with a view to promoting a southern
hemisphere-wide nuclear-weapon-free zone. We are
heartened by the unprecedented step of four nuclear-
weapon States’ signing the relevant Protocols of the
Pelindaba Treaty simultaneously with African States in
April 1996, while the fifth has indicated that it will sign
shortly. South Africa, as stated previously in other
forums, will also work for the commencement next year
of negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament on a
treaty banning the production of fissile material for
nuclear weapons.
South Africa also supports and will work for the
establishment of an ad hoc committee on nuclear
disarmament in the Conference on Disarmament. This
committee can identify and negotiate the necessary steps
by which we can achieve the ultimate goal of the eventual
elimination of nuclear weapons. We also look forward to
the early ratification of the Chemical Weapons
Convention by those States that have not yet done so.
It is not just the threat posed by all weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery that is of serious
concern to my Government, but also the build-up of
conventional weapons beyond a level which can be
considered legitimate for the purposes of self-defence.
Conventional weapons are, in fact, the cause of most of
the deaths and suffering of millions of people in conflicts
around the world today.
My Government would therefore like to encourage
all States Members of the United Nations to support and
participate in the United Nations Register of Conventional
Arms, and lend active support to General Assembly
resolution 50/70 B on small arms and its panel of
governmental experts mandated to assist the Secretary-
General to prepare a report on small arms. We would also
encourage Member States to support the worldwide
efforts to secure the elimination of anti-personnel
landmines. In order to alleviate the suffering caused by
landmines, my Government is committed to reinforcing
international cooperation. As a country with advanced
demining technology, we are pleased to be making a
modest contribution to international efforts to unearth
landmines.
South Africa will continue to cooperate in the
various international forums dedicated to the
non-proliferation of the technologies and equipment which
17


could be used in the development of weapons of mass
destruction, and in discouraging any destabilizing build up
of conventional weapons.
Our harrowing experience under the tyranny of
apartheid has imposed a duty on us to place a high
premium on the promotion of human rights. In this regard,
our Constitution contains an entrenched and fully justiciable
Bill of Rights. In addition, plans are advanced for the
establishment of an office on the status of women to
provide a mechanism within the Government to act as a
monitor to ensure that a gender perspective is integrated
into all publicly-funded policies and programmes. The
South African Government regards it as a priority to
contribute to the efforts of the international community to
combat the violation of human rights.
In South Africa, and in the region as a whole,
processes of democratization have released a host of
productive human and political resources. This has, in many
ways, contributed to the achievement of peace, security and
stability in our region.
Our vision for southern Africa is one of the highest
possible degree of economic cooperation, mutual assistance
and the joint planning of regional development initiatives,
leading to full economic integration.
Civil conflicts have ravaged many parts of Africa. We
welcome the positive developments which have taken place
in Rwanda and Sierra Leone. However, serious conflict
persists in Liberia, Burundi and Somalia. The South African
Government is committed to playing an active role in the
ongoing efforts of the international community to assist the
people of Burundi to bring about lasting peace and national
reconciliation. President Mandela recently appointed a
special representative for Burundi, who has been given the
task of searching for a viable solution in close coordination
with other special representatives and with countries in the
region. These efforts need to be supplemented by close
cooperation between the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) and the United Nations.
At the same time, we are heartened by the progress,
albeit tentative so far, towards peace in Angola.
Representatives of Member countries assembled here will
agree that the people of Angola deserve peace at last as an
instrument for — or rather, as an important ingredient of —
embarking on the road to sustainable economic
development and social advancement. Our Government
commends the efforts of the United Nations, and especially
those of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Angola, Maître Alioune Blondin Beye, who has with
tremendous patience and commitment guided the Angolan
peace process to the stage where it is today. We owe it to
the people of Angola to see this process through to its
logical conclusion.
Through the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and
Resolution, member States of the OAU are collectively
committed to restoring peace and security on our
continent. In support of the OAU mechanism, we are
pleased that the Southern African Development
Community has recently created an organ on politics,
defence and security. These efforts reflect Africa’s
primary concern with issues of preventive diplomacy and
conflict resolution.
South Africa welcomed the spirit of dialogue and
realism that had begun to characterize the relations
between Israel and Palestine and was hopeful that this
positive development would gradually replace the
centuries of conflict in the Middle East. That hope was
further reinforced by the Declaration of Principles on
Interim Self-Government Arrangements reached in Oslo.
My Government is concerned, however, that recent
developments in the Middle East are likely to reverse and
jeopardize the peace process. We therefore urge all the
players in the Middle East to rise to the occasion and, in
a spirit of reconciliation, to move steadfastly towards a
lasting peace in the region.
We are seriously concerned by the marginalization,
particularly of African countries among the least-
developed countries, from the process of globalization and
liberalization. In this regard, closer attention should be
given to the need to address the external debt burden of
the least-developed countries, especially those in Africa.
Problems associated with the debt burden and its
servicing still persist and frustrate the rate at which the
continent can extricate itself from the vicious cycle of
poverty.
We therefore welcome the Mid-term Review of the
Implementation of the United Nations New Agenda for
the Development of Africa in the 1990s and recognize the
importance of the United Nations System-wide Special
Initiative on Africa, as well as the need to underpin its
success through appropriate and adequate resources.
In this context we also welcome the designation of
1996 as the International Year for the Eradication of
Poverty. We hope that the international community will
18


realize this objective in clear recognition of the challenges
facing it.
We welcome the World Food Summit, which is to
convene in Rome in November 1996 and which will afford
the international community the opportunity to demonstrate
its commitment to ensuring that poverty eradication
strategies are fully integrated into all initiatives of the
United Nations system.
My Government is encouraged by the outcome of the
United Nations Conference on Human Settlements
(HABITAT II). The results of the Conference represent the
collaborative efforts of the international community to
develop a consensus view on the fundamental need to
provide access to adequate shelter and infrastructure for all
people. Continued support for initiatives at the national and
international level to realize and implement the necessary
follow-up to HABITAT II should now receive priority
attention.
It was an honour for South Africa to host the ninth
session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development (UNCTAD) in April 1996. My Government
believes that the sound basis for cooperation established by
UNCTAD IX and the call for partnership for growth and
development outlined in the Midrand Declaration must be
carried forward and implemented through the General
Assembly and other forums. South Africa is particularly
keen to ensure that the framework which we adopted at
Midrand for the reform of UNCTAD is translated into an
effective facility for the developing world.
South Africa also wishes to underscore the
fundamental importance of international cooperation in the
environmental and development fields. Sustained political
commitment through global partnership remains essential
for our continuing international cooperation efforts. It is for
this reason that we believe that the 1997 special session of
the General Assembly will provide an excellent opportunity
to reaffirm the principles and objectives of the Rio
Declaration’s Agenda 21.
South Africa, a country with a long coastline, has
considerable interest in matters relating to the law of the
sea. We are thus pleased that the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea and its implementing
Agreement have entered into force, and that the
International Sea-Bed Authority and related structures, of
which South Africa is proud to be a member, have been
established.
In my statement to the General Assembly during the
fiftieth session, I expressed the sincere hope that
significant progress would be made in bringing about the
establishment of an international criminal court. It is
therefore gratifying to see that the Preparatory Committee
on the Establishment of an International Criminal Court,
which was established during the fiftieth session, has
made much progress in bringing this idea to fruition.
What is now needed is to take this process forward by
holding as soon as possible a diplomatic conference
where the statute of the proposed court can be finalized.
It is widely acknowledged that the favourable
changes in the international climate are conducive to the
reform and modernization of the United Nations in order
to prepare the Organization to respond effectively to the
challenges of the twenty-first century.
I wish to recall that in his address on 23 October
1995 at the Special Commemorative Meeting of the
General Assembly, President Mandela, said:
“Indeed the United Nations has to reassess its
role, redefine its profile and reshape its
structures. It should truly reflect the diversity
of our universe and ensure equity among the
nations in the exercise of power within the
system of international relations in general, and
the Security Council in particular.” (Official
Records of the General Assembly, Fiftieth
Session, Plenary Meetings, 37th meeting, p. 6)
In this regard, my delegation wishes to register its
disappointment at the slow pace of advancement, with no
end in sight to the deliberations of the Working Group on
the question of equitable representation and increase in
the membership of the Security Council and other matters
relating to the Security Council. In this regard we support
the recommendation in the report of the Working Group
that the Group should continue with its work. We would
also urge Member States to demonstrate flexibility and
accommodation in their future deliberations and to display
the necessary political will in order to reach a common
understanding.
In the declaration that the Heads of State and
Government adopted on the occasion of the fiftieth
anniversary of the United Nations on 24 October 1995, it
was noted that
“In order to carry out its work effectively, the
United Nations must have adequate resources.
19


Member States must meet, in full and on time, their
obligation to bear the expenses of the Organization, as
apportioned by the General Assembly. That
apportionment should be established on the basis of
criteria agreed to and considered to be fair by Member
States.” (A/50/48, para. 15)
My delegation has taken note of the progress of the
Working Group on the financial situation in highlighting the
problems facing the Organization, and urges all Member
States to pay what is legally due as soon as possible in
order that we may direct our energies to the real problems
facing the world at this time. As we approach the twenty-
first century, let us together resolve to redefine the role and
shape of the United Nations and render this institution
better equipped to carry out the important task of advancing
peace and development in the world.



﻿Please allow me first of all to offer my sincere
congratulations to Ambassador Razali Ismail on his election
to the presidency of the General Assembly at its current
session. I am convinced that with his outstanding ability
and rich experience he will fulfil this lofty mission with
distinction. I would also like to express my thanks to
Mr. Diogo Freitas do Amaral for the important contribution
he made during his presidency of the last session.
The 1990s are a period of momentous transition,
during which international relations are undergoing the most
far-reaching changes since the Second World War. The
collapse and disappearance of the bipolar structure has
rekindled hope that the world will become a community of
countries with equal rights for all, rather than one
dominated by a single big Power. Multipolarity is gaining
momentum in a global as well as a regional context. Major
Powers are readjusting their relationships. On the other
hand, the multitude of developing countries have become
increasingly aware of the need to bolster their strength
through concerted efforts. The Non-Aligned Movement
continues to uphold the ideals and principles of
independence, independent decision-making and
non-affiliation with blocs, and is vigorously pushing for
a new just and democratic international order of peace
and equality. Regional economic organizations, which are
displaying great vitality, are expanding their role in
promoting regional cooperation and development in their
respective areas.
Asia’s upsurge is having a significant impact on the
world’s political and economic configurations. The world
is deeply impressed with the vigorous economic
development of Asia, East Asia in particular. The
convening of the first Asia-Europe meeting highlighted
the changes now being seen and marked an important
new beginning for an equal, cooperative relationship
between Asia and Europe. As the world moves towards
multipolarity, the forces for peace are bolstered. The call
for dialogue and cooperation, as against confrontation and
conflict, has become louder.
In the Asia-Pacific region, efforts to maintain peace
and stability and promote common development through
dialogue, consultation and cooperation have yielded
positive results. An agreement on confidence-building in
the military field along border areas has been concluded
between China on the one hand, and the Russian
Federation, Kazakstan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan on the
other; this agreement governs a boundary over 3,000
kilometres in length. The Association of South-East Asian
Nations (ASEAN) Regional Forum has succeeded in
bringing Asia-Pacific countries together to consider
security issues facing the region. The Asia-Pacific
Economic Cooperation Council (APEC) has become a
useful mechanism for promoting trade and investment
liberalization as well as economic and technological
cooperation in the region.
The past year has seen peace returning to a number
of war-torn countries and regions. We are pleased to note
that the peace accord reached between the belligerents in
Bosnia and Herzegovina is being implemented, and that
Yugoslavia and Croatia have normalized their relations.
It is hoped that peace will soon be fully restored to the
region of the former Yugoslavia in order to put an end to
the prolonged conflict in that part of Europe.
The impact on Africa of the drastic changes in the
post-cold war international situation is waning. Africa is
entering a new historical era in which it is striving for
peace, stability and development. Many burning issues in
Africa have already been or are in the process of being
settled gradually. At the same time, however, some
14


countries and regions are still plagued by the scourge of
war. We hope that the international community will
continue to give attention and attach importance to African
issues so as to help bring lasting peace and development to
the whole African continent at an early date.
But the path towards peace is tortuous. After some
major gains in preceding years, the Middle East peace
process has hit snags again. China is concerned at this
development. We hope that all the parties concerned will
strive for an early comprehensive and just settlement of this
issue by strictly observing the agreements already reached
and resuming negotiations and dialogue on the basis of the
relevant United Nations resolutions.
Peace should have prevailed in the post-cold-war
world, in which equal members of the international
community should respect each other’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity, refrain from invading each other or
interfering in each other’s internal affairs, and live in
harmony with each other, in a spirit of seeking common
ground and putting aside differences. However, the reality
is that the world today is far from tranquil because the
cold-war mentality dies hard and hegemonism has
repeatedly raised its ugly head. Interference in other
countries’ internal affairs under various pretexts, and
indulgence in sanctions-wielding or even the use of force
are trampling on the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and all accepted norms of
international relations, thereby threatening and undermining
world peace and stability. Recent controversies in
international forums, generated by the issue of sanctions,
signify that in the context of a growing trend towards
multipolarity, hegemonism and power politics will become
increasingly untenable.
The vigorous expansion of international trade and
investment and the rapid advance of science and technology
have led to closer economic ties between countries and
regions, thus accelerating the process of economic
globalization. This presents a rare opportunity to both
developed and developing countries. By riding the tide of
globalization and relying on their own unremitting efforts,
some developing countries have achieved sustained and
rapid economic growth, thereby giving a great impetus to
world economic growth. These and other changes on the
world scene have widened the prospects of international
cooperation.
Regrettably, however, a counter-current of trade
protectionism has recently arisen in the ranks of developed
countries, designed to curtail the development of developing
countries and exclude them from the decision-making
process on major world economic issues. Any act
prejudicial to developing countries will in the final
analysis undermine the interests of developed countries.
International economic exchanges and cooperation should
be built on the basis of mutual complementarity. Facing
the tide of economic globalization, neither developed nor
developing countries should resort to trade protectionism.
Rather, both should make the necessary readjustments and
reforms in the light of their own national conditions in
order to promote their welfare and keep out of harm’s
way. Only by enhancing international exchanges and
cooperation on the basis of equality and mutual benefit
can we jointly cope with new problems arising in the
course of world economic advances and achieve sustained
common development and prosperity.
No one should overlook the unevenness of world
development and the ever widening gap between
developed and developing countries. Caught in the web of
relentless international competition, the least-developed
countries are in distress, and the risk of marginalization
is looming large. To make matters worse, the amount of
official development assistance from richer countries is
shrinking every year, with more stringent conditions
attached. The coffers of the United Nations Capital
Development Fund are drying up, and future prospects are
grim indeed. The international community, and especially
the developed countries, are duty-bound to take effective
measures to reverse this dire situation. The promotion of
economic development and the prosperity of all countries,
and the elimination of poverty should always be at the top
of the United Nations agenda.
Strengthening international cooperation in the field
of the environment and development is a vital link in
global efforts to achieve sustainable development.
Four years after the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development, the public has become
increasingly aware of the importance of environmental
protection. Sustainable development has become a major
objective in the socio-economic development strategies of
all countries. However, international cooperation in this
domain is disappointingly lagging. Developed countries
have failed to live up to their pledges under Agenda 21 in
terms of funding and technology transfer, yet they
demand that developing countries accept obligations
exceeding their capability at their present level of
development. It is hoped that next year’s special session
on environment and development will be able to resolve
these issues.
15


Poverty, unemployment, the problem of refugees,
crime, over-population, environmental deterioration, drug
abuse and terrorism — these scourges remain formidable
and impede global stability and development. In the face of
these challenges, all countries should not only carry out
social development policies commensurate with their own
national conditions, but should also actively cooperate with
one another in line with the principles of mutual respect,
equality and mutual benefit. The United Nations needs to
enhance its social programmes focusing on developing
countries.
The international community at large should press for
the implementation of the follow-up actions of the Cairo
International Conference on Population and Development,
the Copenhagen World Summit for Social Development and
the Beijing Fourth World Conference on Women in favour
of universal social development.
Our Organization has gone through vicissitudes in the
course of half a century. Enormous changes have taken
place on the world scene. It is imperative for the United
Nations to carry out appropriate rational reforms so that it
can better perform the noble mission of the times and usher
a better world into the twenty-first century.
All reforms must be conducive to realizing the
purposes and principles of the Charter and to improving the
efficiency of the United Nations. They must also contribute
to a more positive and effective United Nations role in
promoting world peace and common development. They
must conform to the principle of the sovereign equality of
all States, and reflect the aspirations of the developing
countries, which comprise more than two-thirds of the
membership. Democratic consultations should be practiced
throughout this process. We are confident that we will be
able to achieve a broad consensus as long as all of us
engage in patient deliberations in the spirit of openness and
fair play, and with a readiness to consider all legitimate
concerns.
The United Nations continues to be plagued by a
serious financial crisis. The Organization cannot function
normally without firm and reliable fiscal resources. We call
on the major countries whose financial contributions to the
Organization are in arrears to fulfil the financial obligations
set forth in the Charter by unconditionally paying up in full
without further delay.
Major progress has been made in the field of arms
control and disarmament since the last session of the
General Assembly. The Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty resulting from two and a half years of negotiations
has finally been adopted by the General Assembly.China
actively participated in the Treaty negotiations and
displayed maximum flexibility, thereby contributing
significantly to the final conclusion of the Treaty. We
have always stood for the complete prohibition and
thorough destruction of nuclear weapons. In our view, the
comprehensive test-ban Treaty is only a first step in the
entire process of comprehensive nuclear disarmament.
There are still large stockpiles of nuclear arms in the
world. Some nuclear Powers still refuse to undertake not
to be the first to use such weapons. We still have a long
way to go, and must continue to work strenuously in
order to achieve the ultimate goal of the total elimination
of nuclear weapons.
In order to expedite nuclear disarmament and free
ourselves from the danger of nuclear war forever, I wish
to reiterate the following calls on behalf of the Chinese
Government: first, the major nuclear Powers should
renounce their policy of nuclear deterrence; those
possessing huge nuclear arsenals should continue to cut
back their stockpiles drastically.
Secondly, all nuclear States should assume the
obligation not to be the first to use nuclear weapons at
any time or under any circumstances; they should
unconditionally renounce the use or threat of use of such
weapons against non-nuclear States or nuclear-free zones;
and they should conclude international instruments to that
effect without delay.
Thirdly, those States which have deployed nuclear
weapons overseas should withdraw them completely; all
nuclear States should pledge support for moves to set up
nuclear-free zones; they should respect the status of such
zones and assume corresponding obligations.
Fourthly, all States should refrain from developing
or deploying weapons systems in outer space and missile
defence systems that undermine strategic security and
stability.
Fifthly, all States should negotiate with a view to
concluding an international convention on the complete
prohibition and total destruction of nuclear weapons.
Since mankind was able to produce nuclear weapons
in the twentieth century, it is fully capable of abolishing
them in the twenty-first century. The Chinese Government
and people are ready to join hands with all Governments
16


and peoples of the world to strive for the realization of this
lofty goal.
My country continues to press forward along the road
of reform, opening up and modernization. Our economy
maintains a healthy momentum. The macroeconomic
environment continues to improve. We anticipate a growth
rate of around 10 per cent this year. Inflation will be kept
below 10 per cent. Despite severe natural disasters in some
parts of the country, we have still managed to gather a
bumper harvest of summer crops this year. Grain output for
the entire year is expected to top the previous year’s
figures. The Ninth Five-Year Plan for National Economic
and Social Development and the Outline of the Long-Range
Objectives to the Year 2010 were inaugurated this year.
They depict a promising future for China’s modernization
drive at the turn of the century. By the year 2000, when our
population will have had a net increase of 300 million, we
expect to quadruple our 1980 per capita gross national
product. And by the year 2010 our gross national product
is anticipated to be twice that of the year 2000. Then we
will have put in place a viable socialist market economy.
Seventeen years of reform and opening up have
brought about a fourfold increase in our gross national
product. Our overall national strength will grow further in
another 15 years. Yet China will still be a developing
country with relatively low ranking in terms of indicators
such as per capita gross national product. China’s
development will only help to bolster the elements making
for peace. We pose no threat to anyone anywhere, but will
only help to strengthen the cause of world peace, stability
and development. On the other hand, if China fails to
achieve economic development and its population of 1.2
billion is mired in poverty, that would indeed be ominous
for world peace and stability.
China will resume the exercise of sovereignty over
Hong Kong as from 1 July 1997. This will be a milestone
in the great cause of our national reunification. It is also a
good example of how countries can peacefully resolve
issues left over by history. Preparations are under way to
put into effect our resumption of the exercise of sovereignty
over Hong Kong. We are fully capable of ensuring a
smooth transfer of government and transition in Hong
Kong. After Hong Kong’s return to the embrace of the
motherland, we will put into effect the policy of “one
country, two systems”. As a Special Administrative Region
of the People’s Republic of China, and in conformity with
the Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative
Region, Hong Kong will be administered by the Hong
Kong people. It will enjoy a high degree of autonomy. The
existing social and economic system and way of life will
remain unchanged, and the laws currently in force in
Hong Kong will be basically maintained. Hong Kong will
retain its status as an international trade, financial and
shipping centre, free port and separate customs territory.
Its long-term stability and prosperity will be guaranteed.
Foreign economic interests in Hong Kong will be
accommodated.
Twenty-five years ago, at its twenty-sixth session,
the General Assembly adopted the historic resolution
2758 (XXVI), solemnly declaring the restoration to the
People’s Republic of China all its lawful rights in the
United Nations. That resolution thoroughly settled the
question of China’s representation in the United Nation in
all aspects — political, legal and procedural.
There is but one China in the world and Taiwan is
an inalienable part of its sacred territory. “Peaceful
reunification and one country with two systems” — this
is our unswerving guideline for the settlement of the
Taiwan question. This question involves a cardinal
principle of China’s sovereignty and territorial integrity
and the great task of reunification. It is a purely internal
affair of China which will brook no outside interference.
The Chinese Government and people are determined to
carry through the struggle against all attempts to split
their territory or create an independent Taiwan. No force
on Earth can hold back China’s great cause of
reunification.
The world is on the march at top speed. New
contradictions and problems are constantly arising. The
profound changes in the international scene have brought
forth rare opportunities as well as serious challenges. Let
us seize the opportunities, meet the challenges and push
forward the cause of peace and development. Such is the
glorious mission which our times have bestowed on us.
The Chinese Government and people are ready to join
with all other Governments and peoples in this endeavour.



﻿Last year we
took stock of half a century of United Nations history. The
rock we are pushing up the hill like Sisyphus always seems
to roll back a little. We must not be discouraged by this. It
remains our responsibility to do what we solemnly
reaffirmed on the fiftieth anniversary of the world
Organization: maintain peace and to help people who are
suffering from want and poverty.
You, Mr. President, have issued a warning to us all for
this fifty-first General Assembly. We must look beyond our
national borders, and think and act accordingly. After
making those anniversary promises, let us not fall back into
the old routine and rituals. The vision of a more peaceful
and more equitable world must not be lost.
The world Organization must continue to be the
world’s conscience. For who else other than this forum is
to keep watch to prevent murder and torture, to ensure that
refugees have the basic necessities of life and that our
children are protected and cared for?
The world is grossly unjust. From the moment of birth
millions of people have hardly any chance of living in
conditions worthy of humankind. No one can turn away
from this; it concerns us all. No country, no region and
no group of States can bear all of the world’s burdens and
troubles alone. All, even the strongest among us, need
solidarity, need the help of others. How can terrorism, for
instance, a cancer of our time, be stopped without
international cooperation?
Developments over the past 10 years have shown
there is no cause for resignation. There can be
progress — provided we pool our resources and act
together. That is the lesson of Bosnia, of South Africa
and of the Middle East, and of the historic achievements
in the field of disarmament in recent years. Every child
that is saved from death in Rwanda or Burundi, every
refugee able to return to his native village in Bosnia,
every rainforest area we can preserve, must strengthen our
hope. The one world requires us to act as one.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, a free election has been
held for the first time after four terrible years of war. It
has provided a crucial foundation for the country’s
recovery. Joint institutions must now be created without
delay. The future members of the three-person presidency
should meet in Sarajevo before the end of September.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) had a very difficult task supervising the
election in Bosnia. That organization’s scope for action
must be increased at the Lisbon Summit in December this
year. The OSCE remains an indispensable pillar of the
new peaceful order for Europe, which we believe to be
necessary now that the iron curtain has come down.
The forces working for peace in the region are
themselves not strong enough; there is still no self-
sustaining stability. In Bosnia and Herzegovina there can
be no permanent international police force — even the
60,000 troops of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO), of the United Nations and of all the other
countries cannot guarantee peace on the ground — but I
think that for a limited time that country continues to
require a “fire brigade”. This presupposes a fresh mandate
from the Security Council.
Germany is willing to provide a military
contribution. By admitting more than 320,000 war
refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina, Germany has
practised human solidarity. We also have more than
130,000 Yugoslav nationals, most of them from Kosovo,
who have to return to their native regions. This is a heavy
burden for us, including in financial terms. But we gave
7


temporary protection and shelter to these people on
humanitarian grounds, and we will not be found wanting in
this respect now that their repatriation is becoming possible.
Europe has been torn by fratricidal wars for centuries.
The current peaceful unification of that continent is a
message of hope for the whole world. The first of our
central and eastern European neighbours will soon belong
to the Euro-Atlantic institutions.
My country Germany owes its unity to the confidence
which the world placed in our policy of reconciliation and
good neighbourliness. In our eyes that implies a duty:
together with France, we will remain the motor of European
Union.
Addressing the Assembly in 1989, my predecessor
Hans-Dietrich Genscher extended a hand to Poland. Today
I turn to our Czech neighbours in particular and say that the
German-Czech declaration will be adopted shortly. Czechs
and Germans can look confidently to a common European
future.
The Russian people too must be winners in the process
of European unification. The special partnership which
NATO is seeking with Russia is of central importance for
peace and security in Europe. And that is why we want as
quickly as possible to draft the fundamentals of a charter
between NATO and Russia, as I suggested in Carcassonne
18 months ago at a meeting of the European Union foreign
ministers. Our offer stands. Russia should help shape
Europe’s future as an equal partner. That large and
important country must be given a place in Europe
commensurate with its size and importance.
Part of the European Union’s peace message is that
we Europeans stand for a policy of international
cooperation among equals, and for a global partnership for
development and the environment in the twenty-first
century. New opportunities for such a partnership derive
from the globalization of industry and technology. Never
have so many people experienced so much progress as in
the past 10 years. In the year 2020, if the present trend
continues, the 15 countries with the largest gross national
products will include nine of today’s developing countries.
The recipe is free markets, democracy, reliability of
the judicial system, and integration into the global
economy. This kind of good governance was rewarded with
$150 billion of private direct investment in 1995.
However, 90 per cent of that investment has gone to
only 12 countries, and the gap between the poor and the
rest of the world continues to widen. The World Summit
for Social Development put the number of poor people at
1.3 billion, nearly a quarter of the entire human race. This
calls for action from both sides, help from the community
of nations and self-help on the part of the countries
concerned. The one is the precondition for the other.
This evening I am having another meeting with my
African colleagues. I take a very keen interest in the
future of Europe’s vast neighbouring continent. We
should not see only Africa’s negative side but the hopeful
signs as well, and there are such signs. Democratization
is progressing, as shown by the fact that elections have
taken place or are scheduled in 17 countries this year.
Average economic growth has outpaced population
growth for the first time in many years. Life expectancy
has increased by more than 25 per cent since 1960, and
ever more children are going to school.
Germany supports Africa’s integration into the world
economy and the development of its own capabilities. The
United Nations New Agenda for the Development of
Africa in the 1990s is a sound foundation for these
efforts. The Secretary-General’s United Nations System-
wide Initiative on Africa should likewise be used by all
concerned as a basis for joint action.
However, much remains to be done. The ghastly
events in Rwanda must not be repeated in Burundi. On
the other hand, the United Nations should not be the
organization of first resort in every conflict situation. It
cannot solve every problem. Hence, the regional
organizations must assume a larger measure of
responsibility.
The Organization of African Unity, like the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, has
matured to a degree that commands respect. Germany,
with one eye on Burundi, has to date provided one
million deutsche mark in support of that organization’s
conflict prevention mechanism. High hopes have been
placed in the efforts of Julius Nyerere. The proposed
conference on the Great Lakes region has the support of
Germany and the European Union.
Germany will remain a good partner and friend to
the nations of Africa. That will also be my message at the
forthcoming second European Union-Southern African
Development Community (SADC) ministerial meeting in
Windhoek. The regionalization process in Africa is an
8


element of hope. The outstanding example is southern
Africa with the SADC. That region must become a
locomotive for the whole continent.
One neighbouring region whose fate touches Europe
is the Middle East. That is also the main reason for our
strong commitment in the whole Middle East region. For
historical reasons, Germany has a special relationship with
Israel; that remains unshakable. Bilaterally and through the
European Union we are the most important donor for the
Palestinians. Germany will maintain that commitment. I
confirmed this in my recent meetings with Israeli Foreign
Minister Levy and with President Yasser Arafat in Bonn.
Terrorists should not be given any chance to block the
path to peace. The sealing off of Gaza and the West Bank
must be eased and discontinued as soon as possible. That
is our common endeavour. The struggle against terrorism
must remain at the top of the international agenda. I
urgently appeal to all concerned to resume the peace
process without delay. There is no alternative.
It has been estimated that the world’s population will
number about 10 billion in 2030. For their sake, for the
sake of our children and grandchildren, we must take steps
today to ensure that the Earth remains habitable. Peace and
human dignity, economic progress and protection of the
natural foundations of life are inseparable. Without social
justice, without any vision for the world’s economic
progress, we shall not be able to break the vicious circle of
poverty, environmental destruction and population
explosion.
We have no time to lose. Every second three babies
are born, and every year the world’s population increases
by nearly 100 million. All of them need food, clothing,
schools and a home. Every minute about 12 acres of
tropical rain forest are lost, an area the size of 40 football
pitches.
Antoine de Saint-Exupéry warned that the human race
had not inherited the Earth from its fathers but had
borrowed it from its children. We became acutely aware of
this at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro. North and
South, East and West, are struggling to survive together in
spaceship Earth, whose blue protective shield is becoming
increasingly fragile.
Our task now is to convert that environmental
awareness into environmental action. The year 1997 will be
crucial for such action. The special session of the General
Assembly devoted to environment and development must
chart the course for the next millennium in order to
restore the balance between man, nature and the economy.
Germany’s industrial community has voluntarily
undertaken to reduce its carbon dioxide emissions by
20 per cent by the year 2005. Since 1990, Germany has
reduced those emissions by nearly 13 per cent and
thereby has led the way for the rest of the world.
We are contributing 312 million deutsche mark to
the pilot programme to protect Brazil’s tropical forests.
That represents 60 per cent of the total contributions
made so far. We appeal to the community of nations to
become more heavily involved in this programme. We
can only succeed together or fail together.
At the 1997 climate conference in Japan we must
achieve the objective agreed upon in Berlin 12 months
ago: the adoption of a substantive and binding protocol to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions. At the recent Geneva
conference, the great majority of nations came out in
favour of specific targets and time limits. This is
encouraging.
I wish to thank all members once again for
supporting our efforts to have the secretariat of the
Framework Convention on Climate Change established in
Bonn. May I also ask members to support our proposal
that the secretariat of the Framework Convention to
Combat Desertification likewise be located in Bonn, as it
has to cooperate closely with the climate secretariat. The
United Nations will find that living and working
conditions in our country are good.
The Rio Declaration on Environment and
Development rightly makes people the focal point of all
efforts. We must continue to concentrate on combating
poverty and providing basic and vocational education.
Even if that is not the kind of subject that makes
headlines, it is and will remain, together with
peacekeeping, one of our principal tasks.
Equal opportunities for women must not remain
mere theory.
Nothing is more powerful than an idea whose time
has come, is a saying that applies to human dignity and
human rights. The fall of the Berlin Wall showed that the
people’s pursuit of freedom and personal happiness is, in
the long run, stronger than any dictatorship. That is why
the worldwide defence of human rights will likewise not
be in vain.
It all boils down to something quite natural: that we
treat one another as humans and that we do not inflict upon
others what we would not like to have inflicted upon
ourselves. Murderers and torturers must not be allowed to
sleep peacefully. Mladic´ and Karadzic´, and all for whom
arrest warrants have been issued, deserve to be brought
before the International Tribunal in The Hague. Germany
calls for the early convening of a conference to establish an
international criminal court.
There is a core of human rights that are common to us
all and that are universally valid. This fact received
international confirmation at the Vienna Conference on
Human Rights. There can and should be no withdrawal
from that position.
With the East-West confrontation now consigned to
the past, intercultural dialogue assumes ever-greater
significance. Close to 2.5 million Muslims are living in
Germany. If only for this reason, it is of special importance
to develop greater mutual understanding between
Christianity and Islam.
A subject very close to my heart, as former Minister
of Justice, is the protection of our children, the weakest
members of society. Universal Children’s Day was
observed on 20 September. Its motto: “Children have
rights”. What do those rights look like in reality? Every day
35,000 children die of hunger. Twelve million children do
not live beyond the age of 5. Two million are forced into
prostitution. Two hundred thousand children around the
world are used as soldiers in war. Millions of them are used
as cheap labour.
The Stockholm conference on sexual abuse of children
has awakened world opinion, and I should like to thank the
Swedish Government for having hosted and organized this
conference, which shocked us all into action. The atrocious
way many of our children are being treated is a disgrace —
a disgrace — to our civilization. The Stockholm Plan of
Action must be followed by global action. This we owe to
our children. And I should like to make it very clear that
anyone who violates the weakest members of society —
children, that is — deserves to be outlawed by society.
Peace is not everything, but without peace everything
is nothing. These words originate from the time when East
and West faced each other armed to the teeth. In the
meantime the nightmare of a nuclear inferno has been
dispelled. Yesterday’s signing of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty was another momentous step in
this process, I believe, after half a century of international
debate and protest against nuclear testing.
In expressing my thanks to Australia I appeal to all
nations to ratify the Treaty as soon as possible. Since the
end of the Second World War upwards of 2,000 nuclear
tests have been carried out. We now have the chance to
put a stop to them once and for all. Anyone who rejects
something good because they will only accept something
perfect should be mindful of their responsibility to future
generations. We cannot force the atomic genie back into
the bottle, but we owe it to our children and
grandchildren to tame it — at least to tame it.
The total abolition of all chemical weapons is of
similar consequence. The Chemical Weapons Convention
must enter into force next spring. All nations, and
especially those with the largest stockpiles of such
weapons, must meet their tremendous responsibility and
ratify the Convention as soon as possible.
I should also like to touch upon an issue that I take
a very personal, keen interest in, and that is a totally
different kind of mass-destruction weapon: anti-personnel
mines. I travelled to Mozambique and Cambodia and took
a look at the situation there. Hundreds of millions of such
anti-personnel mines are still in the ground. Year in, year
out they kill and maim 20,000 people and make entire
regions permanently uninhabitable. These treacherous
tools of murder must be banned.
Germany has completely renounced anti-personnel
mines and imposed a unilateral, open-ended ban on
exports. Residual stocks are to be destroyed by the end of
1997. In my Seven-Point Programme of Action I have
proposed a number of measures to maintain the
momentum generated in Geneva. My main objective —
because I think the motto should be “first things first” —
is to improve the efficiency of mine clearance. We will
attend a conference in Canada very soon which deals with
the political aspects of this issue, trying to ban land-
mines. But we should also at the same time try to
concentrate on improving the efficiency of mine
clearance, that is, testing and using mechanical clearance
equipment. We quickly need machinery that can be mass-
produced in order to remove this plague without harming
people. I do not know whether anyone here has watched
a mine-clearance operation. It is done by people and can
be compared to trying to remove a sand-dune with a
spoon. I think it is incredible that highly developed
10


nations such as ours and many others are not able to
produce a piece of machinery for a large-scale de-mining
operation. I want to focus the technical knowledge that we
have to make this matter progress as quickly as possible.
If we want to win peace, we must not only consider
conflict prevention; we must also pay greater attention to
the situation after the termination of military hostilities.
Peace-building was the subject of the international
conference that we sponsored in Berlin in July. That
conference produced a number of interesting and tangible
results, which we are making available to all Member
States in the form of a report. Together with other countries
we intend to submit to members during this session of the
General Assembly a draft resolution on peace consolidation
through practical steps towards disarmament. Whether in
Bosnia, Rwanda or Angola, all previous efforts will prove
in vain unless we can prevent a resurgence of violence.
Most of the burden is borne by the 26,000 or so Blue
Helmets and civilian personnel making up the peacekeeping
missions, as well as by the countless courageous staff of
non-governmental organizations who are doing their job all
over the world under difficult conditions. Speaking here in
the United Nations, I should like to express my sincere
thanks to the non-governmental organizations. We are
proud of them.
In our resolution marking the fiftieth anniversary of
the United Nations, we solemnly undertook to pass on to
the next millennium a United Nations organization equipped
and financed to perform its tasks. The greatest political
significance attaches to reform of the Security Council, in
whose work we have been closely involved over the last
two years. This, the principal guardian of world peace, still
bears the countenance of the year 1945, but it now needs a
new one for the year 2000. It is a question of enhancing
that body’s legitimacy, credibility and effectiveness. After
a three-year debate the time has come to put the various
elements together and start the restructuring process, to now
get things done after having analysed what can be done.
We are pleased that a large number of Member States are
in favour of a permanent seat for Germany on the Security
Council. I really believe that the time is approaching when
the General Assembly will have to decide.
What continues to require our immediate attention is
the financial crisis. The Organization’s rationalization and
reform are indispensable and urgent. A glance at the books
is enough to tell us that. The regular United Nations budget
shows zero growth. The Secretariat has lost more than
1,000 posts, and further reductions will follow next year.
So much has already been achieved.
I therefore take this opportunity to thank the
Secretary-General and his staff, who, both at headquarters
and in the field, continue to achieve outstanding results
despite the reductions in their numbers and the constant
lack of funds. I should like to thank them very warmly.
I wish to add another word if I may. The United
Nations, in its actions and decisions, can be only as
strong as its Members allow it to be. People tend to
overlook that fact so readily when they criticize this
Organization. I stress this point because I think that the
outside world has a distorted image of the United Nations.
The United Nations is us, the Member States. We can
only achieve what we want to achieve together.
I am afraid that I must repeat that we will have to
save and rationalize further still. The need for reform is
no justification for refusing to pay contributions, however.
Moreover, special rights also imply special duties. The
German-American philosopher Hans Jonas said that
responsibility is the most important principle of the new
age. Let us act in accordance with that principle.


﻿My country is especially pleased at the
President’s election to lead the General Assembly. He
represents a great country that plays an important role in
the Non-Aligned Movement and the Group of 77 and I
am glad that he is to preside over our work during this
crucial period for our Organization.
17


I should also like to endorse the remarks made by
Ireland’s Foreign Minister in the name of the European
Union.
Last year, we celebrated the first half century of the
United Nations existence, during which its energies were
devoted, with a success universally acknowledged, to the
organization of international society. A mammoth collective
undertaking has been accomplished and the United Nations
has become the keystone of an international system founded
on law and the peaceful settlement of conflicts. This
collective undertaking owes much to the determined action
of successive Secretaries-General, and I should like to pay
a special and warm tribute here to Mr. Boutros-Ghali,
whose determination, vision of the future and firmness have
given our Organization a presence and vitality rarely
achieved. He deserves our confidence.
Today, as the century reaches its turning point, the
Organization is confronted with another major challenge:
globalization. In every sphere, the ideas and realities to
which we were accustomed are changing at a pace
unequalled in human history. The movement of people, of
ideas and images, and of goods is accelerating as distances
shrink. At the same time, the standardization of cultural
practices — and the legitimate reactions this provokes —
the general spread of low-cost high technologies and
intensified competition bring into question the positions that
have been achieved and the functioning, if not the very
foundation, of international society. At the same time, the
production of wealth is increasing tenfold and scientific
progress is growing rapidly, while unexpected opportunities
for development are being given to new nations.
But these benefits have adverse effects. The control
fragile States have over their development is being eroded,
national legislation is becoming inapplicable and the notion
of territorial integrity is changing in meaning. In short,
national authorities are too often reduced to powerlessness
by transnational phenomena over which they have only
scant control. If we are not careful, we are going to be
living in a world without criteria, without values, without
references, in which some — the strongest and the
richest — will be in a position to decide alone on the future
of the planet. It should come as no surprise that, in these
circumstances, the United Nations has many detractors.
Our Organization is in effect a privileged forum in
which the framework of a genuine international society can
be built, a framework that frees the forces of creativity and
development and represses the forces of violence and
oppression. It is up to all of us present here to enable the
United Nations to play that role and to ensure peace,
security and progress in these new circumstances and in
keeping with its mandate. Rest assured that France, a
founding Member of the Organization and permanent
member of the Security Council, will devote all its
energies to this task and will be in the front ranks of this
new fight.
Our world is confronted today with terrible problems
that know no borders and, sadly, spare no population:
terrorism, crime and drugs. The fight against these
scourges is foremost in our concerns and high on the
international agenda. Accordingly, an uncompromising
fight against terrorism, whatever its forms, perpetrators
and motives, constitutes our priority. This is why I
convened a conference on terrorism in Paris last July that
brought together the G-7 countries and Russia. We
adopted 25 practical, specific recommendations. They will
be implemented by each State and will strengthen
international cooperation against terrorism. Therefore,
today I make a solemn call on the entire international
community to join wholeheartedly in this fight.
We must also react without weakness to the
challenge of organized crime, in the knowledge that it
knows how to make the fullest use of the possibilities that
have been opened up by the liberalization of trade. For it
is the very foundation of our societies and institutions that
it endangers today.
International cooperation is indispensable to stem
this phenomenon. France, pursuing the path mapped out
by the Canadian presidency, has drafted a corpus of legal
and operational recommendations with its G-7 partners
and Russia to improve the effectiveness of the fight
against this scourge. These should guide in particular the
action of the States most affected by transnational
organized crime. France recently strengthened its financial
legislation against money-laundering. All States should
pay particular attention to this phenomenon, which is one
of the hardest forms of organized crime to counter.
One of the most loathsome aspects of organized
crime is that which targets our children. A world summit
on combating the sexual exploitation of children was
recently held in Stockholm. That is good, but it is still not
enough. Everyone must now make a commitment to
implementing effective measures for immediate
application. I urge all States represented here to act
quickly and with determination in this area which, more
than any other, affects our future. The Assembly may rest
assured of France’s political resolve.
18


Drugs are a formidable threat today because of the
ravages they inflict on young people. International
cooperation must be solid. The producer and consumer
countries must recognize their shared responsibility. The
international community must therefore continue to pursue
convergent policies to reduce the supply of illegal
substances and the demand for them. The European Union
has chosen such a global policy and has launched large-
scale actions in close coordination with international
institutions, in particular the United Nations International
Drug Control Programme. France strongly supports the
proposal to convene a special session of the General
Assembly devoted to drugs in 1998.
These new perils do not supplant the traditional
challenges, which our Organization must address with
sustained vigilance and unwavering firmness. Peace-keeping
remains the central function of our Organization under the
terms of the founding Charter. The mission of the United
Nations to soothe tensions, separate combatants and resolve
conflicts remains fundamental.
The panoply of available instruments is becoming
more diversified. Recent additions to conventional peace-
keeping missions include activities to consolidate peace,
preventive diplomacy measures and even regional
conferences — such as I hope will soon take place with
regard to the situation in the Great Lakes region.
Sanctions constitute one of these instruments. They are
a useful weapon, but they penalize populations and must
therefore be used with prudence and moderation, follow
strict criteria and — I stress this — always be limited in
time. Only under those conditions can sanctions, which are
sometimes necessary to prevent something worse, continue
to be used by our Organization with the required
legitimacy.
Of course, we cannot refer to the traditional challenges
to peace without speaking about current regional conflicts.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, where my country has paid a
heavy tribute, France is pleased that elections could be held,
imperfect though they were. That represents an essential
stage in the return to peace provided for by the agreements
signed in Paris in 1995.
But peace still has to be consolidated, devastated
territories be reconstructed, refugees encouraged to return
and a civilian society rebuilt. To that end, France has
proposed a plan of consolidated action by the international
community with a time-frame of two years. With this goal
in mind, we will very shortly be hosting an international
conference in Paris to examine, and I hope adopt, this
proposal.
Similarly, the peace process in the Middle East
seems to be at a crucial stage. I wish here to express my
anxiety about it. I certainly believe the process to be
irreversible, but I am also aware of the precariousness of
the gains and the urgency of the need for long-term
solutions. We are half-way there. I say “we”, because this
process concerns not just Arabs and Israelis but all of us
here.
For France, peace in the Middle East is built upon
dialogue between equal partners, respect for the identity
of each and the right of peoples to the free determination
of their destiny, the affirmation of their independence, and
security. That is why — and I wish to emphasize this
point — France believes that there will be no lasting
peace in the region, based on an exchange of land for
peace, unless the right of the Palestinian people to self-
determination is respected, together with their legitimate
aspirations for a State.
We believe that a just and balanced agreement
between Israelis and Palestinians cannot avoid the issues
of Jerusalem, refugees and the settlements in the
Palestinian territories. Finally, a lasting peace presupposes
that Israel is assured of its existence within secure and
recognized borders.
France believes that complete withdrawal from the
Golan Heights in exchange for total peace constitutes the
basis of an agreement between Syria and Israel, and that
Lebanon must regain full and complete sovereignty over
the whole of its territory.
Based on these principles, France intends to have a
greater and more active presence than ever in the Middle
East, with which it has close and long-standing relations.
It will pursue this policy in close consultation with its
European partners. Furthermore, Europe must have a
place, alongside the two sponsors of the peace process,
commensurate with the major contribution it is making to
the region’s development.
While we are endeavouring to build peace in areas
in crisis, our efforts are no less ambitious for the entire
European continent. In building step by step what we call
an “architecture of security“, we are really offering the
international community a pillar of peace. France is
making an important contribution to the establishment on
19


the European continent a system of global security that
leaves no one out on the edge.
The construction of peace in Europe began with the
construction of European institutions. It is being continued
by deepening the Union. The intergovernmental Conference
represents a decisive stage in this process, the forerunner of
expansion, which is vital to the stability and prosperity of
the continent.
France wishes to see the Union go still further by
giving substance to the European identity in security and
defence matters. To that end, we would like to see a
strengthening of the Western European Union and its
gradual rapprochement with the European Union.
The European identity is also based on the reform of
the Atlantic Alliance. France, after taking a decisive step,
is now working actively with its allies on the adaptation of
structures. This should allow the emergence of a genuine
European security and defence identity within the Alliance
and make it possible in practice for the Western European
Union, and therefore the European Union, to use the assets
of the Alliance for military action that Europeans decide to
undertake themselves. This reform is also the key to the
process of expanding the Alliance, with which France is
ready to assist. That expansion must naturally go hand-in-
hand with in-depth dialogue and cooperation with Russia.
The third and last aspect of the structure is the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), which is the sole forum for security in which all
the European States are represented on an equal footing.
That is why France believes that it is necessary to
strengthen the organization. We hope that the Lisbon
summit will provide the occasion to move towards the
drafting of a charter or treaty linking all the States of the
continent.
Important events therefore await us on the path that
we have mapped out, including the OSCE summit in
December and the NATO summit next year. The latter
should bring together all the European States for a
“pan-Europe day”, demonstrating the community of security
interests of all the countries on the continent, including
Russia and our North American allies whose role in
European security remains decisive. That is our ambition
for a Europe of security that leaves no one out and is safer
and more stable for the entire international community.
In this changing world, it is for the United Nations to
bring out the common values that will be the foundations
of civilization in the twenty-first century. It is thanks to
its actions that we hope to build a safer, less harsh world
for its inhabitants. First, we hope it will be a world in
which the spectre of nuclear war has faded. For many
years, public opinion called for a complete ban on nuclear
tests. It was a hope and a plan that was certainly worthy,
but remained blocked by the reality of East-West
confrontation.
France welcomes the signing of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, which I had the honour to sign
yesterday. This Treaty marks a major turning-point in the
world’s strategic balances.
It puts an end to the possibility of the nuclear-
weapon States’ developing new types of nuclear weapons,
and it makes a decisive contribution to the fight against
nuclear-weapon proliferation.
The Treaty thus opens the way to a more stable,
safer world which will cease to be haunted by the twin
dangers of the nuclear-arms race and the proliferation of
these weapons.
There is another development which I find
remarkable: the endorsement of human rights as a major
principle of international relations. And the United
Nations is at the centre of this development.
I should like in this regard to pay tribute to the
remarkable work done by the Commission on Human
Rights. In often difficult circumstances, it has pursued
with pragmatism and tenacity its patient efforts to awaken
consciences, to galvanize energies and to promote the rule
of law in concrete ways.
Our aim must not be to pronounce
excommunications or establish a blacklist, generally to no
effect. Rather, it must be to promote the protection of
individuals and the progress of law with due respect for
differences.
I should also like to reaffirm France’s determination
to see crimes against humanity punished. The
condemnation they warrant cannot brook any exception.
Together with others, France took the initiative of
proposing the establishment of the international criminal
Tribunal and the international Tribunal for Rwanda. I
wish to reaffirm France’s unqualified support for their
founding work, and its backing in order that the tribunals
might carry out their work in full.
20


Lastly, France is pleased that the foundations that have
thus been laid have helped to speed up the debates on the
establishment of an international criminal court, which we
earnestly desire and to which we attach a high priority.
There are other important areas which we have begun
to consider.
At this time when workers, money, factories and
commerce operate at a heightened pace, it is essential to
develop dialogue among the partners of economic life. This
is really the only solid basis on which to build social
protection that preserves the interests of all without harming
the growth of economies.
The fiftieth anniversary of the International Labour
Organisation (ILO) provided the opportunity to recall the
essential role of this organization in defining these minimal
norms, without which the economic world is but a vast
jungle.
Universality, however, must not lead to uniformity.
The definition of common values, accepted by all, is based
on respect for the identities that underpin the cultures of the
world. Our values will thus command all the more respect
for being expressed in all our respective languages.
Accordingly, we welcome the fact that the General
Assembly last year adopted a resolution on multilingualism
by a very large majority. Our civilizations, languages and
cultures, inherited from an often turbulent history, but of
irreplaceable richness, are a precious legacy for humankind.
The importance that my country ascribes to the
French-speaking community reflects its determination to
maintain the specificity and richness of the profoundly
original world view of several hundreds of millions of
people. We will not give this up.
The search for a new world ethic is not limited to
human rights but extends to the whole of international life.
Since 1945, international trade has been a powerful growth
factor, contributing to a large extent to the expansion of the
industrialized economies and to the success of the so-called
emerging countries. But here too we must have rules of the
game, acknowledged at the world level, so as to develop
and regulate trade, ensure that it is fair and prevent
unilateral conduct.
I should like to mention here the dangers of
unilateralism. Unilateralism: behind this technocratic word
lurks the temptation to impose the law of the strongest at
the expense of dialogue and negotiation.
France and Europe cannot accept that one country,
even if it is the most powerful, attempt to regulate world
trade by itself by means of decisions that have extra-
territorial scope. The World Trade Organization does not
allow it, and no one should doubt the firmness of French
and European reactions were such measures actually to be
implemented.
The globalization of the economy and the
liberalization of trade and investments have opened up
unprecedented prospects. However, we must take care not
to allow the gap to widen between the nations that trade,
invest and derive profit from this new factor and those
that remain on the sidelines of this new prosperity.
Each nation is responsible for itself and must create,
through rigorous public management and compliance with
its legislative rulings, optimum conditions for freeing
private initiative, a factor in economic and commercial
progress. But I do not believe that one can leave to
market forces alone the care of ensuring the development
of the poorest nations.
Here, too, the United Nations has an important role
to play. By its side, the wealthiest States must affirm their
solidarity in a tangible way: actively and effectively, this
solidarity must assist the developing countries without
becoming a substitute for them. On the threshold of a
new century, poverty and exclusion cannot constitute the
sole prospects for two-thirds of humankind. France, for its
part, will not accept this.
This commitment concerns Africa in particular,
where real prospects for progress are beginning to
emerge.
Africa has embarked with courage and perseverance
on the path to readjustment and recovery, which will
enable it to find its place again in the great flows of
world trade.
For the first time in a long time, Africa’s growth
rate has been on the order of 5 per cent these past two
years, higher than its demographic expansion, very high
though it is. This is a reassuring sign, attributable to the
efforts made by the African States themselves. They have
been able to cut public deficits, establish realistic
monetary parities, open up their markets and move
towards regional integration and democratization. Such
21


achievements, which are the result of structural reforms,
seem to us to justify our confidence. France believes in
Africa’s future.
Still, official development assistance must be
maintained and strengthened, but this assistance must be the
subject of many initiatives. France has taken such
initiatives within the European Union, the African
Development Bank, the International Development
Association and the International Monetary Fund.
Recently, at the summit of industrialized countries
held in Lyons, my country reaffirmed the need to increase
aid to the poorest countries, asking for more generous
treatment of debt for them, and for a new global partnership
to be defined between the developing countries and the
multilateral institutions.
In this new world context, we have to consider the
progress that the United Nations needs to make to be able
to meet its responsibilities for the next century.
France approves of the current discussions on
improving the representative character of the Security
Council, in particular with respect to Germany, Japan and
the States of the South.
Similarly, under the decisive impetus of the Secretary-
General, the Organization has embarked on a vast effort for
structural reform, the first results of which are beginning to
show.
It is not a matter of changing everything but of seeing
that every institution is in a position to make a useful
contribution to the collective work in its own sphere.
That is why the members of the G-7 have proposed
putting the savings realized through reforms into
development projects.
France would like to see the reform of the United
Nations economic and social sector concluded quickly so as
to strengthen the overall coherence of the Organization. To
that end, the roles and mandates of the specialized agencies
and commissions in particular should be better defined, and
waste and duplication eliminated.
These proposals are dictated solely by the wish to help
the United Nations better fulfil its mission of fighting
poverty and exclusion on a global scale.
In the case of the United Nations budget, many of us
are worried about the financial crisis that threatens to
paralyse the United Nations. The European Union has put
forward concrete proposals for overcoming this crisis. It
is now up to all States that have let their arrears
accumulate to assume their responsibilities.
Whatever some may say, the United Nations is still
one of our best chances for building a better world. Let
us not spoil it.





﻿May I begin by
congratulating Ambassador Razali of Malaysia on his
assumption of office as our General Assembly’s new
President and offer our thanks to his predecessor,
Ambassador Freitas do Amaral, for all his valuable work
during the fiftieth session.
The late twentieth century is an exciting time. For the
fortunate among us, the world has never offered more:
travel with unheard-of ease, a tantalizing cornucopia of
consumer goods, 100 or more television stations in our
homes, the Internet. But these fruits are denied the vast
majority of the planet’s population. The number of people
who live in absolute poverty is still growing. Their misery
is a challenge to all our consciences, and I want today to
talk about what we all, the developed countries as well as
the developing, can do for those trapped in poverty — what
we can do together to open the door to development.
But first of all I would like to say a few brief words
about four other issues of particular importance at this
moment in time.
First of all, Hong Kong. The year 1997 will be a
special one for Hong Kong. Less than 300 days from now
the world will witness history. The peaceful transfer of
sovereignty over a territory of 6 million free and prosperous
people is an event unparalleled in modern times. A transfer
on the basis of an international Treaty, registered here at
the United Nations — a Treaty between two members of
the Security Council, which guarantees that for 50 years
after 1997 there will be “one country, two systems” and
that “Hong Kong people will rule Hong Kong”. Let there
be no doubt of Britain’s continuing commitment to the
future of Hong Kong and its people, well into the next
century.
Thanks to the efforts of the Hong Kong people
themselves, the development of Hong Kong is one of the
world’s great success stories. The Chinese Government
has made clear its determination to preserve Hong Kong’s
prosperity, its stability and its way of life as a free and
open society based on the rule of law. For Britain, a
successful transfer will be the closing of a chapter, but
also a new beginning to our relations with both Hong
Kong and with China.
I suggest that all Members of the United Nations
have a stake in this historic exercise. As long as the
promises of the joint Declaration are turned into reality,
Hong Kong has a bright future, as part of China and as
one of the world’s leading cities, contributing enormously
to growth and prosperity throughout the Asia-Pacific
region. And I am sure that all here will join me in
welcoming that prospect.
I want also to take this opportunity to commend the
International Court of Justice in its fiftieth anniversary
year. The International Court has performed
groundbreaking work in settling disputes between States,
and I am proud that the United Kingdom has always been
among the States that accept its compulsory jurisdiction.
I hope that others will join us in pledging both moral and
material support to the International Court. The more who
accept that international law must be the foundation of
international relations, the safer we shall all be.
The world is safer today too with the historic
signature of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
Earlier this morning I had the privilege of signing the
Treaty for the United Kingdom. It shows that we can, by
acting with determination and by making sacrifices, reap
the benefits of the end of the cold war, and I firmly
believe that the Treaty can make an important
contribution to preventing the proliferation of nuclear
weapons and in promoting international security. The
Treaty was the product of a multilateral negotiation and
was adopted here in the General Assembly. But that alone
is not enough. If it is to be fully effective, it must
command universal support, and the United Kingdom will
now put in hand the steps to allow us to ratify the Treaty.
17


It is the sovereign right of every State to decide whether or
not to be bound by international agreements. But it is our
firm conviction that this Treaty is in the interests of all, and
I urge all States to give it their full support.
Meanwhile, other threats still loom large. The
insidious spectre of terrorism is a concern to all of us here,
and it is right that the United Nations should be the forum
for debate on this worldwide menace. The United Kingdom
is proposing for adoption at this session a United Nations
declaration which will spell out unequivocally that acts of
terrorism, and the financing, planning and incitement of
these acts, are contrary to the purposes and principles of the
United Nations. People who do these evil things and who
seek asylum under the United Nations refugee Convention
do not deserve to benefit from it.
The United Nations faces a critical year. It remains the
hope of people across the world in search of peace and
development. But the changes required to adapt and
strengthen the United Nations to meet the challenges of the
future have not yet been completed. This year must see a
solution to the financial crisis. Reform must be part of the
solution, including a thorough updating of the system of
assessing contributions to the United Nations, so that
contributions match real ability to pay. But all Members
must pay what they owe, both their assessments and their
arrears, and promptly; and the European Union’s proposals
are a good basis for negotiation. It will also be important to
achieve over the coming year a resolution to the long-
standing discussions of Security Council enlargement. In
short, the United Nations must be made fit for the new
millennium.
I turn now to my main theme. Three months ago, at
Lyons, the Group of Seven countries committed themselves
to a partnership for the economic development of the world.
This is not just a catchy slogan; it is a fresh approach to the
challenge of development, and what it means is that the
developing countries and the developed together would
share responsibility for creating the conditions that will
allow economies to grow, a shared agenda of measures that
we need to take to promote development.
For the countries of the developing world, this means
pursuing policies to enable economies to grow: taxes need
to be kept low, subsidies cannot be allowed to distort
markets, exports should not be impeded by heavy tariffs.
Domestic markets must be allowed to operate with as little
interference as possible. The goal must be to establish an
environment where the private sector can flourish, for the
private sector is the engine of growth.
In 1755, Adam Smith famously remarked that for
prosperity
“Little else is requisite ... but peace, easy taxes, and
tolerable administration of justice”.
This is still a valid recipe today — not easy to achieve,
but with the sound foundations of good government and
sensible macroeconomic policies, enterprise can flourish
anywhere. This is the challenge to the Governments of
the developing world.
What of the developed world’s side of the
bargain? — countries such as my own. Our responsibility
is to remove the shackles which hinder developing
economies as they try to enter the global market. Many of
the poorest countries are still caught in a mire of debt
they are unlikely ever to be able to pay off. This benefits
no one. The United Kingdom has long argued that, when
combined with macroeconomic reform of the kind I have
described, deep debt relief can kick-start the development
of the poorest economies. Some time ago, Britain helped
to identify steps that could be taken to lift the debt burden
from the poorest, most indebted countries: more debt
relief from bilateral creditors and getting the multilateral
agencies themselves to share more of the burden. Since
then the Paris Club of creditors has made an important
contribution by increasing debt forgiveness as agreed
following British proposals at the Naples Summit in 1994.
The multilateral agencies too have come up with some
useful proposals, such as the World Bank’s Trust Fund to
provide debt relief. I also welcome the International
Monetary Fund’s (IMF) commitment to continue
providing concessional finance through the enhanced
structural adjustment facility.
These measures to relieve debt need to be
implemented both flexibly and soon. The countries in
greatest need should be granted maximum relief as swiftly
as possible. I look forward to final agreement at the
annual meetings of the IMF and the World Bank next
week.
The private sector is the motor of development.
Private investment flows to the developing world are now
at record levels. The United Kingdom is the third largest
source of private investment. But these flows are still not
reaching the poorest countries. There is therefore a
continuing need for concessional aid to prime the pump
of homegrown development. We need to focus our efforts
on those countries where help is needed most and which
can make the best use of it. Help must primarily be
18


targeted at creating growth with equity, at developing
human resources to their full potential, at giving priority to
the needs of the poor: to health and education, to clean
water and small enterprises.
Increasingly this partnership in development amongst
us all has to deal with the growing problems of planet
survival: climate change, the environment, the future of the
world’s oceans and forests, and pandemic diseases.
Development which ignores these will not be sustainable.
The United Nations is a central forum for focusing the
attention and action of Governments and civil society on
these challenges as we enter the next century. Next year’s
General Assembly special session to review the Rio summit
on environment and development is one example.
But the best help that we in the developed world can
give to the developing is to buy what they produce, and to
do that we in the developed world must demolish the
barriers that we still maintain against imports from the
poorer countries of the developing world. When I look
around the world, I see many developing countries bursting
with exports that they have to sell: textiles, food,
manufactured goods. But tragically, the markets of the
richer countries of the developed world are often closed to
these exports. Last week’s report from the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD)
predicted that poor countries could triple their exports to the
North over the next 10 years if import quotas were phased
out — an extra $175 billion a year in income.
Protectionism is starving the developing economies of their
oxygen, the oxygen of growth.
The European Union’s record is better than most. We
already have a wide-ranging scheme to allow duty-free
imports from developing countries. But even so, the
European Union obstructs, for example, imports of
Palestinian cut flowers; it obstructs fruit juices from South
Africa, strawberry jam from Bulgaria. Other developed
countries are even less generous. The United States targets
imports of Mexican tomatoes; Japan restricts imports of rice
from South-East Asia. The list could go on.
We all know the difficulty of resisting powerful
domestic lobbies. They exist in Britain as elsewhere. But
this sort of protectionism is not simply selfish; it is also
short-sighted. Growth and prosperity in the developing
world will over time increase, not diminish, the wealth of
the industrialized world. Trade is not a zero-sum game. It
is a process which is mutually beneficial, mutually
enriching; and with prosperity comes stability and greater
security for us all.
This is not some fashionable nostrum dreamt up in
an ivory tower. It is a prescription which has already been
seen to work. Since 1945, under the auspices of the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), the
world economy has moved steadily towards more open
markets. And the result is clear: five decades of
unprecedented economic growth and prosperity. It is
incumbent upon us to spread this benefit more widely.
That is why I so warmly welcome the proposal put
forward by the Director-General of the World Trade
Organization. Mr. Ruggiero has proposed that the least-
developed countries be granted tariff-free access to the
markets of the developed world. I wholeheartedly
welcome this initiative. I hope that others will see its
compelling logic: the best hope the poor have for
sustained economic development is to be given the
freedom to export, the freedom to sell.
That freedom enables countries to grow. But free
trade is not just helpful to developing countries, it is a
global good, its benefits are spread wide, to the producers
and consumers in the developed and the developing world
alike, who can profit from the greater efficiency that free
trade engenders, and who can buy the best and cheapest
products available on the world markets. In short, free
trade benefits us all. That is why Britain is so firmly
committed to bringing the vision of global free trade to
reality by the year 2020.
Free trade begins at home. Cutting tariffs and other
import restrictions helps developing countries by cutting
the costs of production, boosting efficiency and thus
helping exports and growth. Combine these benefits with
the freedom to export granted by open markets in the
developed world, and developing countries and their
economies can enjoy a virtuous circle of development.
Free trade is therefore the catalyst for growth. This is not
just good economic theory. Greater efficiency and higher
growth mean more resources available for new hospitals
and new schools, better housing and cleaner water. Free
trade means real benefits for poor people.
I have described today a challenge for every one of
us here. Poverty is something we can all do something
about. In May, the Organisation for Economic
Cooperation and Development proposed that the
developed and developing worlds together should try to
cut the number of people living in absolute poverty by
half by 2015. Britain commits itself to that goal. It is
achievable.
19


At home, we must liberalize our economies, minimize
the burden of government and lift all restrictions on the free
operation of the market. In the global economy, we must
remove barriers to trade to allow the developing countries
to sell. We must help lift the millstone of debt from those
who can least bear it. We cannot allow the poorest
members of the world community to become marginalized.
We must do our utmost to enable all Members of the
United Nations to enjoy the fruits of integration into the
global economy. A revitalized United Nations has an
essential part to play.
I do not underestimate the difficulty of the tasks that
I have described. We can only confront them in partnership,
rich and poor together. If we all play our part, prosperity
can be placed within the grasp of even the poorest
countries.



﻿It gives me great pleasure to
congratulate Ambassador Razali on his election as
President of the General Assembly at its fifty-first
session. He is not present here, but I would like to say
that he is no stranger to India. We are fully cognizant of
his sagacity and skills and repose our confidence in his
ability to successfully guide the General Assembly during
its fifty-first session. May I also express my delegation’s
warm appreciation for the presidency of his predecessor,
His Excellency Mr. Diogo Freitas do Amaral, for a most
productive tenure as President of the Assembly in its
historic, landmark fiftieth year.
Six years ago I had the privilege of addressing the
historic forty-fifth session of this Assembly. We rejoiced
12


at the end of the cold war and believed that the animosities,
rivalries, suspicions and intrigues that had bedeviled the
past would now be overcome and the problems of the
world and their solutions could be addressed with greater,
perhaps pristine, clarity. We have welcomed the reduction
of global tensions and the opening up of new economic
possibilities between nations.
However, we cannot say that the new dawn has led to
a new and genuinely cooperative web of kinship and
collaboration. Regional conflicts and tensions continue to
occupy us. Development problems remain acute, and there
is less sensitivity to the genuine needs of struggling nations.
The voice of the rich and powerful nations rings louder
than ever, while the developing world feels itself more
marginalized and ignored than ever.
In these circumstances, it is even more necessary to
strive for a genuine spirit of joint international endeavour
in addressing the world’s problems. The United Nations is
the foremost embodiment of multilateralism. No single
nation or even group of nations today can expect to find
solutions to the world’s problems, nor are many problems
amenable to solutions in isolation. Global problems require
global institutions and global solutions. This role and duty
can fall only to the United Nations.
We are concerned at unilateral actions and at the
evident decline in the commitment to obligations under the
Charter of the United Nations. International cooperation is
necessary to meet the vast development needs of the
developing countries, to eliminate weapons of mass
destruction and to fight terrorism and crime. The United
Nations system, under which sovereign nations have joined
together to achieve their common objectives, is the
universal framework for international cooperation. The
Charter of the United Nations is the real basis for renewing
multilateralism. India recently joined 15 other Heads of
State or Government in stating that
“either nations move forward to strengthen
(multilateralism), or we risk having to face more
unilateralism and perhaps conflict and overt disregard
of international law and common values”.
The United Nations is at a crossroads. Its financial
crisis is the result of an unwarranted unwillingness on the
part of certain countries to pay their dues in full and on
time. Such deliberate targeting of the United Nations
represents the most acute threat to multilateral cooperation
and can do incalculable long-term damage.
Beyond the financial crisis of the United Nations
itself is the critical issue of financing global cooperation.
While the world remains confronted with enormous
problems of poverty, malnutrition, disease, ecological
degradation and waste, the will to contribute is on the
decline. Development assistance is at its lowest level in
decades. Negotiated replenishments of multilateral
development funds are not being honoured.
It is unfortunate that voices continue to be raised
questioning the role of the United Nations in the
economic growth and social development of developing
countries. It is necessary to restore to the United Nations,
in the coming century, the important role of eradicating
poverty and all the ills associated with it, of promoting
development and achieving social progress and better
living standards, with more freedom for all.
For this purpose, the multilateral economic system
needs to be reformed and the partnership of the United
Nations with other relevant institutions must to be
strengthened in order to achieve greater economic growth,
integration and sustainable development. The United
Nations and the Bretton Woods institutions need to
develop an effective partnership. While India welcomes
the initial, tentative steps towards such a partnership,
effective economic leadership requires that we work to
ensure a much closer relationship between global
economic institutions than has been the case so far.
Indeed, there is no alternative if the financing of long-
term global cooperation in economic and social fields is
to be assured. We need larger volumes of financial
assistance, greater predictability of resources and
unfettered access to the markets of developed countries.
It is also time that we energize our efforts to complete the
Agenda for Development and launch an effective follow-
up process, including in the context of the recent major
United Nations conferences.
India is unreservedly committed to the protection
and promotion of human rights. The profoundly
humanistic traditions of Indian civilization, with its
emphasis on tolerance, harmony, non-violence and the
inviolability of the individual, have been consolidated in
the Constitution of India, which is indeed a veritable bill
of human rights. All human rights are sacrosanct in India,
guaranteed by its Constitution, an independent judiciary,
a free press, public opinion vigorously expressed and an
independent National Human Rights Commission. To us
in India, the human rights of all segments of society are
sacrosanct and an article of faith rather than a policy.
13


We believe that international cooperation in the
protection and promotion of human rights should proceed
within the framework of respect for the sovereignty and
integrity of States. We deplore the selective use of human
rights issues as a form of political pressure, as an obstacle
to trade or as a condition for development assistance. Such
actions detract from the moral imperatives of human rights
promotion and impede the full realization of the human
rights of all people.
Human rights violations take many forms. Among the
most pernicious of them is terrorism. Terrorism seeks to
exploit the openness and freedom offered by democratic
societies to pursue narrow ends through the use of violence.
It must be combated by firm action at the national and
international level. We are dismayed when we hear certain
parties voice concern for the so-called rights of terrorists
while ignoring their persistent violation of the human rights
of their victims, including the right to life, freedom of
expression and the freedom to follow religious beliefs of
one’s own choice.
India took the lead in raising the issue of terrorism as
a threat to human rights almost five years ago. We are
pleased that despite initial and sometimes vocal opposition
by some western countries, terrorism is now accepted to be
the major threat to the enjoyment of human rights today. A
number of international declarations have been issued on
terrorism such as the Sharm el-Sheikh Declaration, and the
G-7 Lyons Declaration of 27 June 1996. We are
encouraged that the international community now
recognizes terrorism as a major challenge to democracy,
human rights and peace. In this context, India will pursue
its call to adopt a binding international convention to
combat terrorism.
Fifty years after the United Nations was established,
the threat to humanity posed by nuclear weapons continues
unabated. We believe that India’s security, as indeed that of
all countries, lies in a nuclear-weapon-free world.
The only way to achieve this ultimate security is to
ban the production, possession and use of nuclear weapons
within an agreed time-frame. Partial and half-hearted arms
control measures, such as the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) or the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT), defeat
this objective by legitimizing the possession of nuclear
weapons and permitting the non-explosive testing of nuclear
weapons by nuclear-weapon countries. India, therefore,
cannot be a party to such flawed arrangements.
Let me also emphasize that any effective
disarmament regime needs to be universal in its approach
and scope. The total elimination of all existing nuclear
weapons, as an indispensable step towards general and
complete disarmament under strict and efficient
international control, is the demand of the entire Non-
Aligned Movement, to which we fully subscribe. Partial
or regional approaches, as are sometimes put forward, do
not serve any useful purpose and can distract us from the
accepted goal.
At the same time, India remains committed to
participating fully and actively in any negotiations on a
treaty banning nuclear weapons and all types of tests, just
as it did in regard to the Chemical Weapons Convention.
India signed and deposited its instrument of
ratification of the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction two weeks
ago. India regrets that major chemical weapon producers
have been slow to ratify the Convention. We urge all
those countries which have still not done so to ratify the
Chemical Weapons Convention and to demonstrate their
readiness to move towards banning all weapons of mass
destruction.
India will work with all like-minded countries in
sponsoring draft resolutions on the establishment of an ad
hoc committee under the Conference on Disarmament for
beginning negotiations on a treaty banning nuclear
weapons in a time-bound framework. India expects all
countries, including those represented in the Canberra
Commission on the Elimination of Nuclear Weapons,
which support time-bound elimination of nuclear
weapons, to join in supporting such draft resolutions.
India will once again present the draft convention on
the prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons at this
session of the General Assembly. India believes that the
urgency of negotiating that convention has been greatly
enhanced by the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice regarding the illegality of the use of
nuclear weapons.
At the recent session of the Conference on
Disarmament, India joined 27 non-aligned and neutral
countries to present a phased programme for the
elimination of nuclear weapons by the year 2020. India
asks that all countries join us in propagating and
promoting this joint proposal, both at the fifty-first
session of the General Assembly and in other forums.
14


India is in favour of a non-discriminatory and
universal ban on anti-personnel mines, which cripple or kill
a large number of civilians.
The continued credibility of the United Nations
requires reform of the Organization to reflect present-day
realities. While the membership of the United Nations has
increased greatly, the voices of the newly sovereign
countries in decision-making in the United Nations remain
unheard. There is an imbalance in the authority and weight
of structures and organs, just as there is an imbalance in the
weight of different countries or groups. The General
Assembly, the sole universal organ of the United Nations,
needs to find greater resonance in other bodies of the
system.
The Security Council must be made more
representative in order to enhance its legitimacy and
effectiveness. The vast increase in the membership of the
United Nations since its founding, especially of the
developing countries, must find adequate representation in
the categories of permanent and non-permanent
membership. A comprehensive proposal by the Non-
Aligned Movement for the reform and restructuring of the
Security Council is already on the table. India supports the
expansion of both the permanent and the non-permanent
categories. We are against piecemeal or temporary solutions
which discriminate against developing countries. We
believe that the same yardstick must be applied to all
countries, developed or developing, from all regions or
groups, for induction as permanent members. We believe
that under any objectively derived criteria for the expansion
of permanent members, India would be an obvious
candidate.
Reform and expansion must be an integral part of a
common package. The restructuring of the Security Council
must give expression to the impulse for reform. The
reforms must address not only the failings of the past, but
also the needs of the future.
Peacekeeping is a significant area of United Nations
activities, very often the most visible symbol of the
Organization’s presence on the ground. India has
participated in over 25 peacekeeping operations on four
continents, including some of the most sensitive and
prolonged, starting with Korea in 1953 and 1954, and
including the operations in Viet Nam, Congo, the Middle
East, Cambodia, Haiti, Somalia, El Salvador, Mozambique
and Rwanda. Indian peacekeepers are currently in the field
in Angola, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Liberia and Kuwait.
Our participation has not been without cost. We have lost
100 peacekeepers for the United Nations cause. We have
also offered a fully-equipped brigade to the United
Nations standby arrangement. The performance of the
Indian troops has won universal recognition. India is one
of the few countries which can sustain large-scale troop
commitment over prolonged periods.
Our participation in United Nations peacekeeping
does not stem from considerations of narrow gain. We
have participated because we have been wanted and
because we have been asked, but most of all because of
our solidarity and empathy with the affected countries and
with the international community, as well as because of
our commitment to the United Nations and to the cause
of international peace and security.
India has offered its candidature for the non-
permanent seat on the Security Council from Asia for
1997 and 1998. Our candidature is rooted in the criteria
stipulated in the Charter: the principle of equity, our
unwavering commitment to the United Nations, and to the
cause of multilateralism, and our 50-year-long
contribution to the maintenance of international peace and
security and to the other purposes and principles of the
Organization. India has a unique record of supporting
United Nations activities against apartheid and
colonialism. We have richly contributed to the debates on
development, disarmament and human rights. We seek the
onerous responsibility of Council membership convinced
of the support of this Assembly.
I would like to take this opportunity to pay a warm
tribute to the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-
Ghali, for his successful stewardship during a most
difficult period. His services are a distinct asset to this
world body.
Let me briefly refer to India’s interaction with the
world. We have witnessed some remarkable changes in
the last few years. New vistas for greater cooperation are
now visible. The challenge lies in effectively seizing the
opportunities. We attach the highest importance to
developing cordial and friendly relations with our
neighbours with a view to promoting peace, stability and
mutual confidence in the region. We also seek to develop
stronger economic and commercial relations within the
region, for all-around prosperity. As current Chairman of
the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
(SAARC), it will be our endeavour to promote
multifaceted cooperation in all spheres.
15


The economic reforms embarked upon since 1991
have provided India with a new outward orientation that
seeks greater integration of India into the global
marketplace. Today, India is branching out and adding to
the substantive content of its relations with individual
countries of the region and beyond, developing and building
upon regional cooperation arrangements involving SAARC,
the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), the
ASEAN Regional Forum, the Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation Council (APEC) and the Indian Ocean Rim, to
name a few.
Convinced of the need and utility of enhanced South-
South cooperation, we accord the highest priority to our
relations with Africa, the Middle East and Central Asia. We
are proud to have been associated with Africa and its
causes in the United Nations since the inception of the
world body. We appreciate the role played by the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), which has striven to
find regional solutions to African problems. Its efforts must
be supplemented by the United Nations. The scramble for
Africa in the nineteenth century was for African land and
resources. We hope that the closing years of the present
century will see a scramble to redress African problems, the
genesis of which largely lies outside the region. The United
Nations must lead international efforts to meet Africa’s
needs and aspirations.
We are deeply concerned at the recent serious
incidents of violence in the West Bank and Gaza and by
Israeli authorities’ opening of a tunnel beneath Haram
Al-Sharif — the Temple Mount — in East Jerusalem,
which resulted in the tragic loss of several innocent lives
and large-scale injuries following violent clashes. The
current situation underlines the need for immediate and
effective measures to end the violence and to create a
climate that would enable purposeful negotiations based on
a recognition of the underlying causes of the conflict. These
developments also serve to emphasize the need to build
further on the agreements and understandings already
reached.
In the wave of the recent political changes in the
Middle East, India is encouraged by the reiteration by all
parties of their continued commitment to the Middle East
peace process based on the framework established by the
Madrid Conference. However, we are concerned that these
reaffirmations do not appear to have manifested themselves
in commensurate progress in the peace process. India urges
all parties to intensify their efforts towards realizing the
mutually agreed objectives of the Middle East peace
process, keeping in view that achieving durable peace and
stability in the Middle East requires solving the
Palestinian issue.
India has ties dating back to early history with
Afghanistan, a country with which we also share bonds of
kinship, culture and religion. We are deeply saddened by
the continued violence and loss of life in that country.
India stands for the unity, independence and territorial
integrity of Afghanistan. We urge all Afghan parties to
resolve their differences through early peaceful dialogue
and negotiations. We support the efforts of the Secretary-
General and his special representative to bring about a
solution in Afghanistan.
The Non-Aligned Movement figures firmly in
India’s world view and constitutes an important plank in
our foreign policy. We remain firmly committed to the
philosophy and values of the Non-Aligned Movement. For
us, non-alignment means independence of thought and
autonomy of choice. It also means working in cooperation
with the largest number of countries. Last year’s non-
aligned summit in Colombia reinforced our faith in the
ability and resilience of the Movement, its responsiveness
to change and its effectiveness in today’s global situation.
India will be privileged to host the next ministerial
conference of the non-aligned countries in New Delhi in
1997.
India is a progressive country charting a balanced
course between economic growth and social justice, and
science and tradition. It is committed to the values of
peace, non-violence, coexistence, pluralism, tolerance and
constructive cooperation. Culturally, India is a bridge
between traditional cultures and emergent trends.
Politically, India will remain anchored in a pluralistic,
liberal democracy that can provide space for all its
constituents and internal interlocutors.
Before I conclude, I am reminded of an ancient Rig
Vedic hymn which reads:
“O citizens of the world!
Live in harmony and concord
Be organized and cooperative
Speak with one voice
And make your resolutions with one Mind.”
May this invocation to harmony, cooperation,
consensus and solidarity continue to guide our
deliberations and actions.
16


﻿Allow
me first, Sir, to congratulate Mr. Razali Ismail on his
unanimous election as President of the General Assembly
at its fifty-first session and to wish him every success. I
would also like to thank his predecessor, Mr. Diogo Freitas
do Amaral, for the outstanding manner in which he carried
out his duties.
The succession of Governments, which is a defining
principle of Israeli democracy, has recently brought to
power a new Government in Israel. A section of the
international community has deemed this democratic Israeli
choice impertinent, suggesting that it would work against
regional peace. In response to this prejudice I would like to
make a simple statement: Israel is united in its quest for
peace. It is not a question of good people and peace-seekers
on one side and mischief-makers and people who reject
peace on the other. In Israel, those on the left and right
converge in their quest for peace, their sensibilities and
differences notwithstanding.
I wish to raise the recent history of the Israeli-Arab
peace process in order to dispel any ambiguity regarding
the practice of peace in Israel and to show that the new
majority cannot be disqualified from efforts to achieve
peace. The peace between Israel and Egypt is a founding
landmark of coexistence between Israelis and Arabs. The
Madrid Conference, to which I had the honour of
contributing, also bears the special stamp of the pioneers of
peace, to whose achievements the new majority in Israel are
the direct heirs.
The firm commitment of the Netanyahu Government
with respect to the Oslo accords is also closely tied to the
peace process, which our immediate neighbours, Egypt and
Jordan, helped to shape. However, my Government’s swift
engagement in the peace process has been minimized,
reduced and distorted. The meetings that the Prime
Minister and the Minister of Defence of the State of Israel
and I have had with the Chairman of the Palestinian
Authority have been met with sarcasm and given only
secondary importance. Those meetings dealt precisely
with the substance and the content of peace. They
initiated the ways and means necessary for the
achievement of peace. They amplified the resonance of
the Oslo accords and extended mutual Israeli-Palestinian
recognition to new sections of society and Israeli political
classes. It is Israel’s determination to reach peace
according to the policies and fundamental guidelines of
the new Government.
On its road to peace, the Government of Israel is
guided by several principles, which I would like to
expound. For us, security is neither an obsession nor a
blind belief. It touches upon our very existence in a
region where, unfortunately, threats and instability still
rage. Security must be the cornerstone in the architecture
of peace. It cannot, under any circumstances, tag along
behind a process in which terrorism and violence have not
yet spoken their last word.
Negotiations themselves, through their joint creative
energies, allow us to control the dangers and drifts. The
battle against terrorism and its infrastructures and its
sources of financing and assistance is not only for us to
fight. We solemnly call upon the United Nations
relentlessly to pursue active cooperation in the struggle
against terrorism and in condemning it unequivocally. It
is imperative to preserve the Israeli-Palestinian peace
process free from violence.
I have just returned from the Washington summit,
held at the initiative of President Clinton. On behalf of
the Government and the people of Israel, I wish, from this
rostrum, to thank the President and the Secretary of State
of the United States for their exemplary contribution to
peace by bringing the parties together and for their
profound commitment to reinvigorating the peace process.
In this respect the role and contribution of the United
States remain of great importance.
On Sunday the Israeli and Palestinian teams will
convene again in an attempt to resolve their differences in
respect of the various agreements. We are responsible to
our people and to our whole region in this matter. We
must therefore display good faith and mutual
understanding in order to fulfil our mission, and to send
out the message of stable peace and lasting security.
12


The Washington summit reconfirmed the principles
and guidelines for the negotiations. I associate myself
wholeheartedly with President Clinton’s statement that face-
to-face negotiations in a constructive atmosphere are the
key to resolving problems. A future free of hostility and the
renunciation of violence: these represent the very basis of
mutual efforts for peace.
The choice is in our hands. Will we opt for
cooperation, progress, real peace and security? Or will we
revert to the dark days of conflict, confrontation and
violence, thereby putting an end to all hope? For its part,
Israel has chosen hope.
Another major principle in our search for peace is the
will of the partners to allow a tangible peace to exist.
Regional cooperation is a critical factor in ensuring peace
and stability. Israel entertains no dreams of economic
hegemony; it wishes to play its fair role in the creation of
regional cooperation. This is a basic principle of
normalization. Peace and normalization are one and
indivisible. Consequently, if we are to follow the logic of
peace and dialogue, we cannot risk having normalization
taken hostage and brought to a halt.
Israel makes no secret that normalization of its
relations with the Arab world must be fully implemented.
This means comprehensive political and economic relations,
and the broadest possible intellectual, cultural and spiritual
acceptance. Some of our neighbours still view Israel as a
body foreign to the region. Normalization must erase
forever the residue of this ideological negation.
Normalization is the indispensable cement for keeping
together the edifice of peace.
One of our immediate goals is the resumption of
negotiations with Syria on the basis of the Madrid
principles, which inaugurated the dialogue between the two
countries. We recognize Syria’s important role in the
establishment of lasting peace in our region. From this
rostrum, we call upon President Al-Assad to resume
negotiations.
As to Lebanon, we have no territorial disputes with
Lebanon. We are committed to its sovereignty. Lebanon
can be fertile ground for the restoration of confidence and
the building of peace.
Egypt and its President, Mr. Hosni Mubarak, are our
partners in peace. They are the authors and actors that have
always been engaged in all stages of the peace process.
Jordan is unquestionably a decisive factor in the
building of peace in our region. A man of peace and
dialogue, His Majesty King Hussein has actively
supported the peace process and has provided a vital
guarantee of continuity. The Washington summit enjoyed
his complete support.
On the long path to peace, the country of Morocco,
the country of my birth and family roots, has always
walked and illuminated the path of Israeli-Arab
reconciliation. The vision displayed by His Majesty King
Hassan II has left its distinctive mark on the entire Arab-
Israeli dialogue. The Moroccan King will continue his
essential role and breathe into peace the remarkable
inspiration of his solidarity.
I would like to pay tribute also to the active support
of Tunisia. Oman, Qatar and, more recently, Mauritania
have all helped to consolidate peace efforts.
The peace process has benefitted from the
considerable support of the co-sponsors, the United States
and Russia, and from the active and positive contribution
of the European Union and Norway and of Powers such
as Japan and Canada.
Once again, I wish solemnly to reaffirm Israel’s
irreversible commitment and determination to pursue the
path of peace.
Since the dawn of history our region has been a
meeting point of diverse civilizations and cultures, a
vibrant wellspring of progress for all of humanity. At the
crossroads of continents and countries, the Middle East
must, in times of peace, discover again the genius of this
place and the richness of its edifying civilizations. Arabs
and Jews must pool their knowledge and wisdom to
regenerate their vocation as the promoters of life and
humanity.
Through international cooperation, Israel is sharing
with young countries from Africa to Asia, from Latin
America to China, its achievements and assets in the
fields of agriculture, health and science.
We hope that the day will come when a regional
security system will be established in the Middle East to
provide a cooperative multilateral response to all security
problems. The advantage of this regional approach is that
it is based on direct negotiations between the States of the
region. The first stage is to build confidence, and
thereafter we must put arms control and disarmament
13


mechanisms into place. For this reason, Israel welcomed the
establishment of the Arms Control and Regional Security
Working Group as part of the multilateral talks. We hope
that in the future this framework will encompass all States
of the Middle East.
Israel’s position is defined by a dual mandate: to set
ambitious objectives, and to pursue them pragmatically and
realistically. After peace and reconciliation have been
established among all the States of the region, Israel will
endeavour to establish in the Middle East a zone free of
chemical, biological and nuclear weapons as well as
ballistic missiles. This demilitarization will be subjected to
rigorous verification.
Negotiations to establish such a zone will commence
following the signing of bilateral peace accords between
Israel and all the countries of the region. In the meantime
Israel will implement confidence-building measures that
will increase openness and transparency and, thereby, make
a contribution to easing tensions and preventing all armed
conflict.
We generally prefer regional security arrangements.
However, Israel is in favour of the implementation of
certain aspects of international mechanisms for arms control
and disarmament where appropriate. Accordingly, Israel
signed the Convention on conventional weapons and
adopted a moratorium on the manufacture and export of
anti-personnel landmines. It has also signed the Treaty
against the use of chemical weapons and now the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. Israel will
consider ratification of that Treaty depending upon
developments in the region, particularly the adoption of that
Treaty by the major countries.
Israel has thus demonstrated its determination to be
involved, whenever possible, in the efforts of the
international community to prevent the spread of
conventional and non-conventional weapons.
Israel strongly desires to be an active and fully-fledged
member of the family of nations represented in this
Organization. We note with regret and deep disappointment
that the question of our membership in a regional group has
still not been resolved. Israel is thus deprived of the right
available to all States Members of the United Nations to
participate on an equal footing in all its activities. This
impairs the principle of equality among sovereign nations
under the Charter of the United Nations. I hope that this
injustice will be rectified and that Israel will finally be able
to act within this Organization on the same footing as all
other Member States.
It is with the subject of Jerusalem, whose very name
is invoked in so many prayers for peace, that I wish to
conclude. Jerusalem is the cradle of the three great
religions. We reaffirm this status daily by respecting and
ensuring total freedom of worship and spiritual expression
for all believers. It is an entirely shared religious reality
to which Israel has made a profound contribution.
Jerusalem, the horizon of our dreams and prayers,
has throughout our exile and dispersions constituted the
summit of our collective being. Capital of Israel, both in
ancient and modern times, never has Jerusalem been the
capital of any country other than Israel.
Rarely if ever has any sovereign State been denied
the right to freely determine its capital. Israel, the people
of peace restored to sovereignty after 2,000 years of exile,
has returned to the city of peace, Yerushalayim:
Jerusalem. Thereby it demonstrates its unswerving
devotion to its ancestral capital to renew its psalm of
peace: “Pray for the peace of Jerusalem”. We shall
tirelessly dedicate all our efforts to that search for peace.





﻿It gives me particular
pleasure to address the General Assembly at a session of
over which Malaysia has been elected to preside. Our two
countries are good friends, and Ambassador Razali is
personally known to and respected by us all. New Zealand
looks forward to a productive session under his leadership.
In just two weeks New Zealanders face a general
election. There are many subjects over which the various
political parties differ, but one thing remains quite clear: the
support of New Zealanders for the United Nations and the
rule of international law embodied in it.
For New Zealand, as for many other countries
represented here today — and especially smaller
countries — the primary purpose of the United Nations
remains to provide for a system of collective security. It
brings the nations of the world together in a grand coalition
to keep the peace, to help eliminate weapons of mass
destruction, to uphold human rights, to encourage good
governance, to protect the environment and to promote
economic and social development, including by
supporting the role of women.
Together, these activities, along with national and
regional initiatives, provide the underpinnings of the
system of collective security that we want to leave for our
children.
For New Zealanders, our confidence in the United
Nations was reaffirmed when, two weeks ago, the General
Assembly adopted the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty. It gave me much satisfaction to sign the Treaty
earlier today on behalf of the Government and the people
of New Zealand. Agreement on a test ban has been a
New Zealand objective for more than three decades and
one we promoted in this Assembly, together with
Australia and Mexico. It reflects deeply held convictions
on the part of all New Zealanders.
New Zealand has argued, and will continue to argue,
for a world without nuclear weapons. Our belief that
these weapons of mass destruction can and should be
eliminated has been reinforced by the experiences of our
region as a testing ground for nuclear weapons. I am glad
to say it is an era now happily behind us.
For New Zealand, the Treaty represents first of all
an end to nuclear testing in our region and worldwide.
But even more, it puts real obstacles in the way of any
State seeking to refine or develop a nuclear arsenal. We


have taken a significant step on the way to eliminating
nuclear weapons entirely. Now, however, we must look
ahead.
The International Court of Justice, in its recent
Advisory Opinion on the legality of the use or threat of use
of nuclear weapons, set out our obligation in this regard:
the obligation to pursue in good faith and to bring to a
conclusion negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament.
New Zealand believes that in 1997 all States, including
nuclear-weapon States, should pursue negotiations on a
phased programme of nuclear disarmament, with the
ultimate goals of the complete elimination of nuclear
weapons and a treaty on general and complete disarmament
under strict and effective international control.
We are better placed to make our contribution to such
negotiations because of the recent decision of the
Conference on Disarmament to admit New Zealand and 22
other countries as full members. As a reflection of the
importance we attach to its ongoing work, my Government
has now decided to appoint a full-time Disarmament
Ambassador to the Conference in Geneva.
Further steps towards a nuclear-free world are
recommended in the report of the Canberra Commission on
the Elimination of Nuclear Weapons, released last month.
We hope that report will energize discussions at the
national level, particularly in the nuclear-weapon States.
The aspirations of many States to be free of nuclear
weapons have found expression in the establishment of
what are now four nuclear-weapon-free zones. Taken
together, the four relevant treaties have the potential to
cover some 114 nations and 1.7 billion people. My
Government has given considerable thought to ways in
which cooperation between nuclear-weapon-free zones can
be advanced. We are working with other Governments on
a draft resolution to be submitted to the Assembly at this
session, and New Zealand hopes it will receive wide
support.
The disarmament arena is only one where the United
Nations must continue to address serious challenges to our
collective security. When my Government took office in
October 1990, the international community faced the
challenge presented by Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait. In the
heart of Europe, Yugoslavia was on the path to political
disintegration. Few of us imagined then, however, the
nightmare of Bosnia, the genocide to come in Rwanda or
the mass starvation and anarchy in Somalia. In response,
during our term on the Security Council in 1993 and 1994,
a record 75,000 United Nations peacekeepers were
deployed around the world, and Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait
was robustly countered by coalition action authorized by
the Security Council. New Zealand was part of that
coalition and is part of the current efforts to ensure that
Iraq complies with subsequent Council decisions. Recent
events show that we still need to be vigilant. Iraq must
recognize that there are limits to what the international
community will tolerate.
New Zealanders also serve in the former Yugoslavia
where, while the implementation of the Dayton accords
lies primarily with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO), the United Nations continues to play an
important role. Similarly, our personnel serve in Angola
and the Middle East.
New Zealanders are staunch supporters of the United
Nations role in international peacekeeping, despite the fact
that the overall record through the first half of this decade
has been mixed. There were successes, such as Cambodia,
Mozambique and El Salvador, and there were the
disappointments and bitter frustrations of Bosnia, Somalia
and Rwanda. I hesitate to call those operations failures.
To me, that would be to overlook the positive things they
achieved in extremely difficult circumstances and the
contributions made by so many dedicated and able people.
Those operations will be failures only if we fail to learn
from them. I think we have learned.
We have learned that, first, the United Nations must
be given the resources required to do the job. Secondly,
the Organization must be careful about mixing
enforcement tasks with peacekeeping, unless our
peacekeepers are appropriately configured from the outset
for the higher level of threat.
Thirdly, the Security Council should be wary of
adopting resolutions to which the Organization cannot
give effect. This creates a very corrosive credibility
problem.
My Government also considers that the United
Nations must continue its efforts to develop a capacity to
respond more rapidly. We commend the proposal to
establish a rapidly deployable operational headquarters
team and, indeed, have offered to contribute a highly
experienced officer to it.
Demining remains an important focus for New
Zealand. Mines pose an unacceptable threat to
peacekeeping operations and are a longer-term
2


humanitarian and development challenge. The United
Nations must make every effort to ensure that the necessary
resources are available for demining activities.
We have more than doubled our annual instalment to
the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Assistance in
Mine Clearance. This is in addition to our continuing
contribution of expertise in demining in Cambodia,
Mozambique and Angola, as well as here at United Nations
Headquarters.
Finally, we do not think the United Nations can write
itself out of the script when operations involving a potential
enforcement dimension are contemplated. If it did so, it
could quickly become irrelevant. The threats to international
peace and security in the future are likely to be every bit as
difficult as those of the recent past. The United Nations will
need to be able to respond effectively, not simply as a
rubber stamp for great-Power actions.
The tragic events of recent days in the West Bank and
Gaza show that peace there remains elusive. New Zealand
calls upon all parties to desist from actions that might derail
the Middle East peace process. Painstaking efforts have
gone into that process, and it offers a real hope for a long-
term solution to the problems that have bedeviled that
region. It must be supported and not jeopardized.
Human rights are the foundation of freedom and
justice, and the achievement of universal respect for human
rights is an essential prerequisite for international peace and
security.
In New Zealand we work hard to ensure that our own
house is in order. We are committed to ensuring that the
rights elaborated in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, the Covenants and other core human rights
instruments are a living reality for all New Zealanders, and
we are prepared to speak out when we see human rights
being violated in other parts of the world. At its heart, our
international human rights policy is geared to finding
tangible ways of protecting and promoting human rights
and good government.
In the Asia-Pacific region we are pleased by the
progress the United Nations is making in nurturing human
rights frameworks. We are also encouraged by the new
levels of cooperation and interaction being achieved by the
human rights commissions of the region.
New Zealand also sees a need to support individual
countries, international and regional organizations and non-
governmental organizations in their work to improve
human rights and the quality of governance. To this end
the Minister for Foreign Affairs has today announced the
establishment of an international good-government
programme. This new programme will markedly expand
our ability to support good government and human rights
capacity-building activities. It will work in tandem with
the existing Commonwealth Good Government Fund.
Consistent with United Nations principles, New
Zealand has also participated actively in the Action Group
of Commonwealth Ministers for the promotion of
principles of good governance established at the
Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting at Harare
in 1991 and reaffirmed at its Auckland meeting in 1995.
For my own part, I have been privileged to represent New
Zealand at several of the Action Group’s meetings and
during its recent mission to Gambia.
Such programmes, with the interlinked goals of
social progress and economic development, do not come
cheaply. The money spent on United Nations relief and
development greatly surpasses that spent on peacekeeping,
and so it should.
At the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro in 1992 it
was recognized that substantial new and additional
funding would be required for sustainable development
and the implementation of Agenda 21, the programme of
action that will take us into the next century.
I am pleased to be able to say that by next year New
Zealand will have increased its official development
assistance by almost one third since Rio. There will be a
24 per cent increase in our funding for United Nations
development agencies this year.
1997 will see the five-year review of Agenda 21. At
the special session of the General Assembly next June,
one important task will be to assess the effectiveness of
the bodies and institutions that have been established to
advance the aims set out in Agenda 21. The issues are
many, and all are important. But we need to focus efforts
and produce real results.
In this regard, the Commission on Sustainable
Development should have a strengthened role. It should
be the forum in which States can work to streamline the
environment-and-sustainable- development agenda.
All these challenges facing this unique Organization,
and our regard for it, highlight of course the urgent need
3


for reform. In particular, the Security Council must be
made more representative of the Organization’s membership
as it is today, not as it was 50 years ago. Its decision-
making procedures must be brought up to date.
Finding a sustainable basis for the financing of the
Organization remains long overdue. New Zealand has
dedicated itself to reform of both the Secretariat and the
intergovernmental machinery, not least through our
vigorous commitment to the work of the Open-ended High-
level Working Group on the Strengthening of the United
Nations System. The report of that group provides a
blueprint for action during this session. We also support the
Efficiency Board, and have made available to it the services
of a New Zealand expert in public-service restructuring.
We believe that New Zealand’s record, not only as a
prompt contributor of assessments, but also as a country
that has demonstrated its commitment to financial reform,
places it in a good position to make an effective
contribution to the work of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, in which we are
seeking membership at this year’s session of the General
Assembly.
The drive for reform of the United Nations system to
make it an effective instrument of the international
community for the next 50 years means no part of it can
remain immune from scrutiny.
A good deal of attention has been focused on the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the Secretariat.
We believe there is also scope for increasing the
effectiveness of the International Court of Justice. It is 50
years since the ICJ was established as the principal United
Nations judicial organ. To mark this important milestone in
the international rule of law, we should now finally
schedule a conference to adopt the statute for the
international criminal court. The creation of a permanent
court that will bring justice to victims of genocide, crimes
against humanity, war crimes and other serious international
crimes is surely a priority for us all.
I am grateful to have had this opportunity to reaffirm
New Zealand’s commitment to this Organization, and to
multilateralism, as the means for building a better world.






﻿The agenda of the General Assembly at
the current session reflects all the complexity of the stage
mankind is now going through, the essence of which is
the transition from bloc confrontation to multipolarity,
economic interdependence and the democratization of
international relations.
I would like to emphasize that during the past year
Russia made its contribution to the consolidation of this
very trend. At the domestic level, this means an
uncompromising continuation of the process of reforming
society. The results of the recent presidential elections in
our country have convincingly proved that Russia has
decisively embarked on the road to the future. The
majority of Russians voted for the continuation of
economic reform, for a State of law and for a policy of
openness and cooperation.
In our relations with the other Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) countries, we resolutely oppose
both the idea of restoring the Soviet Union, an idea based
on the denial of the sovereignty of the Commonwealth
States, and narrow-minded national isolationism. We
stand for the voluntary integration and unification of the
13


members of the Commonwealth and hold that it should not
be isolated from the rest of the world. We wish to ensure,
and we shall ensure, that the CIS will become an important
centre of world economic development and international
stability.
On a wider international plane, Russia is pursuing a
policy aimed at establishing a new world order firmly based
on the equality of all States, justice and universal security.
However, the establishment of such a world order is a slow
process, influenced by both objective and subjective factors.
It is only natural that the end of the cold war provided a
starting point for the transition to achieving a stable and
predictable peace at the global level.
But zones of regional conflict have expanded
drastically. The upsurge of terrorism has caused universal
shock, and the threat of proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction is emerging. The rejection of ideological,
military-force confrontation, brought about by the end of
the cold war, clearly proved insufficient to neutralize all
these dangers and risks.
Let us confess, at least to ourselves, that we will not
succeed here unless, first and foremost, we overcome the
inertia of the political mentality. Unfortunately, the
stereotypes that took root in the minds of several
generations of statesmen during the 40 years of the cold
war have not yet disappeared along with the dismantling of
strategic missiles and the destruction of thousands of tanks.
In this connection, I would like to single out three
conditions for the transformation of international relations
during the post-cold-war period.
First, we should see to it that the old fronts of bloc
confrontation are not replaced with new lines of division.
That is precisely why we accept neither the idea of the
expansion of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) military infrastructure to the area of the now
defunct Warsaw Treaty nor the efforts to make that alliance
the axis of a new European system. The enormous
possibilities for economic cooperation and the spiritual
enrichment of all the peoples of the continent can be
realized only through the creation of a genuinely
all-European system of international relations. The
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Lisbon summit must be an important stage in the
construction of such a Europe.
It is important to stress in general that the logic of a
multipolar world in the twenty-first century should differ
qualitatively from the schemes outlined by Metternich and
Bismarck. The way towards the establishment of a system
of comprehensive security is through learning the skills of
equal partnership between the various “poles”, rather than
through the revival of reflexes of rivalry and of balance
of power.
The threat of new lines of division is appearing not
only in Europe, but elsewhere. The understandable
intolerance of the extremism of certain Islamic groups and
factions must not develop into a categorization of the
Muslim world at large as an enemy of modern
civilization. This is probably one of the pressing
requirements of our day.
Russia advocates resolute opposition to extremist and
terrorist forces. They are especially dangerous when they
enjoy State support, and no effort should be spared to
prevent any State from rendering such support. This
cannot be justified. I believe it is time a universal
convention, covering all States without exception, were
elaborated within the United Nations, denying political
asylum anywhere to persons engaged in terrorist
activities. However, no sanctions should be used as a
means to punish peoples or as an instrument to overthrow
Governments. It is far more effective to offer prospects
for a better future to those who renounce extremism and
accept the norms of conduct by the world community.
The second condition for achieving a durable peace
is the emancipation from a mentality based on concepts
of leaders and followers. Such a mentality is fuelled by
illusions that some countries emerged from the cold war
as victors, and others as the vanquished. But this is not
the case. Peoples on both sides of the Iron Curtain jointly
strove to rid themselves of the policy of confrontation.
Meanwhile, the mentality based on leaders and followers
paves the way directly towards the establishment of a
unipolar world. Such a world-order model is unacceptable
today to the overwhelming majority of the international
community.
Finally, the third condition for the successful
movement towards stable peace lies in the coordinated
activities of the international community. Today, one of
the most important tasks is the settlement of regional and
local conflicts. In this regard, significant progress has
been achieved recently. Peace agreements are being
implemented in Bosnia. Initial important agreements have
been achieved for a durable peace in the Middle East. We
have managed to secure ceasefires in Transdniester,
Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Nagorny Karabakh. The
situation has improved somewhat in the conflict zones on
14


the African continent and in Latin America. But as yet no
breakthrough to a durable peace has been achieved in any
of these hotbeds of tension.
The future of the Middle East is a cause for grave
concern. Russia — one of the sponsors of the peace
process — cannot accept the sacrifice to tactical
considerations and internal political manoeuvres of the first
fruits of the peace negotiations, which were won at such a
great cost. The implementation of the Agreements reached
is the only realistic basis for maintaining the peace process.
The only possible way forward is to advance through
negotiation on the basis of the principle of “land for peace”,
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), as
well as resolution 425 (1978), which deals with Lebanon.
It should be clear that the danger of reverting to
confrontation becomes greater as the artificial pause in the
peace process continues. When negotiators are silent, lethal
weapons begin to awake.
We appreciate the peacemaking efforts of the United
States of America, the European Union, France, Egypt and
other members of the international community and we
support an even closer partnership in peacemaking. That is
the most effective way to promote peace-building in the
Middle East.
The Bosnian settlement has entered a new and crucial
stage since the elections of 14 September. The prospects for
a lasting peace have become greater, but the risk of slipping
into a new spiral of hostility and confrontation remains. I
call upon all the Bosnian parties to take full advantage of
the chance for peace created by the international
community. At the same time, the United Nations, the
OSCE, members of the Contact Group and the High
Representative should immediately take a just and balanced
approach to resolving outstanding problems. Assistance for
the social and economic reconstruction of Bosnia and
Herzegovina should be intensified considerably and
conditions created for the return of refugees.
The time has also come to look beyond the horizon of
the Paris agreements. There would seem to be a need for a
large-scale and prolonged civilian peacemaking operation in
which the United Nations and its specialized agencies will
play an important role. The international military and police
presence, to which Russia contributes, should remain a
factor in the peace process for a given period after
December 1996.
The lifting of sanctions against the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and the Bosnian
Serbs is an indispensable condition for a successful peace
in the former Yugoslavia. I hope that, in the near future,
a Yugoslav delegation will take its place in this Hall, as
it has at the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe.
The programme of disarmament, security and
stability for the twenty-first century should become one of
the major axes of transition period strategy. The adoption
of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty is one
huge step in this direction. Russia has just signed the
Treaty and we believe that it is of fundamental
importance for all countries with nuclear capability to
accede to it. However, it should clearly be understood that
testing by any country of a nuclear explosive device
before the Treaty enters into force will radically change
the international situation and greatly prejudice the Treaty
itself, and may compel many countries to revise their
attitude to it.
I should like to draw the attention of the Treaty’s
opponents to the fact that it will not only contribute to the
promotion of nuclear non-proliferation, but will
objectively stimulate a gradual transition to nuclear
disarmament on a multilateral basis. That is the purpose
of President Yeltsin’s proposal to conclude a treaty on
nuclear security and stability with the participation of all
the nuclear Powers. We invite interested States to begin
exchanging views on the issue. Our suggestion that
nuclear arsenals be located only on the territories of the
nuclear Powers in question remains current.
The strengthening of the non-proliferation regime for
weapons of mass destruction depends directly upon
reliable prevention of the illicit traffic in fissile materials.
The Moscow Summit of the Eight on Nuclear Safety and
Security, convened as a result of a Russian initiative,
contributed significantly to a solution of this problem. I
call on all United Nations Member States to become
involved in the implementation of the Moscow
agreements.
The rights of an individual should occupy a central
place in any new concept of international security.
Strengthening the international human-rights protection
mechanism could ensure the observance of these rights.
Its oversight and preventive functions should be
consolidated and made more practical. However,
legitimate efforts to ensure respect for human rights
cannot serve political purposes. It is too delicate an area
to be invaded by political speculation and objectives.
15


My comments apply fully to the protection of the
rights of national minorities. The relevance of this problem
is evident in today’s world. The complexity of the
situation — let us be frank — requires a link between the
protection of the rights of national minorities and
observance of the principle of the territorial integrity of
States. Russia is directing its policy at precisely such a link.
My comments also apply to the Baltic States. While
recognizing the sovereignty of those countries and their
territorial integrity, Russia cannot remain indifferent to the
discriminatory practices pursued against the
Russian-speaking populations in Estonia and Latvia. While
acknowledging measures that have already been taken to
improve the situation, we believe that the United Nations
and other international organizations should intensify and
systematize their work for the protection of the rights of
national minorities.
How do we implement this strategy for creating a new
world order? Despite the importance of bilateral relations
and successful regional organizations, the United Nations
remains the principal mechanism capable of ensuring the
transition from a bipolar and confrontational world to a
multipolar and democratic one. In such circumstances, the
significance of the United Nations as a centre for
coordinating the actions of States is increasing. During the
formation of a multipolar system, the United Nations is
called upon to serve as a kind of safety net, minimizing the
destructive effects of the changes and directing them
towards democratic evolution.
The major task of the United Nations remains the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Furthermore, the principal tools available to the
Organization must be political and diplomatic. I remind the
Assembly of this fact because, during the past few years
within the United Nations, a “sanctions syndrome” has
begun to emerge: a desire to apply sanctions and other
coercive measures more broadly and actively, sometimes
ignoring existing political and diplomatic avenues. We are
convinced that the United Nations should take such
measures only in exceptional cases, after all other means
have been genuinely exhausted.
On the whole, there is a need to modernize the United
Nations sanctions mechanisms. Today, for example, no
specific procedure is provided for lifting sanctions, and, as
experience has demonstrated, this is extremely important.
The humanitarian damage caused by sanctions and the
damage to third countries should be minimized.
It is extremely important to emphasize that the
United Nations must be maintained as the sole
Organization that can authorize the use of force. Any
actions of that nature taken in circumvention of the
Security Council must be totally precluded.
The United Nations can and must work purposefully
towards establishing a new global legal framework. To
give impetus to such work Russia has proposed the
holding in 1999 of a third peace conference. This idea
already has the support of a significant number of States.
I believe that the time has come to discuss this initiative
in a constructive and substantive manner.
Past experience shows the need for new approaches
by the United Nations to peacekeeping operations. We
can already discern a pyramid regulating the relations of
the United Nations with regional organizations. Without
the development of such relations the United Nations may
not be able to withstand the burden of peacemaking
actions. I refer specifically to a pyramid, because it is of
fundamental importance to do no harm to the Security
Council, which bears the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace.
We are counting on significantly more attention
being paid by the United Nations to conflicts in the area
of the Commonwealth of Independent States. So far, the
major role in this respect has been played by Russia and
its Commonwealth partners.
In view of present circumstances, Russia calls on the
United Nations to address the Afghan conflict. In that
multinational and long-suffering country, a truly critical
situation has arisen, and we have to do everything
possible to prevent the country from disintegrating. The
Afghan tragedy, like the endless series of internal
conflicts in Rwanda and Liberia, is the most convincing
argument for the development of a United Nations policy
of national reconciliation diplomacy.
To cope with all these tasks, the United Nations
itself must be updated and adapted to these new
conditions. Reform is long overdue, and it is not a single
measure that is required but a process that encompasses
the entire United Nations system. Reform of the United
Nations requires clearly defined goals: first, that it carry
out its activities in a timely manner; and secondly, that its
structure be optimized in order to enhance the
effectiveness of the Organization.
16


A great deal has already been done to implement
reform. The Secretary-General has made a considerable
contribution to these efforts, and Russia supports the
continuation of this difficult and protracted effort.
It is a well-established tradition to conclude statements
before this Assembly by saying that the current session
must play a special role in strengthening peace and that
peoples are expecting us to make decisions. I am confident
that this session of the General Assembly will live up to the
expectations of Governments and the hopes of peoples: that
all of us will take a new step in humankind’s difficult
transition towards a world united in its diversity, a world
that is open to universal economic and spiritual
development, a world that promises security and stability —
a world in which States cooperate on an equal footing. Let
us work together for the sake of this goal.





﻿Three years ago I had the honour
of being the first American President born after the
founding of the United Nations to address the General
Assembly. In its fifty-first year, the United Nations has not
yet realized all its founders’ aspirations. But the ideals of
the United Nations Charter — peace, freedom, tolerance
and prosperity — now touch more people in more nations
than ever before.
Now we find ourselves at a turning point in history
when the blocs and barriers that long defined the world are
giving way to an age of remarkable possibility — a time
when more of our children and more nations will be able to
live out their dreams than ever before. But this is also an
age of new threats — threats from terrorists, from rogue
States that support them, threats from ethnic, religious,
racial and tribal hatreds, threats from international
criminals and drug traffickers — all of whom will be
more dangerous if they gain access to weapons of mass
destruction.
The challenge before us, plainly, is twofold: to seize
the new opportunities for more people to enjoy peace and
freedom, security and prosperity and to move strongly
and swiftly against the dangers that change has produced.
This week and in this place, we take a giant step
forward. By overwhelming global consensus, we will
make a solemn commitment to end all nuclear tests for all
time.
Before entering this Hall, I had the great honour to
be the first leader to sign the Comprehensive Test-Ban
Treaty (CTBT). I did so, with some pride, with this pen,
for this pen is the very one that President Kennedy used
to help bring the limited test-ban Treaty to life 33 years
ago.
This Comprehensive Test-Ban Treaty will help
prevent the nuclear Powers from developing more
advanced and more dangerous weapons. It will limit the
ability of other States to acquire such devices themselves.
It points us towards a century in which the roles and risks
of nuclear weapons can be further reduced and ultimately
eliminated.
I want to thank all those who helped bring us to this
day, especially the Chairman of the comprehensive test-


ban negotiating Committee, Netherlands Ambassador
Ramaker, and the Government of Australia, which took the
lead at the United Nations.
I thank the Secretary-General for the remarks he made
this morning in establishing the criteria and standards in
support of the United Nations as the depository of the
Treaty.
The signatures of the world’s declared nuclear
Powers — the United States, China, France, Russia and the
United Kingdom — along with those of the vast majority
of its nations, will immediately create an international norm
against nuclear testing even before the Treaty formally
enters into force.
The CTBT is the shared work of hard negotiation.
Some have complained that it does not mandate total
nuclear disarmament by a date certain. I would say to them:
“Do not forsake the benefits of this achievement by
ignoring the tremendous progress we have already made
towards that goal.” Today there are no Russian missiles
pointed at America and no American missiles pointed at
Russia.
Through the START Treaties we are cutting our
nuclear arsenals by two thirds. Ukraine, Belarus and
Kazakstan are giving up the nuclear weapons left on their
land after the Soviet Union dissolved.
We are working with the newly independent States to
improve security at nuclear facilities and to convert nuclear
weapons to peaceful uses.
The United States and other nuclear-weapon States
have embraced the South Pacific and African nuclear-free
zones. Now half the world’s land area is nuclear free by
international agreement. And the world community
extended indefinitely the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
Yet some of the very changes that had made this
progress possible have also created new risks. The breakup
of the Soviet Union left nuclear materials dispersed
throughout the newly independent States. As barriers have
come down around the world the danger of nuclear
smuggling has gone up. So even as we reduce the global
stockpiles of weapons of mass destruction, we must also
reduce the danger that lethal materials could wind up in the
wrong hands, while developing effective defences for our
people if that should happen.
The United States has six priority goals to further lift
the threat of nuclear weapons destruction and the threat of
weapons of mass destruction, and to limit their dangerous
spread.
First, we must protect our people from chemical
attack and make it harder for rogue States and terrorists
to brandish poison gas by bringing the chemical weapons
Convention into force as soon as possible. I thank the
nations here that have ratified the chemical weapons
Convention. I deeply regret that the United States Senate
has not yet voted on the Convention, but I want to assure
you and people throughout the world that I will not let
this treaty die, and we will join the ranks of nation
determined to prevent the spread of chemical weapons.
Secondly, we must reduce the risk that an outlaw
State or organization could build a nuclear device by
negotiating a treaty to freeze the production of fissile
materials for use in nuclear weapons. The Conference on
Disarmament should take up this challenge immediately.
The United States, Russia, France and the United
Kingdom already have halted production of fissile
materials for weapons. I urge other nations to end the
unsafeguarded production of these materials pending
completion of the treaty.
Thirdly, we must continue to reduce our nuclear
arsenals. When Russia ratifies START II, President
Yeltsin and I are all ready to discuss the possibilities of
further cuts, as well as limiting and monitoring nuclear
warheads and materials. This will help make deep
reductions irreversible.
Fourthly, we must reinforce our efforts against the
spread of nuclear weapons by strengthening the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). We
should give the International Atomic Energy Agency a
stronger role and sharper tools for conducting worldwide
inspections. Our law enforcement and customs officials
should cooperate more in the fight against nuclear
smuggling. And I urge all nations that have not signed the
NPT to do so without delay.
Fifthly, we must better protect our people from those
who would use disease as a weapon of war, by giving the
biological weapons Convention the means to strengthen
compliance, including on-site investigations when we
believe such weapons may have been used or when
suspicious outbreaks of disease occur. We should aim to
complete this task by 1998.
2

Finally, we must end the carnage caused by
anti-personnel landmines, the hidden killers that murder and
maim more than 25,000 people a year. In May, I announced
a series of actions the United States would take towards
this goal. Today, I renew my appeal for the swift
negotiation of a worldwide ban on the use, stockpiling,
production, and transfer of anti-personnel landmines. Our
children deserve to walk the Earth in safety.
Thirty-three years ago, at the height of the cold war,
President Kennedy spoke at American University in
Washington. Peace was the topic of his address, but not an
abstract ideal of peace. Instead, he urged us to focus on
“a more practical, attainable peace — based not on a
sudden revolution in human nature but on a gradual
evolution in human institutions — on a series of
concrete actions and effective agreements which are in
the interests of all concerned.”
It was in that same speech that he announced that talks
would shortly begin in Moscow on a comprehensive test-
ban treaty.
President Kennedy’s vision exceeded the possibilities
of his time, but his words speak to us still. As we sign our
names to the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty —
the longest-sought, hardest-fought prize in arms control
history — let us summon the confidence of earlier pioneers
and set our sights on the challenges of the new century.
Over the past three years we have moved in the right
direction in meeting those challenges. In Bosnia, where the
war is over and where just 10 days ago its people went to
the polls in peace, we have moved in the right direction.
Now we must help Bosnia build a unified, democratic, and
peaceful future.
In Haiti, where the dictators are gone, democracy is
back and the exodus of refugees has ended, we have move
in the right direction. Now we must help the Haitian people
seize the full benefits of freedom and forge a more
prosperous future. In the Middle East and in Northern
Ireland, there is progress towards lasting peace, and we are
moving in the right direction. Now we must support
continued progress between Israel and Palestinians, and we
must broaden the circle of peace to include more of Israel’s
neighbours. We must help to give the children of Belfast
the chance to live out normal lives.
In the fact that democracy, open markets and peace
are taking hold around the world, we are moving in the
right direction. Here in the Americas, every nation but
one has raised freedom’s flag. In Central Europe, in
Russia, Ukraine and the other new independent States, the
forces of reform have earned all our respect and will
continue to have the support of the United States. Now
we must begin to welcome Europe’s new democracies
into the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO),
strengthen NATO’s partnership with Russia and build a
secure and undivided Europe.
In Asia, South Korea, Japan, China and America
working together persuaded North Korea to freeze its
nuclear programme under international monitoring. Now,
in the wake of provocative actions by North Korea, we
must pursue a permanent peace for all the Korean people.
Our planet is safer because of our common efforts to
close Chernobyl, to address the challenges of climate
change, to protect the world’s forests and oceans. Now
we must uphold our duty as custodians of our
environment so that our children will inherit an even
healthier planet.
All of us must continue our historic efforts to build
a better, more global trading system for the twenty-first
century. We have made remarkable progress, but there is
more to do in opening markets, in creating millions of
new jobs for all our people.
In this time of challenge and change, the United
Nations is more important than ever before, because our
world is more interdependent than ever before. Most
Americans know this. Unfortunately, some Americans, in
their longing to be free of the world’s problems, and
perhaps to focus more on our own problems, ignore what
the United Nations has done, ignore the benefits of
cooperation. They ignore our own interdependence with
all of you in charting a better future. They ignore all that
the United Nations is doing to lift the lives of millions by
preserving the peace, vaccinating children, caring for
refugees, sharing the blessings of progress around the
world. They have made it difficult for the United States
to meet its obligations to the United Nations. But let me
reassure all of you: the vast majority of Americans
support the United Nations, not only because it reflects
our own ideals, but because it reinforces our interests. We
must continue to work to manifest the support that our
people feel. For the fifty-first year in a row, the United
States will be the largest financial contributor to the
United Nations. We are paying our dues, and I am
committed to paying off our accumulated obligations.
However, we also support the process of reform, which
has done great work in reforming and streamlining the
3


bureaucracy and reining in the budget, and it should
continue.
We also believe that all of us — the nations of the
world working together — must do more to fight terrorism.
Last year I asked the nations assembled here to commit to
a goal of zero tolerance for aggression, terrorism and
lawless behaviour. Frankly, we have not done that yet. Real
zero tolerance means giving no aid and no quarter to
terrorists who slaughter the innocent and drug traffickers
who poison our children, and doing everything we can to
prevent weapons of mass destruction from falling into the
wrong hands. Real zero tolerance requires us to isolate
States that refuse to play by the rules we have all accepted
for civilized behaviour. As long as Iraq threatens its
neighbours and its people, as long as Iran supports and
protects terrorists, as long as Libya refuses to give up the
people who blew up Pan Am 103, they should not become
full members of the family of nations.
The United States is pursuing a three-part strategy
against terrorists: abroad, by working more closely than
ever with like-minded nations; at home by giving our law
enforcement the toughest counter-terrorism tools available,
and by doing all we can to make our airports and the
aeroplanes that link us all together even safer. I have
requested more than $1 billion from our Congress to meet
these commitments, and we are implementing the United
States Vice President's aviation security plan to make those
travelling to, from and within the United States more
secure.
There are other steps we must take together. Last year,
I urged that together we crack down on money laundering
and front companies, shut down gray markets for guns,
explosives and false documents, open more law
enforcement centres around the world and strengthen
safeguards on lethal materials. In each of these areas we
have made progress, through the United Nations, at the
Summit of Peacemakers in Sharm el-Sheikh, at the Paris
terrorism conference and individually.
Now we should adopt the declaration on crime and
public security I proposed last year. It includes a no-
sanctuary pledge, so that we can say with one voice to the
terrorists, criminals and drug traffickers: “You have no
place to run, no place to hide.” I call on every Member to
ratify 11 international conventions that would help prevent
and punish terrorism and to criminalize the use of
explosives in terrorist attacks.
To every nation whose children fall prey to
drugs and every nation that makes those drugs: we must
do more to reduce demand and to take illegal drugs off
the market and off the streets. The United States will do
its part. Next week, I will target more than $100-million
worth of defence equipment, services and training to
Mexico, Colombia and other South American and
Caribbean countries.
These resources will help our friends stop the flow
of drugs at the source. Now I ask every nation that
exports the chemicals needed to make illicit drugs to
create an informal group whose members will work to
deny these chemicals to drug producers. We must not let
more drugs darken the dawn of the next century.
Our duty to fight all these forces of destruction is
directly linked to our efforts to reduce the threat of
weapons of mass destruction. We all know we are not
immune from this. We saw it when our friends in Japan
were subject to the murderous power of a small vial of
sarin gas unleashed in the Tokyo subway. We know a
small lump of plutonium is enough to build a nuclear
bomb. We know that more dangerous people have access
to materials of mass destruction because of the rapid
movement and open borders of this age. The quest to
eliminate these problems from the world’s arsenals and to
stop them from spreading has taken on a new and
powerful urgency for all of us.
So let us strengthen our determination to fight the
rogue States, the terrorists and the criminals who menace
our safety, our way of life and the potential of our
children in the twenty-first century. Let us recommit
ourselves to prevent them from acquiring weapons of
mass destruction. Let us work harder than ever to lift the
nuclear backdrop that has darkened the world’s stage for
too long now. Let us make these solemn tasks our
common obligation, our common commitment; if we do,
then together we will enter the twenty-first century
marching towards a better, safer world — the very better,
safer world the United Nations has sought to build for 51
years.




﻿I should like first to extend
warm congratulations to Mr. Razali Ismail on his election
to the presidency of the General Assembly at its fifty-first
session. We have no doubt that the session will benefit
from his known skills as he discharges his responsibilities.
I should also like to commend Mr. Diogo Freitas
do Amaral for the excellent work done during his term of
office.
I should also like to express to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, our continued confidence in his
guidance of the Organization.
Allow me at the outset of this, my first opportunity to
speak before the General Assembly, to express the deep
gratitude and appreciation of the people and Government of
South Africa for the decision taken by the Assembly at the
fiftieth session to relieve the new democratic Government
of South Africa of the burden of the contribution to the
United Nations budget accumulated over the period of two
decades when the apartheid regime was excluded from
participating in the work of the General Assembly. We
recognize that that action involved considerable sacrifice,
both for the United Nations and for its Member States, and
that it was also consistent with the historic commitment of
support for our struggle for democracy.
South Africa remains committed to achieving a world
free of all weapons of mass destruction and to addressing
the issue of the proliferation of conventional weapons. We
therefore welcome the adoption of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT), which we signed
yesterday.
Our support for the CTBT as an instrument of
disarmament and non-proliferation is based upon the view
that this Treaty is an integral part of a process which will
lead to the full implementation of the nuclear-disarmament
obligations set out in article VI of the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
An important milestone along this road was the
adoption of the Pelindaba Treaty creating the African
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone. This Treaty will contribute
greatly to measures aimed at achieving a world free from
nuclear weapons. Further steps are needed in the process to
bring the world closer to the ultimate goal of the
elimination of nuclear weapons. The next step is for
African States to cooperate with parties to the other
nuclear-weapon-free-zones in the Pacific and Latin
American regions with a view to promoting a southern
hemisphere-wide nuclear-weapon-free zone. We are
heartened by the unprecedented step of four nuclear-
weapon States’ signing the relevant Protocols of the
Pelindaba Treaty simultaneously with African States in
April 1996, while the fifth has indicated that it will sign
shortly. South Africa, as stated previously in other
forums, will also work for the commencement next year
of negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament on a
treaty banning the production of fissile material for
nuclear weapons.
South Africa also supports and will work for the
establishment of an ad hoc committee on nuclear
disarmament in the Conference on Disarmament. This
committee can identify and negotiate the necessary steps
by which we can achieve the ultimate goal of the eventual
elimination of nuclear weapons. We also look forward to
the early ratification of the Chemical Weapons
Convention by those States that have not yet done so.
It is not just the threat posed by all weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery that is of serious
concern to my Government, but also the build-up of
conventional weapons beyond a level which can be
considered legitimate for the purposes of self-defence.
Conventional weapons are, in fact, the cause of most of
the deaths and suffering of millions of people in conflicts
around the world today.
My Government would therefore like to encourage
all States Members of the United Nations to support and
participate in the United Nations Register of Conventional
Arms, and lend active support to General Assembly
resolution 50/70 B on small arms and its panel of
governmental experts mandated to assist the Secretary-
General to prepare a report on small arms. We would also
encourage Member States to support the worldwide
efforts to secure the elimination of anti-personnel
landmines. In order to alleviate the suffering caused by
landmines, my Government is committed to reinforcing
international cooperation. As a country with advanced
demining technology, we are pleased to be making a
modest contribution to international efforts to unearth
landmines.
South Africa will continue to cooperate in the
various international forums dedicated to the
non-proliferation of the technologies and equipment which
17


could be used in the development of weapons of mass
destruction, and in discouraging any destabilizing build up
of conventional weapons.
Our harrowing experience under the tyranny of
apartheid has imposed a duty on us to place a high
premium on the promotion of human rights. In this regard,
our Constitution contains an entrenched and fully justiciable
Bill of Rights. In addition, plans are advanced for the
establishment of an office on the status of women to
provide a mechanism within the Government to act as a
monitor to ensure that a gender perspective is integrated
into all publicly-funded policies and programmes. The
South African Government regards it as a priority to
contribute to the efforts of the international community to
combat the violation of human rights.
In South Africa, and in the region as a whole,
processes of democratization have released a host of
productive human and political resources. This has, in many
ways, contributed to the achievement of peace, security and
stability in our region.
Our vision for southern Africa is one of the highest
possible degree of economic cooperation, mutual assistance
and the joint planning of regional development initiatives,
leading to full economic integration.
Civil conflicts have ravaged many parts of Africa. We
welcome the positive developments which have taken place
in Rwanda and Sierra Leone. However, serious conflict
persists in Liberia, Burundi and Somalia. The South African
Government is committed to playing an active role in the
ongoing efforts of the international community to assist the
people of Burundi to bring about lasting peace and national
reconciliation. President Mandela recently appointed a
special representative for Burundi, who has been given the
task of searching for a viable solution in close coordination
with other special representatives and with countries in the
region. These efforts need to be supplemented by close
cooperation between the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) and the United Nations.
At the same time, we are heartened by the progress,
albeit tentative so far, towards peace in Angola.
Representatives of Member countries assembled here will
agree that the people of Angola deserve peace at last as an
instrument for — or rather, as an important ingredient of —
embarking on the road to sustainable economic
development and social advancement. Our Government
commends the efforts of the United Nations, and especially
those of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Angola, Maître Alioune Blondin Beye, who has with
tremendous patience and commitment guided the Angolan
peace process to the stage where it is today. We owe it to
the people of Angola to see this process through to its
logical conclusion.
Through the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and
Resolution, member States of the OAU are collectively
committed to restoring peace and security on our
continent. In support of the OAU mechanism, we are
pleased that the Southern African Development
Community has recently created an organ on politics,
defence and security. These efforts reflect Africa’s
primary concern with issues of preventive diplomacy and
conflict resolution.
South Africa welcomed the spirit of dialogue and
realism that had begun to characterize the relations
between Israel and Palestine and was hopeful that this
positive development would gradually replace the
centuries of conflict in the Middle East. That hope was
further reinforced by the Declaration of Principles on
Interim Self-Government Arrangements reached in Oslo.
My Government is concerned, however, that recent
developments in the Middle East are likely to reverse and
jeopardize the peace process. We therefore urge all the
players in the Middle East to rise to the occasion and, in
a spirit of reconciliation, to move steadfastly towards a
lasting peace in the region.
We are seriously concerned by the marginalization,
particularly of African countries among the least-
developed countries, from the process of globalization and
liberalization. In this regard, closer attention should be
given to the need to address the external debt burden of
the least-developed countries, especially those in Africa.
Problems associated with the debt burden and its
servicing still persist and frustrate the rate at which the
continent can extricate itself from the vicious cycle of
poverty.
We therefore welcome the Mid-term Review of the
Implementation of the United Nations New Agenda for
the Development of Africa in the 1990s and recognize the
importance of the United Nations System-wide Special
Initiative on Africa, as well as the need to underpin its
success through appropriate and adequate resources.
In this context we also welcome the designation of
1996 as the International Year for the Eradication of
Poverty. We hope that the international community will
18


realize this objective in clear recognition of the challenges
facing it.
We welcome the World Food Summit, which is to
convene in Rome in November 1996 and which will afford
the international community the opportunity to demonstrate
its commitment to ensuring that poverty eradication
strategies are fully integrated into all initiatives of the
United Nations system.
My Government is encouraged by the outcome of the
United Nations Conference on Human Settlements
(HABITAT II). The results of the Conference represent the
collaborative efforts of the international community to
develop a consensus view on the fundamental need to
provide access to adequate shelter and infrastructure for all
people. Continued support for initiatives at the national and
international level to realize and implement the necessary
follow-up to HABITAT II should now receive priority
attention.
It was an honour for South Africa to host the ninth
session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development (UNCTAD) in April 1996. My Government
believes that the sound basis for cooperation established by
UNCTAD IX and the call for partnership for growth and
development outlined in the Midrand Declaration must be
carried forward and implemented through the General
Assembly and other forums. South Africa is particularly
keen to ensure that the framework which we adopted at
Midrand for the reform of UNCTAD is translated into an
effective facility for the developing world.
South Africa also wishes to underscore the
fundamental importance of international cooperation in the
environmental and development fields. Sustained political
commitment through global partnership remains essential
for our continuing international cooperation efforts. It is for
this reason that we believe that the 1997 special session of
the General Assembly will provide an excellent opportunity
to reaffirm the principles and objectives of the Rio
Declaration’s Agenda 21.
South Africa, a country with a long coastline, has
considerable interest in matters relating to the law of the
sea. We are thus pleased that the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea and its implementing
Agreement have entered into force, and that the
International Sea-Bed Authority and related structures, of
which South Africa is proud to be a member, have been
established.
In my statement to the General Assembly during the
fiftieth session, I expressed the sincere hope that
significant progress would be made in bringing about the
establishment of an international criminal court. It is
therefore gratifying to see that the Preparatory Committee
on the Establishment of an International Criminal Court,
which was established during the fiftieth session, has
made much progress in bringing this idea to fruition.
What is now needed is to take this process forward by
holding as soon as possible a diplomatic conference
where the statute of the proposed court can be finalized.
It is widely acknowledged that the favourable
changes in the international climate are conducive to the
reform and modernization of the United Nations in order
to prepare the Organization to respond effectively to the
challenges of the twenty-first century.
I wish to recall that in his address on 23 October
1995 at the Special Commemorative Meeting of the
General Assembly, President Mandela, said:
“Indeed the United Nations has to reassess its
role, redefine its profile and reshape its
structures. It should truly reflect the diversity
of our universe and ensure equity among the
nations in the exercise of power within the
system of international relations in general, and
the Security Council in particular.” (Official
Records of the General Assembly, Fiftieth
Session, Plenary Meetings, 37th meeting, p. 6)
In this regard, my delegation wishes to register its
disappointment at the slow pace of advancement, with no
end in sight to the deliberations of the Working Group on
the question of equitable representation and increase in
the membership of the Security Council and other matters
relating to the Security Council. In this regard we support
the recommendation in the report of the Working Group
that the Group should continue with its work. We would
also urge Member States to demonstrate flexibility and
accommodation in their future deliberations and to display
the necessary political will in order to reach a common
understanding.
In the declaration that the Heads of State and
Government adopted on the occasion of the fiftieth
anniversary of the United Nations on 24 October 1995, it
was noted that
“In order to carry out its work effectively, the
United Nations must have adequate resources.
19


Member States must meet, in full and on time, their
obligation to bear the expenses of the Organization, as
apportioned by the General Assembly. That
apportionment should be established on the basis of
criteria agreed to and considered to be fair by Member
States.” (A/50/48, para. 15)
My delegation has taken note of the progress of the
Working Group on the financial situation in highlighting the
problems facing the Organization, and urges all Member
States to pay what is legally due as soon as possible in
order that we may direct our energies to the real problems
facing the world at this time. As we approach the twenty-
first century, let us together resolve to redefine the role and
shape of the United Nations and render this institution
better equipped to carry out the important task of advancing
peace and development in the world.



