Please allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the General Assembly at
its current session. I believe your wisdom and experience
will enable you to accomplish your lofty mission with
distinction. At the same time, I would like to express my
appreciation to Mr. Razali Ismail for his contribution as
President of the General Assembly at its last session.
This year, 1997, is no ordinary year for China. Last
February, when Deng Xiaoping, the chief architect of
China’s reform and opening-up, passed away, the 1.2
billion Chinese people were immersed in deep sorrow.
Turning grief into strength, we are determined to heed his
behest by deepening reform, opening the country still wider
to the outside world, stepping up national development and
promoting the cause of world peace. Here, on behalf of the
Chinese Government and people, I would like once again
to thank the United Nations and its Member States for the
sincere condolences they expressed on the passing of Deng
Xiaoping. Your kind words gave us strength at our time of
bereavement.
Just a few days ago, the Fifteenth National Congress
of the Communist Party of China came to a triumphant
conclusion in Beijing. This Congress, holding high the great
banner of Deng Xiaoping theory, charts the future course of
China’s development with a blueprint and displays the
resolve to carry forward the cause of building socialism
with Chinese characteristics well into the twenty-first
century.
On 1 July of this year, China resumed its exercise of
sovereignty over Hong Kong, which wiped out our national
humiliation of one and a half centuries and opened up a
new chapter in our peaceful reunification. During the more
than two months since its return, Hong Kong has enjoyed
social stability and economic prosperity, which fills the
people of Hong Kong, of China and of the world at large
with great joy.
The realization of Deng Xiaoping’s concept of “one
country, two systems” in Hong Kong carries profound
significance. Firmly adhering to this concept, we will
keep up the peaceful reunification of our motherland by
ensuring a smooth return of Macao and eventually
resolving the Taiwan question. Taiwan is an inalienable
part of Chinese territory, and the Taiwan question is
purely an internal affair of China. Any country that
attempts to use the Taiwan question to put pressure on
China or even clamours for “two Chinas” or “one China,
one Taiwan” has acted in total contravention of the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and
the relevant General Assembly resolutions. Such
behaviour will be absolutely unacceptable to the Chinese
people, as well as to all the countries upholding justice in
the world.
As the international situation continues to undergo
profound changes, peace and development have become
the main themes of our times. The world is evolving
towards multipolarity with growing diversity in countries’
political, economic and cultural lives. This trend has
become an irresistible tide of history.
The two world wars in the first half of the twentieth
century plunged mankind into unprecedented havoc. And
the cold war, which lasted for more than four decades in
the latter half of our century, kept humanity in the dark
shadow of war. Reviewing the past and looking to the
future, people throughout the world are anxiously waiting
for the establishment of a just and equitable new
international political and economic order, and they are
hoping to see lasting peace and prosperity for all in the
coming century.
The cold-war security regime that featured military
alliances and the arms race is, as has been proved,
incapable of making peace. Expanding military blocs and
enhancing military alliances under new circumstances can
do little to bring about greater security. Relations between
States should be based on the five principles of mutual
respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual
non-aggression, non-interference in each other’s internal
affairs, equality and mutual benefit and peaceful
coexistence. Each country has the right to choose a road
of development according to its own national conditions,
and no country should interfere in the internal affairs of
other countries on whatever grounds. This must serve as
the political prerequisite for global and regional security.
16


All countries should increase their mutually beneficial
cooperation in the economic field, eliminate unequal
practices in trade and economic relations, and do away with
discriminatory policies with a view to gradually narrowing
the gap between the rich and the poor and achieving
common prosperity. This should serve as the economic
foundation for global and regional security.
All countries should step up consultation and
cooperation in the security field, increase mutual
understanding and trust, and undertake to settle through
peaceful means, whatever differences and disputes they may
have. This is the practical way to achieve global and
regional security.
In the first half of the year, five countries — China,
Russia, Kazakhstan, Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan — signed
the agreement on mutual reduction of military forces in the
border areas; the four-party talks aimed at bringing about a
new peace mechanism on the Korean peninsula were
launched; and the Regional Forum of the Association of
South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) introduced a
preliminary form of cooperation on security issues featuring
equal participation and negotiated consensus. These are
some of the examples of searching for new models of
security cooperation and of the initial progress already
made.
We feel concerned about the recent setbacks in the
Middle East peace process. We are of the view that the
relevant United Nations resolutions should be complied
with, agreements reached among the parties concerned in
the peace process should be honoured, the principle of land
for peace should be adhered to, and terrorist activities
should stop. We hope that the parties concerned will work
together on that basis so that the Madrid Peace Conference
on peace in the Middle East will resume at an early date.
We are also deeply concerned about the incessant conflicts
and turmoil which have plagued Africa since the beginning
of this year, and wish the African countries steady progress
along the road of peace and development.
The past year has seen new progress in the field of
international arms control and disarmament. The Chemical
Weapons Convention has entered into force; the Preparatory
Committee of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
has started its work; the extent of nuclear-weapon-free
zones is increasing; and negotiations on the efficacy of the
Biological Weapons Convention have made further
headway.
In our view, no one should try to monopolize the
market in the name of preventing proliferation or try to
interfere in the economic and technological cooperation of
other countries, developing countries in particular. An
overhaul of the discriminatory and exclusive
non-proliferation regimes and arrangements is thus
necessary, on the basis of universal participation, and the
United Nations should see to it that it accomplishes
something in this regard.
We maintain that continued efforts should be made
to advance the process of multilateral arms control and
disarmament. The universality of international arms-
control treaties should be strengthened and complete
adherence to them ensured. Instead of weakening and
undermining security, arms-control and disarmament
efforts should reinforce it. The target of disarmament
should not be shifted to developing countries, as countries
with the largest and most sophisticated arsenals bear a
special responsibility for disarmament.
I would also like to draw the Assembly’s attention
to China’s recent announcement of a unilateral step of
disarmament — that is, having reduced its troop strength
by 1 million in the 1980s, China will further reduce its
military by 500,000 troops within the next three years.
This is a move of major significance in the field of
disarmament.
In the past year, the overall situation of the world
economy has been good. Economic links and mutual
penetration among countries and regions are on the
constant increase. The importance of international
cooperation should be given a fresh evaluation with a
view to making it broader, closer and more fruitful.
Developing countries are most vulnerable to the
impact of adverse environmental conditions because of
their weak economic foundations. At present, the
international financial market is highly globalized and
very risky. We should work to stabilize the financial
market and ensure steady economic growth of the
developing countries.
The Uruguay Round agreements should be
implemented in a comprehensive, faithful and balanced
manner, and attempts to impose a linkage between
environmental or labour standards and trade must be
opposed.
Environment and development pose a common
challenge to mankind. The United Nations has held two
17


important conferences in the 1990s, setting forth a set of
guiding principles for the solution of the issue. We hope the
international community, developed countries in particular,
will honour its pledges to provide funds and transfer
technology to the developing countries so as to translate the
declaration of partnership into real action.
Many transboundary issues, such as poverty,
unemployment, refugees, drugs and crime, need to be
addressed through consultation by the international
community. The work of the United Nations in the social
field needs to be strengthened. All countries should, in
keeping with the principles of mutual respect, equality and
mutual benefit, endeavour to promote international
cooperation. They should get down to practical tasks, the
first of which is to help developing countries deal with their
most urgent difficulties. We hope that the special session of
the General Assembly on international drug control,
scheduled for next year, will yield positive results by
formulating a cross-century strategy for combating drug-
related crimes through strengthened international
cooperation along with effective measures of
implementation.
China will continue to support the United Nations in
its work in the social field and will make a greater
contribution to social progress around the world.
The realization of human rights is the common ideal
of mankind. All countries have made great efforts to this
end, with both achievements and lessons. We maintain that
the universality of human rights should be respected; yet
their realization must be integrated with the conditions of
each country. A review of United Nations practice over the
past 50 years and more shows that when countries or
regions do this they will enjoy social stability, economic
development and popular contentment. When they do not,
society will face disintegration, with people losing their
most basic human rights and freedoms, and gross violations
of human rights will even take place when chaos erupts as
a result of war.
We say it is quite natural for people to differ on the
human rights issue. The question is how to deal with these
differences. Which is the better approach: dialogue or
confrontation? I opt for dialogue. Only dialogue can
enhance mutual understanding and cooperation.
Confrontation, on the other hand, can only lead to further
estrangement and do nobody any good. We are pleased to
see that more and more countries are in favour of dialogue
in handling the human rights issue.
The Chinese Government attaches importance to
human rights and is dedicated to promoting and protecting
human rights of its people. Having repeatedly suffered
from foreign aggression in the past, the Chinese people
know full well how state sovereignty and territorial
integrity fundamentally guarantee the realization of their
human rights. We in China — taking upon ourselves the
task of feeding, clothing, sheltering and educating, and
providing travel facilities to, our 1.2 billion people —
know full well how vitally important our right to
subsistence and our right to development are. To enable
our people to lead a freer, happier and more democratic
life, we are focusing above all on the development of our
economy and on advancing democracy and our legal
system.
China will soon sign the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and is studying
earnestly the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights. We stand ready to work with other countries in a
continued effort to promote cooperation in the
international human rights field.
As the most important intergovernmental
organization in the world, the United Nations occupies an
irreplaceable position in international life. At the same
time, an evolving situation calls for reform of the United
Nations.
Last July, Secretary-General Kofi Annan submitted
an extensive report on the reform of the United Nations.
We appreciate his effort.
We are in favour of reforming the United Nations.
The purpose of such reform is to strengthen the role of
the United Nations and enhance its efficiency. Measures
taken in this regard must reflect the common interests of
all Member States and the results must be able to stand
the test of time. To this end, we offer the following
views.
United Nations reform is the shared cause of all
Member States. It should allow full play to democracy,
heed the voices of all sides and take into account the
interests of various parties. The reform plan should be
widely acceptable to Member States.
To enhance efficiency, an appropriate reduction of
personnel and expenditure is necessary. What is
important, however, is for the reform to put greater
emphasis on development issues with a view to
18


strengthening rather than weakening the United Nations role
in the promotion of economic and social development.
The reform should help preserve the diversity in the
United Nations, which is a microcosm of the diversity of
the world. Only when world diversity is recognized and
respected can different countries live in harmony and make
progress together.
The reform should stress practical results, place value
on quality, and progress in an incremental manner.
The enlargement of the Security Council should follow
the principle of equitable geographical distribution and
ensure a proper balance between developing and developed
countries. The Security Council will better perform the lofty
mission entrusted to it under the United Nations Charter
only when it becomes more broadly representative.
Payment of assessed dues is the bounden duty of
every Member State under the Charter of the United
Nations. We urge the countries concerned to pay off their
arrears without conditions and as early as possible in order
to put the United Nations on a sound financial basis for
normal operation.
Countries around the world need the United Nations.
So does the United Nations need their support.






﻿I congratulate
you, Mr. President, on assuming your responsible office.
Major decisions are to be taken at this session and I wish
you good fortune in your conduct of the proceedings.
I wish to thank Ambassador Razali for his
exceptional commitment. He has made us all aware of the
great responsibility we carry during this phase of reform.
The Secretary-General, through the impressive manner in
which he presented his reform proposals, has
re-emphasized that responsibility.
Nowhere else are we so acutely aware as at the
United Nations General Assembly that, regardless of our
origins or the colour of our skin, we have a common
destiny and that we all, North and South, the small
countries and the big countries, need one another.
Millions of people all over the world, especially our
youth, ask themselves whether we politicians and
delegates from 185 nations have drawn the right
conclusions from this; whether we can summon the
political will for joint action to improve their security, to
give them better opportunities in life, and to safeguard
their rights, or whether we will go on wasting and
destroying the natural sources of human life at their
10


expense. Those of us with adult children know how
sceptical their generation have become about the
capabilities of the governing class. That is good reason for
all of us to stop, think and take action, and to do so here
and now.
The world about which we are talking here today and
the world which we participate in shaping is not ours alone.
We have to preserve it for future generations as well. And
this we can achieve only through a united effort. For we are
only one world community that has to survive together.
There is only one boat for all, our vulnerable blue planet,
and there is only one common future, good or bad. That is
the reality we face as we cross over into the third
millennium and it is the reason why policies deriving from
a sense of responsibility are not utopian. Indeed, in our age
they are the only realistic approach.
The world organization’s programmes and funds, that
is to say, those of the United Nation’s Children’s Fund
(UNICEF), the United Nations Development Programme,
the United Nations Population Fund and the World Food
Programme, together dispense more than $4.6 billion a year
in the form of economic and social aid. That comes to
about 80 cents for every person on earth. By contrast, in
1994 the world’s Governments spent about $767 billion on
arms, which was roughly $134 per person. This gross
disproportion is intolerable.
I believe that we must all look beyond the rim of our
own national interests. There is no more time to lose. We
cannot simply come here, make and listen to speeches and
then return to business as usual for another 12 months. We
have a duty and responsibility to leave our children and
grandchildren a world which is worthy of humankind. And
that means doing something about it now, today. We must
protect the earth’s atmosphere by reducing greenhouse-gas
emissions. We must ban lethal anti-personnel landmines by
joining in the Ottawa process. We cannot accept that we
have hundreds of millions of anti-personnel landmines still
in place in the ground of many, many countries in this
world of ours.
We must halt the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, and we must streamline the United Nations
Organization. But above all, we must pay our contributions
on time and in full. These are the criteria which show
whether we are living up to our responsibility.
The opportunity for effective action is there. Despite
carping criticism, international cooperation within the
United Nations framework is working. Malnutrition and
undernourishment have been reduced by a third since
1960 and illiteracy by 50 per cent. Most of the credit for
this, no doubt, goes to the United Nations. Infant
mortality has been halved in the same period — a great
achievement by UNICEF.
Between 1990 and 1995 the world population
increased by 1.48 per cent, considerably less than the 1.72
per cent growth between 1985 and 1990. This nourishes
the hope that we have got over the hump of the
population explosion. Again, this is a big achievement
largely attributable to the work of the United Nations
Population Fund.
Much, I am pleased to note, has also been done to
improve the situation of women. This is important
because with all the tremendous social challenges we
face, the success of our efforts depends heavily on them.
They are the natural advocates of future generations. That
is why one of our main objectives still is to ensure they
have equal rights, not only on paper but also in practice.
The World Conference on Human Rights in Vienna,
the Earth Summit in Rio, the International Conference on
Population and Development in Cairo, the Summit for
Social Development in Copenhagen and the World
Conference on Women in Beijing have demonstrated that
the strategies for creating a better and more equitable
world are in place. What is missing is the political will to
put them into effect. We must learn to give common
interests priority over national interests.
We must start to think not only of the present but of
the future as well. The first step — and I think it cannot
be underlined enough — is to reform and strengthen the
Organization which embodies all these objectives: the
United Nations, our United Nations.
There has been enough talk. Time is running out. At
this fifty-second session, the General Assembly must
make decisions. The backlog of reforms must be dealt
with during this session.
True, Governments and politicians don’t possess a
magic wand with which to put the world in order. And I
readily admit, as a politician, that it is disappointing to
discover how relatively little we ourselves can change,
even in high positions, and I take it that it is the same
with the others present here. But that does not absolve us
from the responsibility to do everything in our power to
bring about necessary change and progress.
11


There is more than enough to be done. The world is
still profoundly unjust. From the moment of their birth,
millions of people have hardly any chance of leading a life
in conditions worthy of the human race. According to
UNICEF, more than 20 million children all over the world
are on the move. About 300,000 children were killed in the
Rwanda massacres. As a result of the 17-year-old war in
Afghanistan, another 280,000 or so have died from
undernourishment and disease. The civil war in Cambodia
has made some 350,000 children orphans. Every 90 minutes
a child is maimed by a landmine.
Yet it is on our children, the weakest members of any
society, be it in the North or the South of our planet, that
the world’s future and hopes depend. They are the weakest
members of any society. They are little people who need
big rights. How much worse off would they be if there
were no United Nations? What would become of the
world’s conscience? Who would demand consideration for
and solidarity with such children if we allowed this
Organization to decline?
At this moment about 25,000 soldiers, civilians and
members of non-governmental organizations are serving the
cause of peace around the globe. All of them deserve our
thanks and appreciation.
A week ago today five Germans, including the Deputy
of the High Representative, Ambassador Gerd Wagner, five
Americans, a Briton and a Pole lost their lives in a tragic
accident. We mourn their loss and share the grief of their
families. Their deaths are an admonition to redouble our
efforts for peace. They wanted to help people in need and
in doing so brought a ray of hope to Bosnia and to the
people working on the ground. That hope must not be
extinguished.
Last Saturday I attended the memorial service in
Sarajevo. I have visited the region more than once, and the
inner conflict among the people was again obvious. As
before, the main obstacles to lasting peace in the region are
hatred and fear among the various ethnic groups. On the
other hand, most Bosnians, in spite of the terrible events of
recent years, realize there is no future for them and their
children if the hatred and fear are not overcome, despite all
the terrible things that have been done, despite the rapes
and the “ethnic cleansing”.
That is why I am speaking out here today — to appeal
to all political leaders in Bosnia to change their attitude and
to mount a reconciliation campaign. The international
community has provided assistance, making millions of
dollars available. We have done a lot. We are very
committed on the ground, and we want to see the results
of what we have done. We believe that those who live in
security and peace have an obligation to help others.
So far more than 300 troops have sacrificed their
lives for the cause of peace in Bosnia. My country
alone — Germany — has spent more than 17 billion
marks on the peace process and on the more than 350,000
asylum-seekers in Germany coming from Kosovo. That is
a lot of money, and those on whom we spend it will have
to react in some way and have to give us a clear sign of
their willingness to implement the agreements.
But outside help, including military support, cannot
be provided indefinitely. And on no account — I want to
be unequivocal about this — will it be given to those who
thwart peace and reconciliation. Attempts to undermine
peace, to incite the people and to torpedo the
implementation of the Dayton Agreement, especially in
Republika Srpska — must stop.
I appeal to all political factions in the region to use
what time remains to launch a new and serious attempt to
settle their differences and to see to it that Karadzic and
other alleged war criminals and enemies of peace are
brought before the Hague Tribunal. These people must
not be allowed to sleep peacefully. But this demand must
be made by the international community, not just
Germany: these people must not be allowed to sleep
peacefully.
We Europeans have done quite a lot this year to
improve the situation on our continent in order to secure
a peaceful future for coming generations. Nations that
belong together are now growing together, and that in a
region that for centuries was divided and at war with
itself. The European Union and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization are gradually opening up to Europe’s new
democracies, while Russia and Ukraine are forming a
new, close partnership with both organizations.
And let the world be prepared. In 1999 we
Europeans, right on schedule and in conformity with
binding stability criteria, will introduce the Euro, the
common European currency. The enlargement of the
European Union and the introduction of the Euro are
historic steps to safeguard the future for coming
generations, steps that hardly anyone would have thought
possible only 10 years ago. And mark my words: there
will be no going back in Europe.
12


At the same time, we are aware that Europe
constitutes only a small section of the much larger global
construction site. Everywhere the harbingers of the new era
are knocking on the door. Nothing is like it used to be, yet
the hopes and wishes of citizens everywhere have remained
the same. They want peace and work. They want a roof
over their heads, protection from crime, and schools for
their children.
Thus the aims and ideals enshrined in the Charter are
just as valid as they were in 1945: peace, sustainable
economic and social development, protection of human
rights and democracy. These aims form a whole, and there
is no order of preference.
Eighty per cent of United Nations activities focus on
world poverty, and rightly so, because this is the big
problem that has remained unsolved since the ending of the
East-West confrontation. Nearly a quarter of the world’s
population — 1.3 billion people — live in poverty, while
840 million suffer from chronic undernourishment. In the
Agenda for Development we have adopted the right course
for the fight against poverty: good governance, market
economy, the rule of law, security for the citizen, regional
cooperation and international integration.
Following the lead of the Association of South-East
Asian Nations countries (ASEAN), the Southern Cone
Common Market (MERCOSUR) and the now-expanding
Southern African Development Community (SADC), the
nations of Central America too are forming closer ties. It is
becoming more and more apparent that this is the path of
progress. The worldwide trend towards closer multilateral
cooperation is increasing, and will lead to progress, security
and prosperity; it is the path of the future. One the one
hand, the Information Age with undreamed-of possibilities,
and, on the other, exclusive communities and citizens
without rights — this does not add up.
Yes, globalization is a great leveller. Basically, it
confronts industrial and developing countries alike with the
same question: are we going to accept the challenge of
being part of a “single world market”, or are we going to
mark time? A good number of newly industrialized and
developing countries have chosen the way forward, and it
has proved to be the right one. They have received the bulk
of global direct investment, which in 1996 increased by 8
per cent to almost $350 billion. Nor have the others been
forgotten. Within the framework of the G-8 process, the
new global partnership for development was established on
their behalf. A beginning was made at the Denver summit
in June, focusing particularly on the sub-Saharan nations
of Africa.
Since 1978 Germany has cancelled debts incurred by
the least developed countries and other land-locked
developing countries in Africa amounting to more than 9
billion marks. These countries will continue to be the
focal point of our development cooperation. Between
1991 and 1995 Germany made available 16.3 billion
marks for Africa’s sub-Saharan nations, and we are proud
of that.
I am glad that the Security Council is holding a
special meeting tomorrow on the situation in Africa.
Many positive developments have taken place there in
recent years, a fact that is often overlooked.
But light and shadow are still very close together. I
need only mention Congo Brazzaville, Sierra Leone,
Somalia and especially the Great Lakes region. My
country, the Federal Republic of Germany, has played a
humanitarian and political role in all these conflicts, and
we recognize that the African States themselves — in the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and in the
subregional organizations — are making significant
efforts to settle these conflicts. We must keep on
supporting them.
But Africa’s real problems lie deeper, in the social
and economic sphere, and in the lack of cohesion among
the different population groups. In my view, Europe’s
vast and important neighbouring continent, which has a
population of about 800 million covers about 23 per cent
of the world’s land surface, has little chance of achieving
stability and economic progress unless it follows the path
of regional cooperation. Such cooperation brings stability
where nations are too weak to achieve it individually.
Southern Africa is a good example. At the 1994
Berlin conference, cooperation between the SADC and the
European Union was raised to a new level. At our
meeting in June we and our African colleagues redefined
the framework for the dialogue between the European
Union and the OAU. Europe will stay on Africa’s side.
Part of this support is that we are helping countries
like Angola and Mozambique to rid themselves of the
scourge of mines. So far mine clearance by hand has
been, at least to me, like trying to remove a sand-dune
with a thimble. We cannot accept that. What we need for
this task is safe, large-capacity machinery.
13


The Oslo Conference gave rise to a sign of hope.
Eighty countries have put their names to a comprehensive
and verifiable ban on anti-personnel mines. I wish to thank
the Secretary-General for his personal efforts on this issue.
Anyone who, like me, has seen the poor, crippled victims
in Cambodia, Mozambique or Bosnia knows that these
treacherous killing devices are wholly — I repeat,
wholly — immoral. I therefore appeal to all countries still
on the outside to join the Ottawa process and help us ban
these infernal devices from the face of the Earth.
The world, galvanized by the spirit of freedom, has
been totally transformed. But this new freedom and its by-
products constitute a major test for us all, not only as
regards competitiveness but also as regards our solidarity,
our ability to show tolerance and to work together, and the
opening of markets.
The East-West conflict has been consigned to the past.
Here too, the question now is: are we going to try and
safeguard the future for posterity, or are we going to allow
new enemy stereotypes to divide us once again? There must
be no clash of civilizations. Hence, the dialogue of
civilizations and world religions must be raised to a new
level. To me this is the spiritual challenge as we approach
the twenty-first century, for only thus can we bring
different standpoints closer together and mobilize the
energies needed for the joint resolution of humanity’s
colossal problems.
I suggest that we hold a forum here at the United
Nations to consider how we can generate new momentum
for this dialogue worldwide. The matter is important
enough. Considerable cultural energy and potential for
innovation lie unused, and the United Nations is the proper
catalyst for their development.
But we must be very clear that there cannot and
should not be dialogue with terrorists. Terrorism has again
raised its ugly head in Mostar, Jerusalem and Cairo. The
vileness of the latest carnage in Algeria would be difficult
to exceed: it really does take your breath away. How long
can the international community look away? I know how
difficult it is to help from the outside, but the world
community cannot accept the cruel killing of utterly
innocent people in the dark of night without standing up
and reacting. We are not powerless in the face of such evil
slaughter of mostly uninvolved persons. In Denver, the
Group of Eight called upon all nations to sign the
international conventions on terrorism. We must resolutely
combat terrorism all over the world, using all democratic
means at our disposal. I call upon the General Assembly to
complete by the end of this session the negotiations on a
convention against terrorist bomb attacks, as proposed by
the Group of Eight.
Extradition or suitable punishment remains the
principle underlying our efforts to combat terrorism. No
one should give refuge to terrorists. We need a united
global front against terrorism. To combat fanatical killers
we can only consistently apply the law as well as police
and judicial measures. The source of sympathy for
terrorist objectives must be withered by political means.
In other words, we must get to the roots, which in most
cases are social problems.
On my last visit to the Middle East I spoke with
many citizens in Jerusalem, Bethlehem and Hebron, and
in the refugee camps in Gaza. I sensed their fears and
concerns. Those who have seen the wretched conditions
in the camps know that these people must be given a
chance to improve their lives. They need to be able to
hope again that the peace process is something from
which they will benefit, that the violence will stop, that
they can find work and have enough to eat, and that their
children can go to school.
For these hopes to materialize, both sides must show
a large measure of good will. President Arafat must do
everything in his power to stop the terrorism. And the
Israeli Government must desist from any measures which
cause the Palestinians to doubt Israel’s commitment to
peace. The settlements issue remains the crucial test here;
at least, that is what I believe. Continuing to build in Har
Homa only makes matters worse, so a moratorium is
essential. To my mind, this is the only way to reopen the
door to peace talks.
As for Iran, the new Government has changed its
tone. It remains to be seen whether this will lead to a
new, constructive policy, especially with regard to the
Middle East peace process, human rights and international
law. Germany has always maintained close and friendly
relations with the Iranian people, and in spite of all that
has happened, in spite of the Mykonos affair, we are
ready for talks. It is up to the Iranian Government to
provide the basis on which these can take place.
We are pleased that Mrs. Robinson has taken up her
post as the new High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Nowhere is the need for a new culture of dialogue so
great, we believe, as in the process of protecting such
rights. This is crucial to world peace and global
development. Any society that fails to respect human
14


rights, which include the right of development, is blocking
its own progress. Our policy on this matter is based on
dialogue and respect for different cultures. But we also
agree with Pope John Paul II, who has said that if we want
peace we must respect the conscience of the people. No
civilization or religion denies people their rights or
approves of murder and torture. Nor can any such action be
justified on political grounds.
We need an international criminal court of justice. The
statute of such a court is to be drawn up in Rome next
summer. The court must be empowered to act of its own
accord where genocide, crimes against humanity, war
crimes and wars of aggression are concerned, and to do so
wherever national courts either do not exist or cannot or are
unwilling to prosecute such crimes. The terrible genocides
in Rwanda and Srbrenica are warning signs. Such cardinal
crimes should not go unpunished.
Our responsibility towards future generations is
particularly acute where protection of the natural sources of
life is concerned. That is why it is crucial to maintain the
spirit engendered by the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development, the Rio Summit. That is the
purpose of the environment initiative put forward by
Chancellor Kohl together with Brazil, South Africa and
Singapore.
The climate conference to be held in Kyoto in
December will be a major test of the industrial world’s
commitment to the environment. Germany intends to reduce
its greenhouse-gas emissions by 25 per cent by the year
2010, based on 1990 levels. We and our partners in the
European Union are asking the other industrial countries to
cut theirs by at least 15 per cent. That would go part of the
way towards meeting our responsibility towards posterity.
When we look at the air pollution in southern Asia,
we cannot fail to admit that we urgently need to agree on
a forest convention. We must put an end to the ruthless
burning of forests to clear vast areas of land. Those who
deplete and destroy their own natural resources will make
us all lose out in the end. The eleventh hour is approaching.
Two weeks from now the decision on where to locate
the secretariat of the Convention to Combat Desertification
will be taken in Rome. We ask members to vote for Bonn.
Since the secretariat of the Framework Convention on
Climate Change already has its headquarters there, it makes
sense to combine the two.
The General Assembly is at a crossroads. Either we
solve our reform problems now and come out of our
introspective shell, or the United Nations will lose
political standing — that is what would happen. All
regional organizations, industrial, developing and
non-aligned countries have a joint responsibility for
implementing the reforms we have been talking about for
so long. This applies to all areas of United Nations
activity: economic and social, Security Council and
finance.
The Secretary-General has submitted a bold package
of reforms. Even though we do not agree with every
detail, we support the package as a whole. I appeal to all
Member States: let us not talk it to shreds, but make
quick decisions so that the necessary measures can be put
into effect. The United Nations has to be streamlined in
order to increase its efficiency. Whatever savings are
made through reform should be used for developments-
assistance purposes.
The Security Council must reflect today’s political
realities, one of which is the greater status of Africa,
Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean. The debate on
this matter should not be artificially prolonged. This the
most important body of the United Nations, and it cannot
credibly and effectively perform its role as the guardian
of peace in the twenty-first century if its composition
remains basically as it was in 1945.
It is gratifying to note that a large number of States
regard the reunited Germany as a suitable candidate for a
permanent seat on the Security Council. If elected, we
will be able to make a good contribution, one that is in
keeping with the spirit of the Charter.
Two years ago, on the Organization’s fiftieth
birthday, we solemnly pledged to hand on to the next
millennium a United Nations equipped and funded for its
task. That promise has to be kept, and it has to be kept by
all. This means, first and foremost, paying our
contributions in full and on time, because without
finances this Organization is a powerless one. The
European Union has submitted its proposal for changing
the scale of assessments, the purpose of which is to
ensure a fair distribution of burdens.
Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights reads,
“All human beings are born free and
equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed
15


with reason and conscience and should act
towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.”
This vision must be sustained: the vision of a world in
which it is not the law of the strongest, but the strength of
the law which prevails; a world in which both the strong
and the weak feel at home; a world fit to live in which we
can safely leave to our children and to our grandchildren.






﻿May I first say, Sir, how pleased my country is at your
election as President of the fifty-second session of the
United Nations General Assembly. I should also like to say
to the Secretary-General that France welcomes the action he
has already taken and assure him that he has our support
and confidence.
I shall begin my statement by expressing a conviction
on behalf of my country: the world needs the United
Nations more than ever. No, the United Nations did not
lose its raison d'être with the end of the cold war, the end
of the arms race between the two blocs and the head-on
clash of differing ideologies.
On the contrary, the need for a universal regulating
body has never been so apparent. The reasons are known to
all. Without regret, we left the era of bipolar confrontation
to enter, in 1991, a new, global, evolving world in which
185 States cooperate, make alliances with one another or
compete in stable or, conversely, unstable combinations.
In this world, States are no longer the sole players. The
giant conglomerates, the financial markets, the media,
opinion groups and non-governmental organizations all
play an increasing role. Because of this, there is an
overriding need for clear, fair and predictable ground
rules to establish a framework for settling conflicts or
mere differences. For, nowadays, no serious problem can
be resolved by one country, even the most powerful,
entirely on its own.
Unless we take care, unless we manage to build a
world in which the rule of law prevails among all States,
a world in equilibrium between its major centres of
power, other scenarios will ensue: the absence of a
counterweight will encourage the predominance of a
single Power, and, inevitably, that Power will be tempted
to engage in unilateralism; for want of organized regional
entities, globalization will exacerbate the economic — and
sometimes political — struggle of each against all; States
will find themselves further weakened, and some will
implode under the effects of aggressive nationalism,
which is often contagious. Fierce competition will render
virtually impossible environmental conservation, however
urgent, however vital in the true meaning of the word, as
well as the fight against drugs and crime; greater respect
for human rights will be compromised.
Our common task must be to forestall such dangers
and, at the same time, to consolidate, together, the
achievements of recent years. For this, regional groupings
are one of the best possible foundations. Europe, which
has been the crucible of so many wars, has been showing
the way for half a century. The growth rates achieved by
many countries in Asia, in Latin America and now in
Africa, announce the emergence of new centres of power
and prosperity. Political and economic entities are being
organized and institutionalized: South-East Asia meets in
the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN);
in Latin America, the Southern Cone Common Market
(MERCOSUR) is developing, as are the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) in southern Africa and
the Economic Community of West African States
19


(ECOWAS) in the west of that continent. To some extent,
one might also include cultural and political entities, such
as the Commonwealth and la Francophonie. This is a
sensible way to adapt to globalization.
However, at the global level we need a coherent,
effective United Nations with the resources necessary to
carry out its missions. It is the task of this body to facilitate
the smooth organization of international relations and to
determine universally recognized rules of law. To be sure,
other organizations exist in various sectors, and these have
their own, very important areas of authority. But none of
them can take the place of the United Nations in giving the
world of tomorrow a set of comprehensive rules. True to its
tradition, France will support all the Organization's efforts
to that end.
I come now to the main object of the session which is
beginning. To carry out the major role we expect of it, the
United Nations must retain or reacquire the means to take
decisions and to act. For this, we must resolve two matters:
United Nations reform and the financing of the
Organization. The ability of the United Nations to act in the
years ahead will depend on the solutions we find together.
France approved of the move by the new Secretary-
General at the outset of his mandate to continue the study
initiated by his predecessor, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali.
The main lines Mr. Kofi Annan has proposed for the work
and the impetus he has given to the process of revamping
the Organization have received France’s full support, a
support shared by France’s partners in the European Union.
The remarks made from this rostrum by its current
President, the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Luxembourg,
illustrate this. I should like to comment more specifically
on three points: the Security Council, financial reform and
restructuring.
The current composition of the Security Council no
longer accurately reflects the political geography of today’s
world. Clearly, it has to be reformed — that is to say,
enlarged — to become more representative.
In this connection, we must take into account the
Security Council’s indispensable role in peacekeeping and
thus elect countries able to contribute to this task, whether
they are from the North or the South.
Accordingly, my country is in favour of the accession
of Germany, Japan and three countries from the South to
permanent seats and the establishment of new
non-permanent seats. For a Security Council composed
solely of the principal countries of the North would not
be representative. Nor should we forget that, once it is
enlarged, and hence more representative, the Council will
still have to be effective. That is essential.
The proposals that have been submitted to us should
make it possible to move forward. However, we are all
aware that no consensus has yet been reached and that
debates on this matter will be difficult. National interests
and the concerns of regional groups must be given due
consideration. In any event, I welcome President Razali’s
perseverance throughout the fifty-first session of the
United Nations General Assembly, which made it possible
to draft a solid working basis from which we must now
proceed to work to find a solution.
Furthermore, financial reform of the United Nations
is a particularly complex issue. It is shocking that the
United Nations should be in a precarious state and
therefore in a situation of financial and budgetary
dependence with respect to its debtors. I believe that we
will be able to move towards a solution on the basis of
three principles: what is owed to the United Nations must
be paid in full, on time and without conditions. Finally,
the payment of contributions should not be a way of
exerting pressure on the Secretary-General and the other
Member States.
With these rudimentary principles as a basis, France
is open to discussion on all aspects of the problem. We
will have to decide on the scale for apportioning
assessments among all States. There is no perfect scale,
but some are not as bad as others. The concept of each
State’s ability to pay, which has enjoyed consensus since
the outset, still seems simple, logical and fair today. On
that basis, a solution can be found that takes account of
the needs and interests of each State. France will do its
utmost to facilitate the settlement of the financial crisis.
We can be both imaginative and conciliatory — like the
European Union’s plan. But our efforts will succeed only
if there is respect for the rules I have just recalled, which
reflect our Organization's impartiality and credibility. If
the United Nations were forced to comply with the
unilateral demands of one among us, in regard both to its
financing and its functioning, then how could it convince
anyone in the future that it is impartial and faithful to the
principle of the equality of all under the Charter, and
generate respect for its decisions?
I come now to restructuring. The Secretary-General
has undertaken to restructure and regroup the
Organization’s institutions. France appreciates the logic of
20


this approach. It therefore welcomes the establishment in
Vienna of a centre to deal specifically with combating new
transnational dangers such as organized crime, drug
trafficking and terrorism, problems that we must fight with
ever-increased vigour. It is also very much in favour of
integrating the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the Centre for Human Rights into a single entity
in Geneva where the main humanitarian aid services are
already established. It also hopes that the main issues
involving disarmament can continue to be addressed in
Geneva.
From this rostrum, I applaud the appointment of
Mrs. Mary Robinson to the post of High Commissioner for
Human Rights. Her very strong personality is
commensurate with the challenges her task entails. The
commemoration of the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, starting on 10 December this
year, will provide an opportunity to reaffirm, in the face of
persistent violations and ever-recurring acts of barbarism,
the universality of these rights. But we will also have to ask
ourselves, in addition to making the usual declarations that
are still necessary, what political and economic actions are
needed to make real headway, in specific situations,
towards respect for human rights, and how the emergence
of democracies can be encouraged from outside.
The United Nations, while adapting, must remain the
preferred instrument for taking action in the interests of
peace. At this time, the United Nations is really the only
organization that can try to bring order to an international
society which is becoming fragmented and globalized at the
same time. The United Nations is faced with both a
resurgence of every kind of micro-nationalism and the
strengthening of regional entities. Most conflicts are now
not between States but within them. Given these new
challenges, the United Nations has already demonstrated
how adaptable and flexible it is. But we must continue. To
ensure the lasting settlement of conflicts, consciences have
to be assuaged and justice needs to be done to put an end
to the endless cycle of revenge. The perpetrators of the
most serious crimes must be tried impartially, with respect
for the rights of the defence, and after an exemplary
investigation which reveals the facts in full. This is why
France supports the action of the international criminal
tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, and hopes
that the forthcoming conference on an international criminal
court will be a success.
Since the beginning of the decade, the Organization’s
actions to promote peace and international stability have
changed radically. The time has passed when large-scale
peacekeeping operations were mounted solely under the
blue flag of the United Nations, in Cambodia and the
former Yugoslavia for example, in order to take on
massive challenges alone. Today, the United Nations
intervenes more and more frequently in conjunction with
other organizations or by authorizing the action of
regional actors. In Europe, the United Nations is pooling
its efforts with those of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization in sensitive theatres of operation, and even
with those of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe. In Africa, for the first time, the
Secretaries-General of the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) have in the past
year appointed a joint special representative in the person
of Ambassador Sahnoun, in the Great Lakes region. It is
good that these two organizations are working together.
This development must be encouraged. We must also help
African States and organizations to strengthen their own
peacekeeping capabilities. To this end, countries outside
the African continent must pool their efforts and not
multiply the number of rival and sometimes redundant
initiatives. For instance, the Government of France, the
United Kingdom and the United States recently agreed to
act together with all those who wish to do so to
strengthen the peacekeeping capabilities of African
countries, under the auspices of the United Nations, of
course, and in cooperation with the OAU.
But, in France's view, encouraging Africa to become
more involved in resolving crises certainly does not mean
that the international community should relinquish its
other responsibilities with regard to the African continent.
It is therefore essential that the United Nations be ready,
once the declared conditions are met, to act in Congo-
Brazzaville. By the same token, the many recent tragedies
in the Great Lakes region make sustained international
involvement indispensable. This United Nations
commitment to promote peace and development must also
serve to further human rights. That is why it is important
for the humanitarian investigative task force in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to be able to carry out
its mission. I might add that by spending too much time
talking about crises in Africa, one might forget the
essential point, namely that the African continent is taking
off in quite an unprecedented way. My country believes
in this.
We are all still mobilized by the situation in the
Middle East. The peace process, set in train on the
initiative of clear-sighted and courageous men on both
sides, raised tremendous hopes. We can clearly see the
increasingly tragic consequences to which the current
21


stalemate would lead, were it to last. The peoples of this
region are once again stuck in an impasse, in a situation of
humiliation, resentment, and the fear of terrorism. New
efforts are therefore necessary so that these two peoples,
Israeli and Palestinian, which are matched in terms of
insecurity and fear of the future, can together find justice
and security. France gave its full support to the action by
the American Secretary of State, who recently went to the
Middle East. Indeed, the United States has a special
responsibility and special means to attempt to reinvigorate
the peace process and effectively combat the deadly acts of
extremism. France and Europe are ready to take part in any
constructive move to this end.
What can the United Nations do? It cannot take the
place of the parties concerned, which have the primary
responsibility. It is up to the Organization to state, or
restate, the law and to recall the principles which must be
the basis for any peace if we want it to last. I refer here to
the resolutions adopted by the Security Council on the
conflict in the Middle East, not forgetting resolution 425
(1978), which deals with the integrity of Lebanon in
particular.
Many other crisis situations where the wounds have
not healed could be mentioned from this rostrum — so
diverse is the work of the United Nations. In particular, I
am thinking of the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
where security has been restored but where the construction
of a State with viable democratic institutions remains
uncertain; and of Albania, where the new stability, thanks
to resolute European action authorized by the United
Nations, is giving rise to new hopes. I am also thinking of
the tenacious efforts of the United Nations to contain or
defuse the crises in Haiti, Cyprus, Georgia, Afghanistan,
Tajikistan and elsewhere.
Finally, let us not forget, now or ever, much-needed
development assistance.
Of course, the insertion of emerging economies,
including the former underdeveloped economies, into the
global economy is an excellent thing; indeed, past efforts in
this regard have proved to be well founded. But this must
not be a selfish excuse for the rich countries to give up
their effort to provide development assistance, which is
equally necessary. In any event, this is very much an
imperative for the leaders of the member States of the
Francophone community. The summit of these States in
Hanoi in November will attest to their interest in more
balanced development and also to their commitment to
respecting the multiplicity of cultures and languages.
I will say no more, however — other than to draw
one single conclusion. While the world has changed so
much over the past 50 years, and even more over the past
six years, its inhabitants still voice the same needs. The
rule of law must be continually consolidated and the
democratic ideal put into practice, faced as we are with
the temptations of oppression and the use of force, for
which new pretexts are constantly being invoked. How
can we be sure that the factors that make for war and
chaos are banned for ever from all continents, including
Europe?
At this moment of our Organization's reform, let us
not forget the lessons of history. Only international
dialogue, the common management of crises, beginning
with their prevention, and the wise conservation of the
earth’s resources make it possible for the voice of reason
and peace to prevail and for confidence in progress to be
rebuilt. The United Nations is the right and the only
legitimate forum for such international discussions, and
the only one where they are universal. Our Organization
is an irreplaceable framework and a vital necessity for us
all. In the past, it has often been able to deter, address,
resolve and prevent. Let us reform it so as to make it
even more useful.






﻿We inhabit a modern
world in which we must accept change as the normal
condition of life. Communication around the globe is
becoming faster. The distance between our countries is
becoming shorter. I travelled to New York at twice the
speed of sound and I landed before I took off. Every word
I say to the Assembly today will be sent to London down
a telephone line and within minutes it will appear on the
World Wide Web.
Our countries today are intertwined as never before in
a market place that is global. And our people have learned
that their purchasing decisions have an impact on jobs and
pay across the planet — from the fruit they buy at the
supermarket to the fuel they use in their cars. Changes to
the environment in one continent can produce changes to
the weather in another continent. Our countries are
increasingly interdependent, and the challenges we each
face are global challenges — challenges that we must face
together: poverty, conflict, climate change, international
crime and the drugs menace. These are all international
problems that require us to behave as a united nations not
just in name but in reality.
And so the United Nations should have a bigger role
than ever before. If it appears to be less relevant, it is not
for want of challenge but for want of reform. The United
Nations must modernize. It must be able to confront the
new global challenges that all its Members face. It will
need flexibility, competence and efficiency to meet the
complex needs of the twenty-first century because the
United Nations cannot give leadership to a changing
world if we ourselves refuse to change.
The outstanding leadership shown by the Secretary-
General is an important start. His proposals for
institutional reform will retain what is best in the United
Nations system but give it the flexibility and the
efficiency it needs to respond rapidly to the new
challenges of a new century. The member countries of the
United Nations must support his commitment to
modernization. We must each stop measuring each
proposal for reform in terms of narrow self-interest and,
instead, recognize that we all have a greater interest in
supporting reform.
Britain’s Labour Government is firmly committed to
the United Nations. We demonstrated this commitment as
soon as we were elected by rejoining the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) and by confirming our intention to stay in the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
(UNIDO). We were elected because we offered Britain
modernization to succeed in a new century. We pledge
ourselves to back modernization of the United Nations.
We do so because we know that our country, like all
other Member States, will benefit from a United Nations
that is efficient, representative and properly funded.
Let me take each of those in turn. Efficient does not
spell cheap. But we do want to see the United Nations do
the most it can with what it has got — a United Nations
that no longer spends $150 million producing 2,500 tons
of documents every year. We thoroughly welcome the
Secretary-General’s commitment to reduce the number of
documents by 25 per cent by next year. We want to see
an end to the duplication between United Nations
agencies, and I give my wholehearted support to the
Secretary-General’s proposal for a Special Commission to
look at the division of labour right across the United
Nations system.
15


Another way in which the United Nations is out of
date is its Security Council. We are all agreed in this
Chamber that what was appropriate in 1945 is not what is
right in 1997. The world has changed. Most of the
countries represented here today did not even exist when
the United Nations was formed. The Security Council must
move on if it is not to lose its legitimacy. Japan and
Germany should both be included in an expanded
permanent membership, and there should be a new balance
between developed and developing countries in a
modernized Security Council. We are all agreed on the
need for change; we have been discussing it for four years.
It is time that we agreed that a proposal for change which
has the backing of the vast majority of Members is better
than a status quo which has the backing of none.
It is not just all the countries of the United Nations
that must be properly represented, but all the people of
those countries. More than half those people are women.
Britain welcomes the United Nations willingness to put
gender perspective into all areas of its work. The new
Labour Government attaches particular importance to
strengthening the rights of women. Women do more than
half the world’s work. They should have equal status in the
international organizations of the world.
Let us also put the United Nations finances on a sound
basis. Speaker after speaker yesterday referred to the need
for us to cooperate to defeat those who make fortunes from
organized crime and to contain the drugs trade, second only
in value to the oil trade. We cannot defeat those well-
resourced menaces to the modern world through a United
Nations that staggers from year to year on the verge of
bankruptcy.
We need a solution based on the ability to pay. The
most equitable means of sharing the burden is to base
contributions on share of global gross national product. But
that measure will only be accepted as equitable if it is
updated regularly to reflect the rapid changes to the world
economy. And it is not equitable that some Members pay
their contributions while other Members do not. Britain
pays in full and on time. Britain expects every Member
State, however large or however small, to do the same.
These three issues — institutional reform, Security
Council reform and financial reform — are critical to the
United Nations future. Let us commit ourselves to progress
on all these issues by the end of 1997 and solutions by this
time next year. Next time we meet, let us celebrate a
modern United Nations that can face the future with
confidence, rather than looking back on another year of
agreeing about all the questions but not being able to
agree on any of the answers. And then the United Nations
will be able to get on with its job.
There are three key areas in which the United
Nations has a vital job to do — promoting sustainable
development, promoting peace and promoting human
rights. Those are not separate challenges, but different
faces of the same challenge. There can be no real and
sustainable development or respect for human rights
without peace. And there will be no permanent peace
where there is only poverty and injustice.
During every speech this week another 300 children
will die before their first birthday, most of them deaths
that could be easily and cheaply prevented. If the United
Nations is to be relevant to its Members, then more than
anything else it must enable people to lift themselves out
of poverty.
Britain supports the United Nations aid target. As
Britain’s contribution to achieving it, the mew Labour
Governments has committed itself to reversing the decline
in the British aid budget. Britain has also consistently
urged faster action in tackling the problem of debt, and at
the Commonwealth Finance Ministers meeting in
Mauritius last week, British Chancellor Gordon Brown
launched a new initiative to cut debt that will benefit 300
million of the world’s poorest people and help developing
countries escape from the debt trap.
But aid will not alone eliminate poverty. We need to
continue breaking down the barriers that deny the poorest
countries access to the world’s most lucrative markets.
We need to make sure that producers in Africa are
allowed to sell their goods to Europe and to America as
easily as their producers can sell their goods to Africa.
Sustainable development will do more than just
reduce poverty. Poverty is also one of the greatest threats
to the environment. If we want to preserve the planet for
future generations, we must make sure that development
respects the environment and does not destroy it. The
United Nations Commission on Sustainable Development
has made important progress towards this goal. But it is
not a task any country can subcontract to the United
Nations. We are all in this together. No country can opt
out of global warming or fence in its own private climate.
We need common action to save our common
environment.
16


The new Labour Government has set itself the
ambitious target of reducing Britain’s emissions of
greenhouse gases by 20 per cent by the year 2010. At the
third session of the Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, in
Kyoto, the nations of the world must sign up to binding
targets and then they must keep to them.
The second key goal is peace — preventing conflicts
before they happen, helping to end them when they do
happen and helping to rebuild lasting peace after conflict.
Each of these contributions to peace is equally vital.
But it is the United Nations peacekeeping operations
that have the highest profile, and with good reason. The
blue berets have prevented worse conflict across the world,
from Eastern Slavonia to the Western Sahara. Many have
laid down their lives, not in the conduct of war but in the
pursuit of peace. The death of a dozen international
policemen and envoys, among them a British diplomat, in
the United Nations helicopter that crashed in Bosnia last
week, was a grim reminder of the risks we ask our peace-
builders to take. I pay tribute to their courage and salute
them for their professionalism and their skill.
The last area in which the United Nations must focus
is human rights. As the world becomes smaller, and news
and ideas travel faster, so the principle that certain rights
are universal becomes even more compelling. The
Universal Declaration of Human Rights sets out the right to
freedom from the fear of violence and the right to liberty
from the threat of unjust imprisonment. Those are rights to
which every citizen of the world irrespective of race, creed
or colour. They must not be limited to any one culture or
any one continent. As the Secretary-General has pointed out
Secretary-General has pointed out, the mothers from every
culture weep when their sons and daughters are killed or
maimed by repressive rule.
Nor do human rights hinder economic development.
The past two decades have demonstrated that political
freedom and economic development are not in conflict but
are mutually reinforcing. Free societies are efficient
economies. Authoritarian rule more often produces
economic stagnation. That is why Britain supports the
Secretary-General’s proposals to integrate human rights into
all the work that the United Nations does.
This is my first General Assembly. I attend it with
both hope and with anxiety — hope that, if it modernizes,
the United Nations can help us face the global challenges
of the future; anxiety that, without modernizing, the
United Nations will lose legitimacy and its effectiveness.
We must not let that happen. There are too many
children stunted by poverty, too many mothers fearful of
war, too many people whose basic human rights are being
abuse. The United Nations offers them hope. Let us
commit ourselves this week to achieving a modern,
reformed United Nations that will turn hope into reality.




﻿Mr. President, it is a particular
pleasure for me to see you presiding over the General
Assembly. As Ambassador to the former Soviet Union for
five years, I had a long association with Ukraine, and I
retain the fondest memories of my several visits to your
beautiful country. You preside over an Assembly that will
deliberate on crucial issues before the world community,
on which your experience and guidance will be
invaluable. I would also like to congratulate your
predecessor, Ambassador Razali Ismail, on the
engagement with which he acted during his presidency to
carry our work forward. I am delighted also to see the
Secretary-General here.
We are celebrating in India the fiftieth anniversary
of our emergence as a free nation. The constitutional
moorings and the democratic forms which the new nation-
State has accepted and adopted rest on the vast foundation
of civilizational experience and ethos. This explains the
stability, coherence and creative unity of the vast Indian
society, which is a world in itself. The experience has
wrought in us the deep conviction that, while there are
universally shared values and striving, there can be no
rigid prescriptions. We see the United Nations in this
image, as a crucible in which we meld together our
individual contributions to a world civilization, yet
6


recognizing the variety of historical and cultural experiences
we bring to it.
The cold war cast an early shadow on the
Organization, creating a situation of ideological
polarization. The Non-Aligned Movement rejected this
imposition of rigidity, representing an independent and
responsible alternative to the world view. This remains true,
and the Non-Aligned Movement retains its validity and
relevance, even after the disappearance of bloc rivalries.
Non-alignment was not a by-product of the cold war. Then,
it expressed the overwhelming need of previously colonized
and disempowered nations to a voice, a perspective and an
agenda in a politically and economically unequal and
inequitable world. Today, it remains a voice of reason and
constructive engagement for the times ahead, which demand
common purpose and contribution from all sides towards a
convergence of intent on vital, even fateful, global
concerns.
Since the creation of the Charter of the United
Nations, the world should have changed far more than it
has in the half century that has elapsed. Decolonization is
almost complete, but the scars of colonization are still with
us. The present bears a heavy burden of the past. South
Africa is free, but racism rears its ugly head amidst us,
often laced with xenophobia. Development and growth —
and even human dignity — remain for much of the world
a distant dream. We must insistently ask ourselves what we
can decisively do at the United Nations to make the dreams
of the hundreds of millions come true, how we can make
the United Nations a more vibrant organization for the
world community as a whole, at a time when we need it
more than we ever have, a United Nations that is better
equipped to fully respond to the challenges of the next
century.
As an organization, the United Nations must also
evolve and adapt itself to a rapidly changing environment,
the better to serve the core needs of the world community.
As a country which sets very great store on the capacity of
the United Nations to contribute to international peace and
security, and to development — the two crucial priorities
before the world community — India, like others, has a
vital interest in a United Nations that continually makes
itself more responsive to the needs of its Member States
and prepares itself to serve them better. This, we believe,
is the objective of reform. We are hence very pleased that
the Secretary-General, immediately after taking office,
made reform one of his priorities and we congratulate him
on this commitment. Within the first seven months of his
tenure, he has produced a series of proposals of impressive
breadth and scope. These are before us, and many have
described this session as a reform General Assembly. In
this connection, I extend my good wishes to you,
Mr. Secretary-General.
We judge the agenda for reform by the measures I
have described. We are supportive of all proposals that,
in our view, will carry forward, or improve, the
Secretariat’s ability to respond to the mandates of the
international community. We will express our thoughts
constructively with the aim of strengthening the process
and direction of reform to the collective advantage of the
global community and the Organization that represents it.
We do not see reform simply as an exercise to trim the
budget of the United Nations. Instead, reforms should
contribute towards strengthening the United Nations and
its capacity to respond effectively to the priorities
identified by the overwhelming majority of its
membership.
The crisis that confronts the United Nations
manifests itself in many ways. A financial crisis has
resulted from the inability of some to fulfil their Charter
commitments, and from the laying down of pre-conditions
to meet them. The United Nations does not have the
means to execute programmes that respond to the felt
needs and priorities of its membership, precisely at a time
when such programmes are sorely necessary. As a result,
the United Nations is in danger of being marginalized as
the global forum where decisions can be taken that truly
respond to the challenges of globalization. The solution
lies not in piecemeal reform but in building trust between
nations, and in an acceptance that in international
relations democratic principles should be the norm, just as
they are being increasingly accepted in national
governance.
In our view, international peace and security and
development are inextricably linked. The one is
impossible to achieve without the other. Over the last six
or seven years, there has been a growing emphasis on the
political aspects of the tasks of development, such as
democracy and human rights. Unless the underlying
causes of underdevelopment, poverty and social alienation
are effectively addressed and removed, this emphasis will
remain unrealized. Therefore, the single most important
target that the United Nations should set itself is the
promotion of sustained economic growth in the
developing countries that will lead to the eradication of
poverty, and erase the tensions and pressures that have
led to the collapse of governance and social order in
several States, and to conflicts between others.
7


International peace and stability will be enhanced only
when all countries enjoy a minimum standard of economic
self-sufficiency and well-being. Therefore, we believe that
the thrust of any reform proposals in the United Nations
should make the promotion of sustained economic
development the principal cross-sectoral issue for the
Secretariat’s programmes. We believe that there are enough
intergovernmental mandates to permit the Secretariat to
tailor programmes towards this end.
The universality of human rights, to which we all
committed ourselves almost five years ago at Vienna,
expresses itself at one level in the international norms for
the promotion and protection of human rights and our
collective efforts to foster respect for these standards. On a
higher plane, this universality stems from the search in
different civilizations for ways of protecting the human
dignity of every individual. Next year, as we celebrate the
fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, we will reflect on whether the ideals enshrined in
the Declaration have become a reality for people in all parts
of the world. As we do so, we must build confidence in a
process that encourages introspection and self-criticism,
dialogue and consultation, rather than confrontation and
judgement. The Declaration calls for the advent of a world
order in which human beings shall enjoy freedom of speech
and belief and freedom from fear and want as the highest
aspirations of the common people. It recognizes the
importance of economic, social and cultural rights as well
as their interdependence with civil and political rights. The
full realization of all these rights is what will give true
meaning to the quest for human dignity embodied in the
Universal Declaration.
India’s approach to the observance and promotion of
human rights is inspired by the holistic vision of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Indian
Constitution. A strong constitutional framework, mutually
reinforcing safeguards, both within and outside this
framework; a policy of transparency and responsiveness to
civil society; and cooperation with the human rights system
of the United Nations — in particular with the treaty
bodies — are the main elements of this approach in the
areas of civil and political rights. Equally important, if not
more so, are the assault on poverty and underdevelopment;
the promotion of awareness of rights; and a policy of
affirmative action for the uplifting of socially and
economically vulnerable sectors of society.
This is a complex task, especially in a country of
India’s diversity. Many times, when the State has faltered
civil society has stepped in. In India, as elsewhere,
individuals have wrought miracles by working outside the
established systems and going beyond traditional ways of
thinking. In recent times, the most moving example has
been that of a frail, sari-clad woman: Mother Teresa. Her
fathomless compassion and soothing touch will be missed
by millions in India. I would like to pay tribute to this
apostle of mercy who rendered service and brought hope
to millions of poor and suffering people, not only in India
but all over the world.
While development must be our supreme objective,
we also need peace, stability and security in order to
achieve it. The dangers that threaten us have become
increasingly more frightening during the last 50 years
than any that have cast their shadow over mankind in its
entire history. The development of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons has made it possible to destroy whole
populations. As the international community, we have
decided to outlaw the production, possession and use of
chemical and biological weapons.
However, with regard to the weapons of mass
destruction capable of the total annihilation of human
civilization, the global community has lived for too long
on a diet of empty promises. The pretexts cited in favour
of clinging to nuclear arsenals, while always questionable,
have now vanished. Mere non-proliferation treaties
promoted as disarmament measures only serve to entrench
a nuclear monopoly. No credible steps towards striving to
realize a nuclear-weapon-free world are contemplated,
much less taken, by those who should be showing the
way. No justifications can be proffered, as they were
during the cold war.
The patience of the world community — as
expressed by the International Court of Justice, by the
enlightened voices of those who formerly believed in
deterrence, by political and general opinion and by
weighty voluntary initiatives — is starting to wear thin.
Nuclear-weapon Powers owe it to the world to answer the
question why they need nuclear weapons. Global opinion
wants a nuclear weapons convention — as has already
been outlined for the class of biological and chemical
weapons — and will not rest until it is achieved. We
appeal to nuclear-weapon States to align their policies
with what the world wants. We see the United Nations as
the forum in which the international community must
continue to demand universal nuclear disarmament, and
we therefore expect that the Secretariat's programmes will
support this intergovernmental objective.
8


Under the Charter, the Security Council was
constituted as a body on which the general membership
conferred primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, acting on its behalf. In
recent years, the Security Council has been able to play a
more active role in discharging its responsibilities.
However, there is often a perception that the Council’s
actions have not always reflected the sentiments of the
general membership. Therefore, it is imperative — and the
time has come — for the Security Council to take on as
permanent members developing countries which are
equipped to make important contributions through their
world views and historical experiences and the values of
their civilizations. In this way the decisions of the Council
will truly reflect the wider membership of the United
Nations. Otherwise, the Council’s actions will be seen as
progressively less representative precisely at a time when it
is being called upon to act far more frequently than before
on behalf of the world community.
India has let it be known in the General Assembly
since 1994 that it is prepared to accept the responsibilities
of permanent membership. We are the largest democracy in
the world, with a civilization replete with ancient values
and achievements, as well as a world view based on a
universalist inspiration, participatory governance, respect for
diversity and pluralism, and a readiness for constructive
engagement in the world’s affairs. These strengths, we
believe, would be an asset to an expanded Security Council.
India’s standing as one of the leading economies of the
world will be progressively strengthened, and we are
prepared to bear fully the responsibilities of permanent
membership. India’s long-standing participation in United
Nations peacekeeping operations testifies not only to the
dedication and professionalism of Indian soldiers, but also
to the political will of the Government to actively
contribute to these operations.
The core of our foreign policy is our keenness to
pursue close ties and build confidence and cooperation with
our neighbours, while recognizing fully that we are the
largest country in the region, in terms not only of size and
population but also of economic capabilities. We extend our
hand of friendship not in a spirit of mere reciprocity but in
good faith. Where we do expect reciprocity, unrelated to
size and capacity, is in mutual respect for each other’s
territorial integrity and sovereignty. We seek to advance
cohesion, synergy and mutual goodwill in our
neighbourhood so that together we can fully participate in
and derive benefits from the dynamic changes the world is
currently witnessing. Our approach has contributed to the
setting in motion of a trend towards cooperation in our
region.
As a large and diverse economy, we are developing
new partnerships that go beyond the region and revitalize
the old cultural and commercial links. Politically, this is
expressed in the active interest that we have taken in
supporting the Middle East peace process — our ties with
the Arab world reaching deep into history — and our
strong fraternal ties with developing countries in general
and with Africa in particular. In our larger
neighbourhood, with which we have a shared history, we
have enhanced our engagement with the Association of
South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) as a full-dialogue
partner and as a participant in the ASEAN Regional
Forum.
While maintaining our traditional relationships with
the United States, Russia, the European Union and Japan,
we have also been strengthening global trends in regional
cooperation by actively promoting cooperation among
countries of the Indian Ocean rim and trying to recover
the cultural and commercial connectivities that have
existed since time immemorial and which were snapped
in the colonial era.
Global society is seeking to find an equilibrium
between the opposing pulls generated by the forces of
globalization, nationalism and sub-nationalism. Indeed, it
is difficult to see just how they can be balanced, yet they
must be or else the potential for international
conflagration will be immense. Hence, the absolute need
for extreme caution to prevent established nation States
from being destabilized either through too hasty a push
towards globalization or through the pull of sub-national
demands. We see this as a challenge which we will have
to face collectively as well as individually.
A global menace that threatens international peace,
and to which open democracies are particularly
vulnerable, is terrorism. It takes innocent lives
indiscriminately, brings fear into the lives of others and
shatters the peaceful existence and the normal growth of
entire communities. Terrorism should be anathema to the
international community because it is the antithesis of
every ideal that the United Nations Charter enshrines. Its
main vehicle is violence; its aim is destruction rather than
development; its doctrines are founded on intolerance;
and, in the means it uses and the effect it has, it destroys
human rights utterly.
9


Incitement to terrorism and complicity and
participation in terrorism across borders undermine the
international system. And even though very few societies
are free from its clutches, we still have not developed a
global strategy to defeat this evil. The resolve is absent. It
is important that we find it, not least because terrorism has
a global web, spanning all countries and continents and
quickly building links with the other global menace: drugs.
We in India see in our region just how deadly a poison this
mix of terrorism and drugs is. The United Nations should
take the lead in determined global action to root out these
scourges.
The protection and preservation of the environment is
an area to which all of us attach the highest importance.
The commitment to global partnership for preventing
further degradation of the environment, made at the Rio
Summit in 1992, was reiterated and the need for effective
implementation of Agenda 21 reaffirmed during the special
session of the General Assembly in June this year. All the
elements of Agenda 21 have to be implemented in full and
we need to accelerate the process of such implementation.
Any partial or non-comprehensive implementation will be
detrimental not only to international cooperation in this
area, but also to the threatened stability of the Earth’s
fragile environment. In this connection, it is our hope that
the spirit of the Convention on Climate Change and the
Berlin Mandate will be fully encompassed by the protocol
or legal instrument to emerge from the Kyoto Conference
to be held in December 1997.
What has been touched upon represents huge
challenges beyond the capacity of any country to face on its
own. This is why it is so vital for the United Nations, now
more than ever before, to be a forum where we can pool
creative ideas and lessons from our experience and to assist
us in understanding and coping with these challenges. This
is the ultimate rationale of reform. We will be ready to
work with other countries to rebuild the United Nations in
the image of our collective aspirations and as our trusted
instrument to meet the challenges of the approaching
century.
Addressing the General Assembly at its fifteenth
regular session, I recall India’s first Prime Minister,
Jawaharlal Nehru, saying here in 1960:
“The main purpose of the United Nations is to
build up a world without war, a world based on the
cooperation of nations and peoples. It is not merely a
world where war is kept in check for a balancing of
armed forces. It is much deeper than that. It is a world
from which the major causes of war have been
removed and social structures built up which further
peaceful cooperation within a nation as well as
between nations.” (Official Records of the General
Assembly, Fifteenth session, Plenary Meetings,
882nd meeting, para. 117)
It is in this spirit that we should approach the tasks
before us. I do hope and pray that, under your guidance,
Sir, and under the spirited leadership of the Secretary-
General, these objectives will be achieved.




﻿I would like to begin by
congratulating the President on his unanimous election to
preside over the fifty-second session of the General
Assembly of the United Nations. It is my hope that at this
session the Assembly will be successful in bringing nations
closer to each other and in finding ways to address the
challenges that face all countries and nations, north and
south, east and west.
I also wish to congratulate his predecessor,
Ambassador Razali Ismail of Malaysia, for the manner in
which he carried out his duties.
We mark this year the twentieth anniversary of the
peace initiative of the late Prime Minister of Israel,
Menachem Begin, and the late President of Egypt, Anwar
Sadat. Those leaders, with their historic decision and their
courageous leadership, pioneered the way towards the first
peace treaty between Israel and an Arab neighbour, Egypt.
Throughout their entire history, the people of Israel
have aspired to live in peace. Together with our constant
call for peace with our neighbours, we have not spared any
effort to seek, whether through direct or indirect contacts,
a partner in this effort. Today, too, we continue to seek
channels for dialogue and to build bridges to peace.
In recent years, since 1991, after the principles for
negotiating peace in the Middle East were laid down at
Madrid, we have achieved a number of important
advances with the establishment of full peace between
Israel and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and the
signing of interim accords with the Palestinians.
Nevertheless, the road to full peace is still long, and
negotiations with the Palestinians and with Syria and
Lebanon still lie ahead of us.
Immediately after the last elections, the Government
of Israel accepted the need to continue to advance the
Oslo accords and has acted to implement them. In the
past year we have spared no effort to implement those
accords, but, unfortunately, the trust that is the lifeblood
of the entire process has been undermined as a result of
the failure of the Palestinians to carry out their
commitments according to the agreements they have
signed.
In the past year, while pursuing these efforts, we
have endured many tests and have suffered ongoing
terrorist attacks and bloodshed. Our deep-rooted aspiration
for peace, security and tranquillity has been stained by the
shedding of innocent blood, by the murder of men,
women and children cut down by barbaric terrorist
attacks. Yet despite our deep sorrow and mourning over
the loss of those innocent lives, the hope for peace has
not been extinguished in the hearts of the citizens of
Israel.
The citizens of Israel have taken upon themselves
great risks for peace, but there is none among them who
is willing to continue to pay the bloody price that is being
demanded in the name of peace. We must break this
tragic and violent cycle. It is only through joint action in
confronting the terror that trust will be re-established and
the doubts regarding intentions be removed.
As I stated in my remarks at the fifty-first session of
this Assembly, all Israel is united in its deep desire for
peace and for a life of calm and security. In Israel, both
right and left are united in this quest.
If trust can be restored, if the principle of reciprocity
is honoured, it will be possible for us to proceed. We
have already proved our willingness to do so, through our
decisions and actions since taking office and in the
signing and implementation of the Hebron agreement in
all its aspects.
Peace cannot live side by side with continued
incitement, hostility, violence and terror. Peace means, in
essence, the unequivocal and irreversible abandonment of
25


violence. Dialogue, negotiation, compromise and the
honouring of agreements — those are the path to peace.
These principles apply throughout the world and must
apply also in the Middle East. The existence of two parallel
tracks, one on which negotiations are pursued while a
second track of violence, terror and bloodshed continues
unimpeded, is totally unacceptable. This is a direct
challenge and affront to the very concept of peace.
Terror does not suddenly erupt from nowhere. It is not
a spontaneous phenomenon. Too often we have seen
terrorist leaders and their organizations adopt the facade of
innocent and peaceful organizations, charitable and welfare
organizations, while under this cover they contribute to the
preparation and perpetration of vicious terrorist attacks.
Terror can be likened to a volcano ready to erupt at any
moment, whose boiling lava threatens to destroy all who lie
in its path.
Those who resort to terror are seeking not only to kill
Israelis but also to hurt their own brethren. Terror cannot be
accepted as a legitimate tool for resolving differences. It
must be rejected, absolutely and unequivocally, and it must
be fought unrelentingly. We will not agree to live under its
constant threat.
The words of the President of the United States and of
the Foreign Minister of Russia at this Assembly just a few
days ago are important and should guide us all in this
matter. I quote President Clinton when he spoke from this
very rostrum:
“terrorism is always a crime and never a justifiable
political act.” [See Official Records of the General
Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Plenary Meetings, 5th
meeting]
Thus, the international community bears the responsibility
for ensuring that terrorism enjoys no political support,
recognition or legitimacy, not even implicitly.
In the 1993 Oslo accords, the Palestinian Authority
and Arafat, its leader, undertook in the name of the
Palestinian people to fight terrorism. They reaffirmed this
commitment again in the 1995 Interim Agreement, again
one year ago at the Washington summit and again in the
Hebron agreement. Much to our consternation, it has been
proved that this commitment has not been upheld as
required, thus causing the present crisis of confidence.
Israel stands firmly upon its call to the Palestinian
Authority to fulfil its promise to fight relentlessly against
terror. The Authority must act jointly and in full
cooperation with us against terrorism and violence. We
seek neither to dictate nor to coerce. We seek merely the
implementation of signed agreements. The fight against
terror, in our humble opinion, is also in the Palestinian
interest.
In response to the repeated crises in the process
caused by the failure of the Palestinian Authority to live
up to its commitments, Israel proposes a binding code of
conduct for relations between us. This code should
include, first, the rejection of violence as a means for
achieving political goals; secondly, preservation of the
framework of direct negotiations and agreement to refrain
from attempts to transfer disputes and negotiations onto
the international stage; thirdly, the institutionalization of
permanent channels of communication, including in times
of crisis; fourthly, a cessation of incitement and the call
to violence and jihad, and their replacement with the
language of reconciliation and mutual respect; and, fifthly,
the advancement and encouragement of normalization and
support for regional activities.
The purpose of this code of conduct is to facilitate
uninterrupted negotiations and crisis management, and to
create an atmosphere of dialogue. This code must respond
to the sensitivities and needs of both sides. We believe
that the adoption of the above principles will allow us to
overcome the present crisis and help in preventing future
ones as the negotiations proceed. These rules of the game
will also contribute to renewed trust between the leaders
and greater confidence between the peoples.
In the wake of the visit to the Middle East of the
United States Secretary of State, renewed agreement has
been reached to continue the efforts at restoring the peace
process to its proper track. We have been conducting
intensive talks in recent days, with the assistance of the
United States, both in Washington and here, with a view
to resuming the negotiations and advancing our efforts to
reach a permanent settlement with the Palestinians.
Israel values and appreciates the action of the United
States Secretary of State and her commitment and efforts
to extricate the peace process from its current impasse, to
bring the parties closer together and to ensure the success
of the negotiations. We are fully committed to these
efforts.
26


Israel reaffirms its proposal to conduct accelerated
negotiations, according to an agreed timetable, on
permanent status. We propose conducting negotiations in
which the sides will agree upon the desired outcomes and
the way towards achieving them. This proposal is intended
to hasten the attainment of a peaceful settlement, not to
delay it. This is also our call and our proposal to the
Palestinian Authority.
The international community can play an important
role in facilitating the dialogue between the sides, which
will make it possible for us to resolve our differences
through direct negotiations. It is only through direct
negotiations that we can bring this process to a successful
conclusion. One-sided international declarations, dictates or
pressures will not help. Attempts to internationalize the
dispute and to transfer the arena of negotiations to the
United Nations and other international forums only serve to
create unnecessary obstacles and to make already
entrenched positions more rigid.
The comprehensive peace we yearn for will not be
achieved until we reach peace agreements with Syria and
Lebanon. It is imperative to reach understandings and
agreement that will enable us to renew negotiations and to
resolve all the matters at issue between us. We expect to
find in Syria and its leadership a partner in the search for
a just peace. If Syria has indeed made a strategic choice in
favour of peace — the “peace of the brave”, as claimed by
its leadership — then we must explore together every
possible avenue, at any place and at any time, for renewing
the talks between us.
Israel cannot accept the continued violence and terror
on its northern border. The terrorist activities of
organizations such as Hezbollah and the fear of Katyusha
rockets and attacks upon our cities and towns bear the
threat of ongoing regional tension and continued bloodshed.
There is no territorial dispute between Israel and Lebanon.
We wish to see a sovereign, free and independent Lebanon
acting determinedly against the terrorist organizations that
operate from its territory.
If we are to reach peace, we cannot make do only
with agreements and contracts. The reality of peace means
normalization, open borders, freedom of movement,
commerce and cooperation for the benefit of the entire
region. These are the soul and essence of peace.
Normalization is not a prize or a gift for Israel alone.
The decisions of the Foreign Ministers of the Arab
League at their recent meeting in Cairo, just over one week
ago, stand in direct contradiction to the aspirations for
peace and undermine its foundations. The attempts to
prevent normalization with Israel, to freeze the level of
existing relations with it, to close liaison and interests
offices between Israel and Arab neighbours and to
reactivate the Arab boycott add up, in practice, to a
boycott of peace itself. This is a destructive policy which
is reversing the process.
The ongoing and intentional freeze of the
multilateral talks also has a deleterious effect on the
entrenchment of peace. The multilateral talks were meant
and should serve as a platform and incentive for building
peace. We must promote the bilateral and multilateral
channels alike and not make one conditional upon the
other, nor create further obstacles and barriers on the road
to peace. The question mark hanging over the regional
economic conference scheduled to take place later this
year in Doha, Qatar, is further evidence of this negative
drive.
The countries of the Middle East that are party to
the peace effort have a common interest in regional
stability and the advancement of prosperity and well-
being for all the nations of the region. We face together
the growing shortage of water and the ever-expanding
desert. We are also facing dangers from within our region
that threaten to undermine the stability of the regimes of
various nations and to plunge the entire region into
violence, war and bloodshed.
It was only a few years ago that the entire world
was forced into forming a coalition to combat an
aggressive dictator who sought to conquer a neighbouring
country and to terrorize our entire region. Today, we face
new and even more extreme dangers, but the lessons of
recent experience have not been learned and many
countries turn a blind eye to the threat.
The leadership of Iran continues to speak in terms
that threaten the State of Israel and call for its destruction.
Yet the international community continues to remain deaf
and refuses to speak out against Iran's policies,
declarations and actions.
Iran's efforts, like those of Iraq, to acquire
operational weapons of mass destruction of all kinds
represent the greatest threat to security and stability in the
Middle East and beyond. The ramifications of Iran's
weapons programme extend far beyond the geographical
confines of our region. They threaten the security of other
27


members of the international community and their interests.
Israel reiterates its call to the members of the
international family of nations — and at their head the
United States, Russia and the members of the European
Union and of the Commonwealth of Independent States —
to exercise the full weight of their influence and to take
concrete steps to prevent this development, which
represents a threat to the existence of the State of Israel.
After the establishment, as we hope, of peace treaties
between Israel and every country of the region, it will be
possible to create a regional security system that would
provide multilateral and shared solutions to the range of
security problems in the Middle East, including a mutually
and effectively verifiable Middle East free of chemical,
biological and nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles. These
are our goals and we must act to achieve them.
Israel is an active and responsible member of the
family of nations represented in this body. However, 50
years after the United Nations adopted, on 29 November
1947, the resolution calling for the establishment of the
State of Israel, we are still denied our equal rights in this
Organization.
We attach great importance to the fundamental reform
of the United Nations work. We also share the opinion of
other United Nations Member countries that believe that the
Organization urgently requires greater efficiency and a
redirecting of its valuable but limited resources towards its
truly important tasks. At the same time, we are convinced
that no reform can be completed so long as the question of
Israel's membership of a regional group remains unresolved.
We call upon this Organization to correct this anomaly.
Much to our chagrin, in the last year we have seen an
intensification of the political campaign waged against
Israel at the United Nations. This campaign only impedes
the peace process and further undermines confidence
between the parties. We call upon the Member States to
refrain from lending their support to such resolutions. The
time has come for this Assembly to reduce the number of
resolutions on the Middle East that it adopts each year and
to contribute positively to creating an atmosphere conducive
to direct negotiations between the parties.
As part of Israel's international and regional
commitment and of its credo as a State, we are engaged in
cooperative programmes with many countries, with which
we share the experience and knowledge we have acquired
in various fields. Israel attaches great importance to its
international cooperation programme and to assisting
various peoples to address the challenges of development
and the hazards of nature, hunger and disease.
Over more than three decades, tens of thousands of
trainees have participated in courses in Israel and in their
own countries within the framework of Israel's
cooperation and assistance programme in the fields of
education, health, agriculture, industry, social affairs and
leadership. We are especially proud of the participation in
recent years of trainees from Arab countries, amongst
them Palestinians. These trainees are emissaries of
goodwill, ambassadors of peace, who bear with them the
message and the great hope of human well-being. As in
the words of the prophet:
“Each shall help his neighbour and make him
strong”.
This year, the Jewish people in Israel and around the
world marks the jubilee of its national revival. Fifty years
ago, the Jewish people restored its national sovereignty in
its ancient homeland. Throughout the dark days of our
2,000-year dispersion, we dreamt of the day that we
would renew our national life in the land of our
forefathers, the land of Israel.
It is the privilege of our generation to fulfil this
aspiration. The Jewish people has returned and built up its
land. The Jewish people is once again gathering in its
ancient home and has succeeded in building a vibrant
and democratic society, a flourishing economy, science,
research and industry.
For the past 50 years, we have laboured to ensure
Israel's security and independence, while always seeking
peace and good-neighbourly relations in our region. Fifty
years on, the State of Israel is an irremovable reality.
This week, we mark the beginning of the Jewish
new year. At this holy time, every Jew turns his eye
towards the heavens with a prayer in his heart for the
peace of the world, the end of misery and a new dawn of
hope for all. On this day of remembrance, the blow of the
shofar is accompanied by the prayer:
“may the year and its troubles pass and a new year
and its blessings begin”.





﻿May I begin by
congratulating the President on his election to preside over
the General Assembly at its fifty-second session. We are in
good hands as we begin our work during what the
Secretary-General has called “the reform Assembly.”
I know, too, that my Foreign Minister, on whose
behalf I am speaking, would want to warmly congratulate
the outgoing President, Ambassador Razali Ismail of
Malaysia, on his efforts during the past 12 months. It has
been a challenging time, and he has demonstrated the
decisive leadership we all expected of him.
Two years ago, at the fiftieth anniversary of the
United Nations, world leaders undertook to give the twenty-
first century an Organization equipped, financed and
structured to serve effectively the peoples in whose name
it was established. With the year 2000 now only 27 months
away, we are still far from that goal. This is a matter of
great concern to New Zealand. We firmly believe in the
United Nations as a vehicle to a better life for the world's
citizens, and not just for those who live now. We have a
responsibility to strengthen the Organization for our
grandchildren and beyond. We must not let them and
ourselves down by allowing an unreformed United Nations
to slide into increasing irrelevance.
We do not pretend the process of reform is easy or
finite. As the Secretary-General has said, “Reform is not an
event; it is a process.” [A/51/950, para. 25] Our own in
volvement on the intergovernmental track, including co-
chairing the Working Group on the Strengthening of the
United Nations System and the Working Group on an
Agenda for Development, has given us a good appreciation
of the complexities involved in producing positive outcomes
acceptable to 185 Member States.
We know the Secretary-General faces the same
issues with his 16 July package. As with any package, it
is inevitable that some Member States will find fault with
individual elements. But we are firmly of the belief that
the package should be viewed as a whole. This will be
for the greater good of the Organization. Difficulties with
individual elements of the package should not be allowed
to unpick the overall good which is in it. We appeal to
Member States to acknowledge this reality and to give the
Secretary-General their generous support. It is small
countries like New Zealand, and developing countries,
which, as we see it, stand most to benefit from what the
Secretary-General is trying to achieve.
To reform and strengthen the United Nations
effectively, we see a need to redistribute resources away
from administration and into areas which are important
for those of us who place a high priority on the United
Nations itself. We support efficiencies, not cost-cutting.
The crucial difference between the two is that one
approach seeks simply to save money without regard to
the impact on the Organization. We cannot support this.
The United Nations is too important to us to allow such
a downgrading.
An approach based on efficiencies allows us to
reinvigorate the United Nations by reinvesting the money
saved from outdated administrative practices. This is
central to the Secretary-General's package. In particular,
the proposal for a “development dividend” channelling
resources freed by administrative efficiencies into
strengthening the development activities of the United
Nations is most welcome. We can certify from our own
national experience that the sort of management reforms
proposed in the package do indeed lead to a reduction in
administrative overheads, allowing more to be delivered
in terms of substantive programmes.
At a time when development funds are diminishing,
the significance of this step should not be lost. New
Zealand is a country that is increasing its overseas aid —
by 40 per cent since the 1992 United Nations Conference
on Environment and Development, the Rio Summit. Our
contributions through the United Nations system have also
increased by nearly 50 per cent over the last five years.
But the global trend is the opposite, particularly among
the larger traditional donors. It is becoming harder and
harder for Governments to meet their Charter commitment
to promote the economic and social advancement of all
peoples. One of the modest outcomes of the last two
years of reform efforts within the United Nations has
been the elaboration of an Agenda for Development
19


reaffirming the primacy of development, setting objectives
and recommending ways of achieving them. But, with the
best will in the world, implementing that Agenda will come
to naught in the absence of adequate funding.
The Secretary-General's reforms are designed to
deliver more for development. Equally important, they are
designed to boost confidence in the United Nations,
confidence which two weeks ago was given tangible form
by Mr. Ted Turner's billion-dollar grant to assist United
Nations agencies in key development activities. That
generous offer has given the Organization a real boost and
could be a catalyst for leveraging further private-sector
funds for development. We must support the Secretary-
General's efforts to make the United Nations the best
vehicle for delivering such assistance.
Member States need to trust the Secretary-General to
fulfil his responsibilities under the Charter: to give effect to
the policy directions which they set. We need to be clear
and realistic in the priorities we set for the United Nations.
We cannot mandate the Organization with more and more
new tasks and somehow expect these to be achieved within
current resources. And, having set the priorities, we must
resist the temptation to micro-manage. This will involve a
sea-change in the way Member States have become
accustomed to operating. The Fifth Committee still makes
decisions about staff numbers and placement within the
Secretariat, administrative decisions that in any modern
organization would be the responsibility of its managers.
We know that the transitional process of change will
not be easy for those working in the Secretariat either.
But — and we are conscious of our own experience in New
Zealand in instituting public-sector reform — the
managerial and results-based budgeting proposals in the
July package will improve work performance and will
deliver greater job satisfaction to those working for the
United Nations. The Organization's most important resource
is its people. The package recognizes the vital importance
of investment in staff. If the best and brightest are to be
attracted to and retained by the United Nations, they must
be recruited, trained, promoted and paid according to
procedures which are as good as the best employed by
Member States.
It is also important to stress here the loyalty owed to
the Secretary-General by those who work for him. He has
the right to expect their full support for his leadership and
for the initiatives he puts forward. Anything less would be
dishonourable, would subvert due process and would
potentially disenfranchise Member States. It could not be
tolerated.
I referred earlier to the intergovernmental track. It is
worth touching on the key issues of Security Council and
financial reform.
On the former, New Zealand will judge specific
proposals for enlargement of the Security Council by the
yardstick of democracy and the representativeness of the
institution as a whole. Increasing the proportion of
permanent to non-permanent members runs counter to this
principle. Nor could a package on Security Council
reform be acceptable to us without substantive proposals
opening up and modernizing the workings of the Council.
Sunshine, an American jurist once observed, is the best
disinfectant. Member States must continue to participate
in the debate in the search for a consensus solution.
On financial reform, New Zealand is strongly
concerned about the crisis facing the United Nations. It is
true that there are problems with the scales of assessments
for both the regular and the peacekeeping budgets. The
present floor has a negative impact on smaller, vulnerable
nations, such as the South Pacific island countries, New
Zealand's neighbours. This is just one example of the kind
of problem that needs to be addressed.
But those who want to see changes made to the
scale need to offer genuine inducements, not threats. We
cannot accept that any Member State is entitled to
withhold payments unilaterally or that the assessment of
those countries that will not pay their dues should be
picked up by others. All assessed contributions must be
paid in full, on time and unconditionally. It is a violation
of international legal obligations to do otherwise. This
must be regarded with the utmost seriousness by Member
States. It undermines the Organization's ability to operate.
It penalizes, through damage to the Organization, those
Member States that abide by their obligations. When the
State responsible for the largest percentage of arrears
owed to the United Nations is also the richest, and when
that State in addition attaches conditions to the payment
of only a portion of what it owes, it is understandable that
these actions should generate real scepticism in this
Assembly.
This sorry state of affairs must be resolved quickly.
But it can be resolved only on the basis of a credible
commitment that all conditions will be eliminated now
and that all payments will be made on time. And that
means in January each year.
20


I would like to raise another reform issue which has
not featured prominently in discussions to date, namely
United Nations regional groupings. It seems to us that this
is an issue that deserves examination. The groupings are in
need of revision to bring them up to date with present-day
geopolitical realities. It is anomalous, for example, that our
Pacific island neighbours, members with us of the South
Pacific Forum grouping, belong to the Asian Group while,
for historical reasons, New Zealand belongs to the Group
of Western European and Other States. The fundamental
importance we accord our membership of the institutions of
the South Pacific Forum, of the Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation Council and of the Regional Forum of the
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), and our
relationship with ASEAN itself, should be able to be better
reflected in the regional groupings. We accordingly see
value in a reconfiguration of New York electoral groupings
to bring them more in line with those used elsewhere in the
United Nations system, where New Zealand in most cases
sits with our South Pacific partners and our East Asian
neighbours.
Developments in other regions will result in further
anomalies in the present structure. We see at a future stage
some long and complex negotiations over regional seat
allocations for a revised system of regional groups. New
Zealand of course will join with others in negotiating new
and equitable allocations of seats. While we look forward
to the outcome of that process, we realize that it will not
come overnight. In the meantime, and as a matter of high
priority, my delegation is working to forge a closer
relationship with the Asian regional group in New York.
I would like to close my statement by focusing once
more on the utmost importance of Member States' giving
positive endorsement to the Secretary-General's package at
this General Assembly, as New Zealand will be doing —
not only because it provides a positive and concrete start to
a reform process, but also because the alternative of not
supporting the Secretary-General will, in our view,
seriously undermine the credibility of the United Nations.
For two years the United Nations has been involved in
the current reform exercise. But none of us can pretend that
reform is an end in itself, or that introspection is an
ongoing excuse for inaction. The United Nations exists to
deliver concrete, substantive assistance to the hundreds of
millions most in need. No amount of self-analysis is a
substitute for that. Moreover, sustained emphasis on
introspection will erode the Organization's capacity, and
possibly also its will, to perform the tasks for which it was
created.
The challenge now is to embrace the bold
programme of reform outlined by the Secretary-General,
to use this General Assembly to begin to implement it,
and then to direct our energy where it rightly belongs, to
taking practical steps to reduce suffering and build a
better and more peaceful world: like drawing up a solid,
practical programme for alleviating poverty in the coming
decade; like establishing an international criminal court
which will ensure that individuals are held responsible for
war crimes; like supporting and enhancing the United
Nations capability for preventive diplomacy; and like
invigorating the United Nations capacity for
peacekeeping.
These are the standards by which the real success or
failure of the United Nations will be judged. New Zealand
is determined that the verdict will be a positive one.
Working together, we can ensure that it is.





﻿Mr. President, allow me sincerely to
congratulate you, a representative of friendly Ukraine, on
your election to this responsible and honoured post. We
are confident that under your Presidency, the General
Assembly will be able to achieve significant results.
In just a little over 800 days, mankind will enter
upon the twenty-first century. From a historical point of
view, this is indeed no more than a sprinter’s lap, and
thus the need to look at what lies ahead, at what awaits
us, would appear quite natural.
One year ago, in speaking from this rostrum, I spoke
about the emerging process of a transition to a multipolar
world order. The developments of the past year support
that. There is a growing diversity in the political,
economic and cultural development of countries. New
centres of economic and political influence in the world
are shaping up, coupled, at the same time, with increased
intermeshing of the interests of different States and
peoples.
The horizons opening up to the international
community in the twenty-first century are making new
demands. These are the assertion of the ideals of
interdependency and partnership in inter-State relations;
the prevention of the emergence of new dividing lines or
exclusive bloc structures; and strict adherence by all to
the principles and rules of international law. As a separate
issue, I should like to cite not only the creation of
conditions for economic and social progress of all
countries, but also the maintenance of environmental
balance.
There is also a need to mention that the transition
from a confrontational bipolar world to a multipolar
system per se would not provide a solution to these
17


problems. Furthermore, realistically minded people realize
that although we are moving farther away from the
simplistic stereotypes of the ideological confrontation era,
the number of existing risks and threats in the world is not
decreasing.
Regional conflicts continue to be one of the major
sources of instability on the global level; they should not be
allowed to continue into the twenty-first century. How can
this be achieved? A characteristic of our days is the
increasing number of intra-State problems — conflicts of an
ethnic rather than social nature. There are many
multinational States in the world today, and we support the
initiatives designed to prevent their forcible disintegration.
The formula for settling such conflicts in today’s
world — and, of course, in the twenty-first century — can
and must combine the need to preserve the territorial
integrity of those States with the provision of the maximum
possible number of rights to their national minorities. To
abandon any of the principles of this two-track formula
would result not only in the continuation but in the
dangerous escalation of such conflict situations.
Likewise, I wish to draw the Assembly’s particular
attention to a dangerous aspect of regional conflicts: their
ability to trigger terrorist waves and spread them far and
wide beyond the borders of the actual conflict zone. For
example, many of the militants who launched a bloody
campaign of terror in a number of countries emerged out of
the ongoing armed conflict that still rages in Afghanistan.
We strongly support the combat against terrorism,
whatever trappings it may don, be it in Ireland or in Israel.
Today, we will not be able to prevail in this fight without
all States pooling their efforts to combat this greatest of
evils. While we oppose the backing of terrorism in any
form by any Government, we believe that we cannot
stigmatize individual Member States forever as international
rogues, irrespective of changes in their policies, simply
because of their suspected links to terrorists.
In the present-day world, no country can hold a
monopoly on any kind of conflict-resolution effort. This
fully applies as well to the long-standing conflict in the
Middle East, where the settlement process has been
stalemated. As the saying goes, “it takes two hands to
applaud”. Broad-based international efforts are required to
undo the taut Middle East knot. Russia, as one of the co-
sponsors of the peace process launched in 1991 in Madrid,
is prepared actively to cooperate actively with all to attain
this goal.
For many years, so too has the Cyprus issue been
awaiting the effective international cooperation needed for
its resolution.
A synergy of efforts would provide the shortest cut
to the resolution of both long-standing and of relatively
new conflicts. But our stance by no means implies — and
I wish to emphasize this — that any individual country
that has influence in a zone of conflict or that can exert
it over conflicting parties should not make active use of
its own potential. It must do so, however, without putting
up a high fence around itself to ward off others.
I should like in this connection to draw the
Assembly’s attention to Russia’s peacekeeping efforts in
the Commonwealth of Independent States region. First of
all, as concerns Tajikistan, Russia is doing a great deal
since we are equipped with the particular tools needed to
do the job, in part for historical reasons. Our efforts have
proved rather effective. Recently in Moscow an
agreement was signed that put an end to the armed strife
between the Government and the opposition in that
country. The return to Dushanbe of Mr. Nuri, the
opposition leader, shows that the agreement is already
working.
Nevertheless, we want only our fair share of the
deal. We note with satisfaction that the attitudes of Russia
and the United Nations towards the parameters of the
operation in Tajikistan are in concurrence, based on the
close cooperation between the United Nations Observer
Mission, the collective Commonwealth of Independent
States peacekeeping force, and the contingent of Russian
border troops. We welcome the intention of the United
Nations to expand the mandate of its observers and to
increase their number.
Nagorny Karabakh provides yet another example.
Acting on its own, Russia has done a great deal to
stabilize the situation in the region. But I believe that we
have quite productively cooperated with the United States
and France, which, jointly with Russia, are acting as co-
chairmen of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe’s Minsk process to settle the
Nagorny Karabakh conflict. The Georgian-Abkhaz
conflict offers a similar example.
I should now like to say a few words about
peacekeeping as a whole. Over the last few years, a trend
has been observed towards its decentralization. Naturally,
there are objective reasons for this: the financial
constraints placed on the United Nations, and the increase
18


in the number of regional organizations working, inter alia,
in peacekeeping. We see nothing wrong with such
decentralization.
However, it is extremely important that peacekeeping
activities, whatever their sponsorship, should rely first and
foremost on the underlying principles developed within the
United Nations framework. We need here to be extremely
cautious in dealing with peacekeeping activities. We believe
that actions involving force should be carried out solely
when authorized by the Security Council and under its
direct supervision, as provided for in the Charter of the
United Nations.
As we move towards a multipolar world in the twenty-
first century, it is essential to create conditions that will
bring stability to a new world order. To that end, work
must be completed to demolish the hurdles of the past and,
above all, the legacy of the massive, decades-long arms
race.
We are moving together along this path, and we are
determined to proceed further. Together with the United
States, we have been steadily reducing our national strategic
arsenals. President Yeltsin of Russia and President Clinton
of the United States have reached an understanding on the
basic parameters for agreement in this area.
On the agenda now are systematic measures for a
reduction in the nuclear arsenals of all the nuclear Powers.
But let us be perfectly clear here: the stability of a
multipolar world cannot be ensured simply by ending the
nuclear-arms race of the past. It is also essential to have
guarantees against the re-emergence of that arms race on a
new basis, and here I have in mind the desire of individual
countries to acquire nuclear weapons. This once again
proves the need for urgent measures to relieve tensions in
the relations between India and Pakistan.
Hence the essential need for the entire international
community to give a universal dimension to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Those few
countries that have so far remained outside the Treaty must,
in our view, come to grips with their responsibility. They
must realize that their own security is an integral part of
global security, and they must assume those obligations to
which over 180 States have already committed themselves
as parties to the Treaty.
The entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) on a global scale, as well as the
forthcoming talks to ban the production of weapon-grade
fissile materials, figures likewise among those badly
needed steps intended to impart stability to global security
in the twenty-first century.
The implementation of the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling
and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction
is getting under way. We consider this document as one
of the major instruments designed to eliminate one of the
weapons of mass destruction subject to the greatest
proliferation. We have been working together with the
deputies of the State Duma to ratify the Convention, and
we look forward to the early, successful completion of
those efforts.
But even now it is conventional weaponry that is
killing people in local conflicts, often in situations where
hostilities have already stopped. In this connection, we are
fully aware of the humanitarian dimension of the problem
of landmines. We think that the elimination of the threat
of landmines to people, especially to civilian populations,
is long overdue. We advocate active, phased efforts and
negotiations to resolve it.
Stability on a global or regional level is impossible
without the establishment of security systems. We have
made headway in this direction on the European
continent. We feel confident that only a universal
organization which brings together all the members of the
European family of nations can serve as a foundation for
a genuinely durable security system in Europe in the
twenty-first century. I am talking here about the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). It is first and foremost in the frame of that
forum that it is possible to seek agreement with a view to
meeting the new and diverse challenges, which are not
necessarily of a military and political nature.
A beneficial effect on the improvement of the
European climate has already been exerted by the
Founding Act on Mutual Relations, Cooperation and
Security between the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
and the Russian Federation, which was born out of the
agonizing quest for compromise. This document will have
broad international resonance and will doubtless play an
essential role in European politics. Of course, the signing
of that document has not changed our negative view of
NATO’s enlargement, which, on the one hand, totally
ignores current realities and, on the other, is fraught with
the risk of creating new dividing lines.
19


I must mention yet another contribution to the
strengthening of good-neighbourly relations in Europe. I am
referring to the agreements signed recently by Russia,
Ukraine and Belarus that have allowed our three countries
to take major steps forward in developing mutually
beneficial, equitable relations which have strengthened
stability in the region.
Russia has an interest in the security and stability of
its Baltic neighbours and is ready to guarantee their
security. Such guarantees could be provided in the form of
our commitment backed by an agreement on good-
neighbourly relations between Russia and the Baltic States.
Such an agreement could become a kind of pact on regional
security and stability.
The Asia-Pacific dimension is also of great
significance to us. We are convinced that the Russian-
Chinese agreements on borders and military détente in the
frontier zone, which were also signed by Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan, will become a long-term factor
for stability in that vast region. Russia also holds a number
of other Asian countries — including India, Japan and the
States of the Association of South-East Asian Nations
(ASEAN) — among its priority partners.
At the same time, our future in the twenty-first century
at both the global and the regional levels depends directly
on whether the international community will be able to stop
and reverse the economic impoverishment of a great
number of the Member States of the United Nations.
A central role in resolving the most important tasks
facing all the countries of the world today belongs to the
United Nations.
Established over half a century ago, the Organization
in general has succeeded in passing the durability test,
traversed the thorny road of the bloc-confrontation era,
survived both the ice-age period and the thaw in
international relations. But today this could be viewed as
axiomatic — the United Nations needs a rational
renovation, referred to by virtually all the speakers in this
debate. The substantive report of Secretary-General Kofi
Annan gives clear proof of this need. Today, figuratively
speaking, the image of this Organization in the twenty-first
century is being shaped.
It is our strong conviction that the priority objective
of the Organization’s reform is to enhance the usefulness
of the United Nations. Naturally, it is impossible to
reform the United Nations in order to increase its
effectiveness without overcoming the financial problems.
We must note that the financial problems of the United
Nations have unfortunately become chronic. It must
therefore be emphasized that the responsibility for the
financial health of the United Nations is borne by all
Member States and that they must all pay their dues
properly.
We are also in favour of expanding the membership
of the Security Council. A decision to that effect is long
overdue. But this expansion should not render our
Organization less efficient.
The reform of the United Nations will take place
against the background of the ever increasing role of
regional organizations. This is a fully logical process. At
the same time, we are convinced that the special leading
role of the United Nations among all other universally
recognized international organizations must be preserved.
We see the United Nations in the twenty-first
century as a highly efficient Organization, free from
bureaucratic constraints, and as a proactive Organization
capable of swiftly responding to the challenges of the
contemporary world.
I began my remarks by encouraging concerted action
by the international community to concentrate on current
problems and on the prospects for the coming century.
And I shall conclude by citing a well-known saying:
“Pessimists are no more than casual observers, it is the
optimists who can change the world”. We are optimists,
and we believe that the United Nations will be able to
play a positive role in the ongoing evolution of the
international community.





﻿Five years ago, when I first
addressed this Assembly, the cold war had only just
ended and the transition to a new era was beginning.
Now, together, we are making that historic transition.
Behind us, we leave a century full of humanity's capacity
for the worst and its genius for the best. Before us, at the
dawn of a new millennium, we can envision a new era
that escapes the twentieth century's darkest moments,
fulfils its most brilliant possibilities and crosses frontiers
yet unimagined.
We are off to a promising start. For the first time in
history, more than half the people represented in this
Assembly freely choose their own Governments. Free
markets are growing, spreading individual opportunity and
national well-being. Early in the twenty-first century,
more than 20 of this Assembly's members - home to
half the earth's population - will lift themselves from
the ranks of low-income nations.
Powerful forces are bringing us closer together,
profoundly changing the way we work, live and relate to
each other. Every day, millions of our citizens on every
continent use laptops and satellites to send information,
products and money across the planet in seconds. Bit by
bit, the information age is chipping away at barriers -
economic, political and social - that once kept people
locked in and ideas locked out. Science is unravelling
mysteries in the tiniest of human genes and in the vast
cosmos. Never in the course of human history have we
had a greater opportunity to make our people healthier
and wiser, to protect our planet from decay and abuse and
to reap the benefits of free markets without abandoning
the social contract and its concern for the common good.
Yet today's possibilities are not tomorrow's
guarantees. We have work to do.
7


The forces of global integration are a great tide,
inexorably wearing away the established order of things.
But we must decide what will be left in its wake. People
fear change when they feel its burdens but not its benefits.
They are susceptible to misguided protectionism and to the
poisoned appeals of extreme nationalism, and ethnic, racial
and religious hatreds. New global environmental challenges
require us to find ways to work together without damaging
legitimate aspirations for progress. We are all vulnerable to
the reckless acts of rogue States and to an unholy axis of
terrorists, drug traffickers and international criminals.
These twenty-first-century predators feed on the free
flow of information, ideas and people we cherish. They
abuse the vast power of technology to build black markets
for weapons, to compromise law enforcement with huge
bribes of illicit cash and to launder money with the
keystroke of a computer. These forces are our enemies. We
must face them together because no one can defeat them
alone.
To seize the opportunities and move against the threats
of this new global era, we need a new strategy of security.
Over the past five years, nations have begun to put that
strategy in place through a new network of institutions and
arrangements, with distinct missions, but a common
purpose: to secure and strengthen the gains of democracy
and free markets while turning back their enemies.
We see this strategy taking shape on every continent:
in expanded military alliances, such as the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO), its Partnership for Peace and
its partnerships with a democratic Russia and a democratic
Ukraine; in free trade arrangements, such as the World
Trade Organization and the global Information Technology
Agreement, and in the movement towards free-trade areas
by nations in the Americas, the Asia-Pacific region and
elsewhere around the world; in strong arms-control regimes,
such as the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons; in
multinational coalitions with zero tolerance for terrorism,
corruption, crime and drug trafficking; and in binding
international commitments to protect the environment and
safeguard human rights.
Through this web of institutions and arrangements,
nations are setting the international ground rules for the
twenty-first century, laying a foundation for security and
prosperity for those who live within them, while isolating
those who challenge them from the outside. This system
will develop and endure only if those who follow the rules
of peace and freedom fully reap their rewards. Only then
will our people believe that they have a stake in
supporting and shaping the emerging international system.
The United Nations must play a leading role in this
effort, filling in the fault lines of the new global era. The
core missions it has pursued during its first half century
will be just as relevant during the next half century: the
pursuit of peace and security, promoting human rights and
moving people from poverty to dignity and prosperity
through sustainable development.
Conceived in the cauldron of war, the United
Nations first task must remain the pursuit of peace and
security. For 50 years the United Nations has helped
prevent world war and nuclear holocaust. Unfortunately,
conflicts between nations, and within nations, have
endured. From 1945 until today, they have cost 20 million
lives. Just since the end of the cold war, each year there
have been more than 30 armed conflicts in which more
than 1,000 people have lost their lives - including, of
course, a quarter of a million killed in the former
Yugoslavia and more than half a million in Rwanda.
Millions of personal tragedies the world over are a
warning that we dare not be complacent or indifferent;
trouble in a far corner can become a plague on everyone's
house. People the world over cheer the hopeful
developments in Northern Ireland, grieve over the loss of
innocent lives and the stalling of the peace process in the
Middle East and long for a resolution of the differences
on the Korean peninsula, between Greece and Turkey or
between the great nations of India and Pakistan as they
celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of their birth.
The United Nations continues to keep many nations
away from bloodshed: in El Salvador and Mozambique;
in Haiti and Namibia; in Cyprus; and in Bosnia, where so
much remains to be done but can still be done because
the bloodshed has ended.
The United Nations record of service has left a
legacy of sacrifice. Just last week we lost some of our
finest sons and daughters in the crash of a United Nations
helicopter in Bosnia. Five were American, five German,
one Polish and one British - all citizens of the world we
are trying to make, each a selfless servant of peace. The
world is poorer for their passing.
At this very moment, the United Nations is keeping
the peace in 16 countries, often in partnership with
regional organizations such as NATO, the Organization of
American States, the Association of South-East Asian
8


Nations and the Economic Community of West African
States, avoiding wider conflicts and even greater suffering.
Our shared commitment to more realistic peacekeeping
training for United Nations troops, a stronger role for
civilian police and better integration between military and
civilian agencies - all these will help the United Nations
fulfil these missions in the years ahead.
At the same time, we must improve the United
Nations capabilities after a conflict ends to help peace
become self-sustaining. The United Nations cannot build
nations, but it can help nations build themselves by
fostering legitimate institutions of government, monitoring
elections and laying a strong foundation for economic
reconstruction.
This week the Security Council will hold an
unprecedented ministerial meeting on African security,
which our Secretary of State is proud to chair, and which
President Mugabe, Chairman of the Organization of African
Unity, will address. It will highlight the role the United
Nations can and should play in preventing conflict on a
continent where amazing progress towards democracy and
development is occurring alongside still too much discord,
disease and distress.
In the twenty-first century our security will be
challenged increasingly by interconnected groups that traffic
in terror, organized crime and drug smuggling. Already,
these international crime and drug syndicates drain up to
$750 billion a year from legitimate economies. That sum
that exceeds the combined gross national product of more
than half the nations in this Hall. These groups threaten to
undermine confidence in the fragile new democracies and
market economies that so many of you are working so hard
to see endure.
Two years ago I called upon all the members of this
Assembly to join in the fight against these forces. I applaud
the recent United Nations resolution calling on its Members
to join the major international anti-terrorism conventions,
making clear the emerging international consensus that
terrorism is always a crime and never a justifiable political
act. As more countries sign on, terrorists will have fewer
places to run or hide. I also applaud the steps that Members
are taking to implement the Declaration on Crime and
Public Security that the United States proposed two years
ago, calling for increased cooperation to strengthen every
citizen's right to basic safety, through cooperation on
extradition and asset forfeiture, shutting down grey markets
for guns and false documents, attacking corruption and
bringing higher standards to law enforcement in new
democracies.
The spread of these global criminal syndicates also
has made all the more urgent our common quest to
eliminate weapons of mass destruction. We cannot allow
them to fall into or remain in the wrong hands. Here too,
the United Nations must lead, and it has led - from the
United Nations Special Commission in Iraq to the
International Atomic Energy Agency, now the most
expansive global inspection system ever devised to police
arms-control agreements.
When we met here last year, I was honoured to be
the first of 146 leaders to sign the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT), our commitment to end
all nuclear tests for all time, the longest-sought, hardest-
fought prize in the history of arms control. It will help
prevent the nuclear Powers from developing more
advanced and more dangerous weapons. It will limit the
possibilities for other States to acquire such devices. I am
pleased to announce that today I am sending this crucial
Treaty to the United States Senate for ratification. Our
common goal should be for the CTBT to enter into force
as soon as possible. I ask for of you to support that goal.
The United Nations second core mission must be to
defend and extend universal human rights and to help
democracy's remarkable gains endure. Fifty years ago the
United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights
stated the international community's conviction that
people everywhere have the right to be treated with
dignity, to give voice to their opinions and to choose their
leaders; that these rights are universal - not American
rights, not Western rights, not rights for the developed
world only, but rights inherent in the humanity of people
everywhere.
Over the past decades these rights have become a
reality for more people than ever, from Asia to Africa,
from Europe to the Americas. In a world that links rich
and poor, North and South, city and countryside in an
electronic network of shared images in real time, the
more these universal rights take hold, the more people
who do not enjoy them will demand them. Armed with
photocopiers and fax machines, e-mail and the Internet;
supported by an increasingly important community of
non-governmental organizations, they will make their
demands known, spreading the spirit of freedom -
which, as the history of the last 10 years has shown us,
ultimately will prevail.
9


The United Nations must be prepared to respond -
not only by setting standards but by implementing them. To
deter abuses, we should strengthen the United Nations field
operations and early-warning systems. To strengthen
democratic institutions - the best guarantors of human
rights - we must pursue programmes to help new legal,
parliamentary and electoral institutions get off the ground.
To punish those responsible for crimes against humanity,
and to promote justice so that peace endures, we must
maintain our strong support for the United Nations war-
crime tribunals and truth commissions. And before the
century ends, we should establish a permanent international
court to prosecute the most serious violations of
humanitarian law.
The United States welcomes the Secretary General's
efforts to strengthen the role of human rights within the
United Nations system and his splendid choice of Mary
Robinson as the new High Commissioner for Human
Rights. We will work hard to make sure that she has the
support she needs to carry out her mandate.
Finally, the United Nations has a special responsibility
to make sure that as the global economy creates greater
wealth, it does not produce growing disparities between the
haves and have-nots or threaten the global environment, our
common home. Progress is not yet everyone's partner.
More than half the world's people are two days' walk from
a telephone, literally disconnected from the global economy.
Tens of millions lack the education, the training and the
skills they need to make the most of their God-given
abilities.
The men and women of the United Nations have
expertise across the entire range of humanitarian and
development activities. Every day they are making a
difference. We see it in nourished bodies of once-starving
children, in the full lives of those immunized against
disease, in the bright eyes of children exposed to education
through the rich storehouse of human knowledge, in
refugees cared for and returned to their homes and in the
health of rivers and lakes restored.
The United Nations must focus even more on shifting
resources from handouts to "hand ups", on giving people
the tools they need to make the most of their own destinies.
Spreading ideas and education and technology - the true
wealth of nations - is the best way to give the people the
chance to succeed.
The United Nations must continue to lead in ensuring
that today's progress does not come at tomorrow's expense.
When the nations of the world gather again next
December in Kyoto for the Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, all of us - developed and developing nations -
must seize the opportunity to turn back the clock on
greenhouse-gas emissions so that we can leave a healthy
planet to our children.
In these efforts, the United Nations no longer can,
and no longer need, go it alone. Innovative partnerships
with the private sector, non-governmental organizations
and the international financial institutions can leverage its
effectiveness many times over. Last week a truly
visionary American, Ted Turner, made a remarkable
donation to strengthen the United Nations development
and humanitarian programmes. His gesture highlights the
potential for partnership between the United Nations and
the private sector, in contributions of time, resources and
expertise. I hope more will follow his lead.
In this area and others, the Secretary-General is
aggressively pursuing the most far-reaching reform of the
United Nations in its history - not to make the United
Nations smaller as an end in itself, but to make it better.
The United States strongly supports his leadership. We
should pass the Secretary-General's reform agenda at this
session.
On every previous occasion I have addressed this
Assembly, the issue of our country's dues has brought the
commitment of the United States to the United Nations
into question. The United States was a founder of the
United Nations. We are proud to be its host. We believe
in its ideals. We continue to be, as we have been, its
largest contributor. We are committed to seeing the
United Nations succeed in the twenty-first century.
This year, for the first time since I have been
President, we have an opportunity to put the question of
debts and dues behind us once and for all and to put the
United Nations on a sounder financial footing for the
future. I have made it a priority to work with our
Congress on comprehensive legislation that would allow
us to pay off the bulk of our arrears and assure full
financing of America's assessment in the years ahead.
Our Congress's actions to solve this problem reflect a
strong bipartisan commitment to the United Nations and
to America's role within it. At the same time, we look to
Member States to adopt a more equitable scale of
assessments. Let me say that we also strongly support
expanding the Security Council to give more countries a
voice in the most important work of the United Nations.
10


In more equitably sharing responsibility for its successes,
we can make the United Nations stronger and more
democratic than it is today. I ask the General Assembly to
act on these proposals this year so that we can move
forward together.
At the dawn of a new century so full of hope but not
free of peril, more than ever we need a United Nations
where people of reason can work through shared problems
and take action to combat them, where nations of goodwill
can join in the struggle for freedom and prosperity and
where we can shape a future of peace, progress and the
preservation of our planet. We have the knowledge; we
have the intelligence; we have the energy; we have the
resources for the work before us. We are building the
necessary networks of cooperation. The great question
remaining is whether we have the vision and the heart
necessary to imagine a future that is different from the
past - necessary to free ourselves from destructive patterns
of relations with each other and within our own nations and
to live a future that is different.
A new century in a new millennium is upon us. We
are literally present at the future, and it is the great gift we
are obligated to leave to our children.




﻿South Africa welcomes your
election, Sir, as the President of the General Assembly at
its fifty-second session. We congratulate you having
experienced at first hand your skills and role as Vice-
Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid. We
also express our appreciation to Ambassador Razali Ismail
for his tireless work as President of the General Assembly
at its fifty-first session.
May I also congratulate His Excellency Mr. Kofi
Annan on his election as the seventh Secretary-General of
the United Nations. The zeal that the Secretary-General
has displayed in addressing, through his reform proposals,
the difficulties confronting this Organization is
impressive. The Secretary-General’s reform programme
is one that in many respects complements the
intergovernmental process regarding the revitalization of
the Organization.
The General Assembly is well aware of the need to
reform the United Nations. The process of reform should
produce a revitalized Organization capable of addressing
humanity’s vital issues of peace and security. Central to
the process of modernization of the United Nations is the
restructuring of the Security Council to redress existing
imbalances and transform it into a transparent organ
accountable to the broader membership of the
Organization.
South Africa fully supports the Non-Aligned
Movement’s position that there should be no partial or
selective expansion in the membership of the Security
Council to the detriment of developing countries.
The reaffirmation at the Organization of African
Unity’s Harare Summit of Africa’s claim to two
permanent and five non-permanent seats, with the same
powers and prerogatives enjoyed by the current permanent
members in an expanded Security Council, is consistent
with the Charter principle of equitable geographical
representation. If the Security Council is to fulfil the role
of custodian of international peace and security envisaged
for it in the Charter, it must be perceived to be fully
legitimate by States and peoples.
South Africa is therefore of the view that a limited
expansion of only five or six new Security Council seats
will not fulfil the crucial requirement of transforming the
Security Council into a representative organ.
Central to the Security Council reform process is the
question of the veto, which has been a focal point in our
deliberations for the last three and a half years. Indeed,
the democratization of the Council hinges on the veto
being either eliminated or extended to the new permanent
members. Accordingly, the issue of the status of the veto
must of necessity form an integral part of a
comprehensive reform package. Permanent membership
without the veto represents merely a symbolic gesture to
new permanent members which would serve to perpetuate
13


an unjust and discriminatory practice and accord them an
inferior status.
I wish to recall that last year in the General Assembly,
I registered South Africa’s disappointment with the slow
pace of the debate relating to the reform of the Security
Council. The time has come for us all to display the
necessary political will and determination in order to reach
agreement on a comprehensive set of measures which will
lead to the creation of a Security Council which is
transparent, democratic, accountable and thus credible and
legitimate.
The fifty-first session of the General Assembly also
witnessed the conclusion of the work of the Open-ended
High-level Working Group on the Strengthening of the
United Nations System. Its notable recommendations
regarding the strengthening of the role and functions of the
General Assembly attest to the importance which we as
Member States attach to this body as the supreme political
organ of the Organization.
It is, however, disappointing that on the issue relating
to the election of a Secretary-General, the Working Group
was unable to reach consensus on the recommendation to
the permanent members of the Security Council to refrain
from using the veto to block the outcome of the election.
As a result of Africa’s painful past experiences under
colonial domination, as well as the abhorrent system of
apartheid, my Government is committed to the final
eradication of colonialism and fully supports the effective
implementation of the Plan of Action for the International
Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism. We believe,
therefore, that the Committee of 24 should continue its
work in order to determine the interests of the peoples of
Non-Self-Governing Territories regarding their future
political status. We call on the administering Powers to lend
their full cooperation to the Committee.
South Africa is concerned that intra-State conflicts in
Africa continue to pose a threat to the continent’s stability.
These conflicts lead to loss of life and economic hardships
and are a major stumbling block on the road towards peace
and development. It is a matter of concern that conflicts in
Africa persist despite the commendable efforts of the
Organization of African Unity and of African leaders in
conflict resolution.
We therefore urge parties to the conflict in the
Republic of the Congo to observe the ceasefire agreement
and to make all efforts to ensure that the interim measures
for the holding of national elections in 1998 are instituted.
Similarly, we condemn the coup in Sierra Leone and
implore Member States of the United Nations to support
Africa’s efforts to restore constitutional order by
refraining from recognizing or giving support in any form
to the military Government.
South Africa is committed to the promotion of peace
in Angola, which we believe will contribute to the
consolidation and extension of stability to the whole of
our region of southern Africa. We are therefore concerned
about the failure of UNITA to fulfil its obligations under
the Lusaka Protocol. In this regard, my Government
welcomes the decision of the Security Council to impose
the punitive measures envisaged in its resolution 1127
(1997), as a means of ensuring UNITA’s compliance.
South Africa has followed the unfolding
developments in the Middle East with cautious optimism.
South Africa, and indeed the international community,
welcomed the signing of the Oslo accord by the Palestine
Liberation Organization and the Israeli Government and
applauded it as representing a positive step towards the
full realization of the long-awaited comprehensive and
just settlement in the region. But the decision of the
Government of Israel to construct new Jewish settlements
in Jebel Abu Ghneim has given rise to tensions and has
generated a crisis situation which has reignited conflict in
the region. We all know that this decision is a flagrant
violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and
of the relevant resolutions of this body. It is no doubt an
attempt to change the legal status of Jerusalem and to pre-
empt the final status negotiations.
The inalienable right of the Palestinian people to
self-determination is a prerequisite for achieving a durable
and comprehensive peace. For peace and stability to
prevail, the region requires the unconditional withdrawal
of Israel from all Palestinian and Arab territories occupied
since 1967.
South Africa welcomes the Secretary-General’s latest
initiatives currently under way to seek a lasting solution
to the question of Cyprus. We urge all parties to make
concerted efforts in working with the Secretary-General
and his good offices towards an overall comprehensive
settlement to this question, which has been on the agenda
of the United Nations for more than 30 years.
South Africa attaches great importance to preventive
diplomacy as a means of forestalling the possibility of
conflict. We commend the report of the Special
14


Committee on Peacekeeping Operations because it provides
us with measures aimed at strengthening the role of the
United Nations in peacekeeping. We also welcome the
Committee’s 1997 report on peacekeeping operations and
urge the Committee to address the question of the rapidly
deployable mission headquarters and the further
development of United Nations standby arrangements.
South Africa believes that progress on disarmament
issues will create a world free of war. The end of the cold
war heralded a period of progress in disarmament and non-
proliferation, as was evidenced by the entry into force of
the Chemical Weapons Convention and the conclusion of
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. However, the
re-emergence of maximalist positions in the disarmament
debate retards global disarmament, as demonstrated by the
disappointing progress made at the Conference on
Disarmament this year. Despite the consensual adoption of
a mandate for the negotiation of a fissile-material cut-off
treaty, one of the essential elements for complete nuclear
disarmament, little progress has been made. Nevertheless,
South Africa is encouraged by the large number of States
which have committed themselves to the complete
eradication of weapons of mass destruction by joining
various non-proliferation and disarmament treaties during
the past year. Universal adherence to important
disarmament treaties will pave the way towards a world
free of weapons of mass destruction.
Humanity is faced with the daily threat of harm from
the use of conventional weapons. High priority should be
placed on strategies and policies intended to prevent the
proliferation of conventional weapons and to reduce their
flow to conflict areas. The conclusions reached by the
United Nations Panel of Governmental Experts on Small
Arms lay the foundation for future action by the
international community.
On 18 September 1997, the Oslo Diplomatic
Conference adopted the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-
Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction. The Convention
is a clear and total ban on anti-personnel mines and
establishes a compelling new international norm against this
scourge which has for so long afflicted humanity, especially
innocent civilians, mostly women and children. South
Africa looks forward to the early entry into force of the
Convention and appeals to all States to heed the call of the
international community against these inhumane weapons.
South Africa has often expressed grave concern at the
involvement of its nationals in mercenary activities, because
these activities inhibit the achievement of peaceful
solutions to internal conflicts and destabilize regions.
Consequently, we have drafted legislation to regulate the
rendering of military assistance by private individuals and
companies to foreign Governments and agencies.
The South African Government puts a high premium
on the promotion and protection of human rights as a
cornerstone of its foreign policy. As we approach the
fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and the thirtieth of the International Year
for Human Rights, we reaffirm our commitment to the
preeminent values of basic human dignity, values for
which we have fought and for which we must continue to
fight. Our peoples deserve no less. In this context, my
delegation supports the recommendation to convene a
world conference on racism and racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance.
My Government remains committed to addressing
gender inequities. The worst manifestations of these
unequal gender relations are the acts of violence
committed against women and girls. My Government has
pledged itself to preventing and combating this violence
by, among other initiatives, aligning its legislation,
policies and strategies with international instruments such
as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women.
South Africa believes in the strengthening of the role
of the United Nations in the promotion of international
cooperation for economic and social development. To this
end, we welcome those measures in the Secretary-
General’s proposed reform package which seek to
strengthen the capacity of the United Nations and to
revitalize its role in the context of development.
The adoption of the Agenda for Development by the
General Assembly was a milestone in our collective
search for a meaningful global partnership for
development. That the membership could reach agreement
on so complex a matter is testimony to the seriousness
with which States view the issue, and to the dynamics of
consensus-building in fostering a global partnership.
Member States should act to implement the Agenda for
Development in a coordinated manner, by creating
dynamic structures susceptible of successful delivery.
South Africa remains committed to an action-
orientated Agenda for Development which gives priority
to international cooperation for development. Partnerships
15


for development, as envisaged also in the Midrand
Ministerial Declaration and Partnership for Growth and
Development, should be established to ensure effective
delivery of assistance to the developing world.
The problems of abject poverty and social deprivation
continue to afflict and haunt many countries, particularly in
the developing world. In order to address this scourge,
which affects least-developed countries in particular,
effective and consistent measures need to be undertaken
within the context of the United Nations Decade for the
Eradication of Poverty.
The issue of external indebtedness continues to
frustrate the ability of the least-developed countries to
promote economic and social development. It is therefore
incumbent upon the international community to address and
find a solution to this problem as a matter of urgency.
One year after the conclusion of the mid-term review
of the United Nations New Agenda for the Development of
Africa in the 1990s, we need to take stock and review
progress to see if the requisite resource mobilization levels
are anywhere near being met and whether the central
development goals are in place. As with the mid-term
review of the New Agenda, this would enable the
international community to take urgent and practical action
on behalf of the African continent to eradicate poverty and
underdevelopment.
We in southern Africa, as a region whose potential for
development was hamstrung by the repressive policies of
apartheid, cannot but seek the promotion of our people
through cooperation. It follows therefore that we should be
committed to the transformation of our Southern African
Development Community into an institution which provides
a framework for the promotion of the imperatives of
reconstruction and development. This would enhance the
degree to which, individually and collectively, the region
offers a basis to ensure a better life for all our peoples.
The global partnership for sustainable development
will be enhanced through the transfer of essential and
environmentally sound technologies to developing States on
preferential and concessional terms. The financial resources
and mechanisms necessary for the implementation of
Agenda 21 are still inadequate. Developed countries should
honour their commitment to raise official development
assistance flows to the United Nations target of 0.7 per cent
of gross domestic product. Those few countries which have
achieved this objective are commended.
We encourage the promotion and sustainable
management of the global environment to ensure a higher
quality of life for all. The objective of sustainable
development should be the integration of environmental,
economic and social policies in order to meet basic
human needs and to manage the environment on a
sustainable basis.
The disappointing lack of consensus at the special
session of the General Assembly on the environment held
in June 1997 leaves considerable follow-up action to be
undertaken in order to accelerate the implementation of
Agenda 21. In this respect, the role and importance of the
United Nations Environment Programme as one of the
leading United Nations bodies in the field of the
environment should be strengthened.
We commend the decision to convene a special
session on drugs to deal effectively with the illicit
production, sale, demand, trafficking and distribution of
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances. The special
session will offer Member States an opportunity to join
their efforts to combat drug abuse and illicit trafficking.
South Africa strongly favours the early establishment
of a permanent, independent and effective international
criminal court. An opportunity now exists to establish the
court before the turn of the century. We must therefore
redouble our efforts during the forthcoming sessions of
the Preparatory Committee to ensure that the diplomatic
conference in Rome can complete its work successfully.
It is imperative that all Member States continue fully
to support the international criminal tribunals for Rwanda
and the former Yugoslavia. To this end, my Government,
in collaboration with the Parliamentarians for Global
Action, recently hosted an international workshop on
securing State cooperation and compliance with the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. Its purpose
was to review cooperation with the Rwanda Tribunal and
encourage the enactment of domestic legislation by
Member States, thus ensuring that those accused of acts
of genocide are swiftly brought to trial.
My Government welcomes efforts to elaborate a
draft convention to define terrorism. It is our belief that
acts of terrorism must be clearly distinguished from
national liberation struggles in pursuit of the right to self-
determination by peoples subjected to foreign or colonial
domination.
16


I should like to take this opportunity to announce to
the Assembly that on 20 August 1997, the South African
Cabinet approved ratification of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea. South Africa, a country
with considerable maritime interests, will, for its part,
continue to play a meaningful and constructive role in the
governance of the world’s oceans.
The continuing financial crisis of the Organization is
of great concern to my delegation. We fully support the
Secretary-General’s commitment to ending the long and
persistent near-bankruptcy of the Organization. It behoves
Member States to discharge their Charter obligation by
paying their contributions in full, on time and without
conditions.
The lofty ideals that brought us together should
continue to serve as an inspiration for us to strengthen the
authority and capacity of the United Nations as we move
into the next millennium.





﻿Please allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the General Assembly at
its current session. I believe your wisdom and experience
will enable you to accomplish your lofty mission with
distinction. At the same time, I would like to express my
appreciation to Mr. Razali Ismail for his contribution as
President of the General Assembly at its last session.
This year, 1997, is no ordinary year for China. Last
February, when Deng Xiaoping, the chief architect of
China’s reform and opening-up, passed away, the 1.2
billion Chinese people were immersed in deep sorrow.
Turning grief into strength, we are determined to heed his
behest by deepening reform, opening the country still wider
to the outside world, stepping up national development and
promoting the cause of world peace. Here, on behalf of the
Chinese Government and people, I would like once again
to thank the United Nations and its Member States for the
sincere condolences they expressed on the passing of Deng
Xiaoping. Your kind words gave us strength at our time of
bereavement.
Just a few days ago, the Fifteenth National Congress
of the Communist Party of China came to a triumphant
conclusion in Beijing. This Congress, holding high the great
banner of Deng Xiaoping theory, charts the future course of
China’s development with a blueprint and displays the
resolve to carry forward the cause of building socialism
with Chinese characteristics well into the twenty-first
century.
On 1 July of this year, China resumed its exercise of
sovereignty over Hong Kong, which wiped out our national
humiliation of one and a half centuries and opened up a
new chapter in our peaceful reunification. During the more
than two months since its return, Hong Kong has enjoyed
social stability and economic prosperity, which fills the
people of Hong Kong, of China and of the world at large
with great joy.
The realization of Deng Xiaoping’s concept of “one
country, two systems” in Hong Kong carries profound
significance. Firmly adhering to this concept, we will
keep up the peaceful reunification of our motherland by
ensuring a smooth return of Macao and eventually
resolving the Taiwan question. Taiwan is an inalienable
part of Chinese territory, and the Taiwan question is
purely an internal affair of China. Any country that
attempts to use the Taiwan question to put pressure on
China or even clamours for “two Chinas” or “one China,
one Taiwan” has acted in total contravention of the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and
the relevant General Assembly resolutions. Such
behaviour will be absolutely unacceptable to the Chinese
people, as well as to all the countries upholding justice in
the world.
As the international situation continues to undergo
profound changes, peace and development have become
the main themes of our times. The world is evolving
towards multipolarity with growing diversity in countries’
political, economic and cultural lives. This trend has
become an irresistible tide of history.
The two world wars in the first half of the twentieth
century plunged mankind into unprecedented havoc. And
the cold war, which lasted for more than four decades in
the latter half of our century, kept humanity in the dark
shadow of war. Reviewing the past and looking to the
future, people throughout the world are anxiously waiting
for the establishment of a just and equitable new
international political and economic order, and they are
hoping to see lasting peace and prosperity for all in the
coming century.
The cold-war security regime that featured military
alliances and the arms race is, as has been proved,
incapable of making peace. Expanding military blocs and
enhancing military alliances under new circumstances can
do little to bring about greater security. Relations between
States should be based on the five principles of mutual
respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual
non-aggression, non-interference in each other’s internal
affairs, equality and mutual benefit and peaceful
coexistence. Each country has the right to choose a road
of development according to its own national conditions,
and no country should interfere in the internal affairs of
other countries on whatever grounds. This must serve as
the political prerequisite for global and regional security.
16


All countries should increase their mutually beneficial
cooperation in the economic field, eliminate unequal
practices in trade and economic relations, and do away with
discriminatory policies with a view to gradually narrowing
the gap between the rich and the poor and achieving
common prosperity. This should serve as the economic
foundation for global and regional security.
All countries should step up consultation and
cooperation in the security field, increase mutual
understanding and trust, and undertake to settle through
peaceful means, whatever differences and disputes they may
have. This is the practical way to achieve global and
regional security.
In the first half of the year, five countries — China,
Russia, Kazakhstan, Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan — signed
the agreement on mutual reduction of military forces in the
border areas; the four-party talks aimed at bringing about a
new peace mechanism on the Korean peninsula were
launched; and the Regional Forum of the Association of
South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) introduced a
preliminary form of cooperation on security issues featuring
equal participation and negotiated consensus. These are
some of the examples of searching for new models of
security cooperation and of the initial progress already
made.
We feel concerned about the recent setbacks in the
Middle East peace process. We are of the view that the
relevant United Nations resolutions should be complied
with, agreements reached among the parties concerned in
the peace process should be honoured, the principle of land
for peace should be adhered to, and terrorist activities
should stop. We hope that the parties concerned will work
together on that basis so that the Madrid Peace Conference
on peace in the Middle East will resume at an early date.
We are also deeply concerned about the incessant conflicts
and turmoil which have plagued Africa since the beginning
of this year, and wish the African countries steady progress
along the road of peace and development.
The past year has seen new progress in the field of
international arms control and disarmament. The Chemical
Weapons Convention has entered into force; the Preparatory
Committee of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
has started its work; the extent of nuclear-weapon-free
zones is increasing; and negotiations on the efficacy of the
Biological Weapons Convention have made further
headway.
In our view, no one should try to monopolize the
market in the name of preventing proliferation or try to
interfere in the economic and technological cooperation of
other countries, developing countries in particular. An
overhaul of the discriminatory and exclusive
non-proliferation regimes and arrangements is thus
necessary, on the basis of universal participation, and the
United Nations should see to it that it accomplishes
something in this regard.
We maintain that continued efforts should be made
to advance the process of multilateral arms control and
disarmament. The universality of international arms-
control treaties should be strengthened and complete
adherence to them ensured. Instead of weakening and
undermining security, arms-control and disarmament
efforts should reinforce it. The target of disarmament
should not be shifted to developing countries, as countries
with the largest and most sophisticated arsenals bear a
special responsibility for disarmament.
I would also like to draw the Assembly’s attention
to China’s recent announcement of a unilateral step of
disarmament — that is, having reduced its troop strength
by 1 million in the 1980s, China will further reduce its
military by 500,000 troops within the next three years.
This is a move of major significance in the field of
disarmament.
In the past year, the overall situation of the world
economy has been good. Economic links and mutual
penetration among countries and regions are on the
constant increase. The importance of international
cooperation should be given a fresh evaluation with a
view to making it broader, closer and more fruitful.
Developing countries are most vulnerable to the
impact of adverse environmental conditions because of
their weak economic foundations. At present, the
international financial market is highly globalized and
very risky. We should work to stabilize the financial
market and ensure steady economic growth of the
developing countries.
The Uruguay Round agreements should be
implemented in a comprehensive, faithful and balanced
manner, and attempts to impose a linkage between
environmental or labour standards and trade must be
opposed.
Environment and development pose a common
challenge to mankind. The United Nations has held two
17


important conferences in the 1990s, setting forth a set of
guiding principles for the solution of the issue. We hope the
international community, developed countries in particular,
will honour its pledges to provide funds and transfer
technology to the developing countries so as to translate the
declaration of partnership into real action.
Many transboundary issues, such as poverty,
unemployment, refugees, drugs and crime, need to be
addressed through consultation by the international
community. The work of the United Nations in the social
field needs to be strengthened. All countries should, in
keeping with the principles of mutual respect, equality and
mutual benefit, endeavour to promote international
cooperation. They should get down to practical tasks, the
first of which is to help developing countries deal with their
most urgent difficulties. We hope that the special session of
the General Assembly on international drug control,
scheduled for next year, will yield positive results by
formulating a cross-century strategy for combating drug-
related crimes through strengthened international
cooperation along with effective measures of
implementation.
China will continue to support the United Nations in
its work in the social field and will make a greater
contribution to social progress around the world.
The realization of human rights is the common ideal
of mankind. All countries have made great efforts to this
end, with both achievements and lessons. We maintain that
the universality of human rights should be respected; yet
their realization must be integrated with the conditions of
each country. A review of United Nations practice over the
past 50 years and more shows that when countries or
regions do this they will enjoy social stability, economic
development and popular contentment. When they do not,
society will face disintegration, with people losing their
most basic human rights and freedoms, and gross violations
of human rights will even take place when chaos erupts as
a result of war.
We say it is quite natural for people to differ on the
human rights issue. The question is how to deal with these
differences. Which is the better approach: dialogue or
confrontation? I opt for dialogue. Only dialogue can
enhance mutual understanding and cooperation.
Confrontation, on the other hand, can only lead to further
estrangement and do nobody any good. We are pleased to
see that more and more countries are in favour of dialogue
in handling the human rights issue.
The Chinese Government attaches importance to
human rights and is dedicated to promoting and protecting
human rights of its people. Having repeatedly suffered
from foreign aggression in the past, the Chinese people
know full well how state sovereignty and territorial
integrity fundamentally guarantee the realization of their
human rights. We in China — taking upon ourselves the
task of feeding, clothing, sheltering and educating, and
providing travel facilities to, our 1.2 billion people —
know full well how vitally important our right to
subsistence and our right to development are. To enable
our people to lead a freer, happier and more democratic
life, we are focusing above all on the development of our
economy and on advancing democracy and our legal
system.
China will soon sign the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and is studying
earnestly the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights. We stand ready to work with other countries in a
continued effort to promote cooperation in the
international human rights field.
As the most important intergovernmental
organization in the world, the United Nations occupies an
irreplaceable position in international life. At the same
time, an evolving situation calls for reform of the United
Nations.
Last July, Secretary-General Kofi Annan submitted
an extensive report on the reform of the United Nations.
We appreciate his effort.
We are in favour of reforming the United Nations.
The purpose of such reform is to strengthen the role of
the United Nations and enhance its efficiency. Measures
taken in this regard must reflect the common interests of
all Member States and the results must be able to stand
the test of time. To this end, we offer the following
views.
United Nations reform is the shared cause of all
Member States. It should allow full play to democracy,
heed the voices of all sides and take into account the
interests of various parties. The reform plan should be
widely acceptable to Member States.
To enhance efficiency, an appropriate reduction of
personnel and expenditure is necessary. What is
important, however, is for the reform to put greater
emphasis on development issues with a view to
18


strengthening rather than weakening the United Nations role
in the promotion of economic and social development.
The reform should help preserve the diversity in the
United Nations, which is a microcosm of the diversity of
the world. Only when world diversity is recognized and
respected can different countries live in harmony and make
progress together.
The reform should stress practical results, place value
on quality, and progress in an incremental manner.
The enlargement of the Security Council should follow
the principle of equitable geographical distribution and
ensure a proper balance between developing and developed
countries. The Security Council will better perform the lofty
mission entrusted to it under the United Nations Charter
only when it becomes more broadly representative.
Payment of assessed dues is the bounden duty of
every Member State under the Charter of the United
Nations. We urge the countries concerned to pay off their
arrears without conditions and as early as possible in order
to put the United Nations on a sound financial basis for
normal operation.
Countries around the world need the United Nations.
So does the United Nations need their support.






﻿I congratulate
you, Mr. President, on assuming your responsible office.
Major decisions are to be taken at this session and I wish
you good fortune in your conduct of the proceedings.
I wish to thank Ambassador Razali for his
exceptional commitment. He has made us all aware of the
great responsibility we carry during this phase of reform.
The Secretary-General, through the impressive manner in
which he presented his reform proposals, has
re-emphasized that responsibility.
Nowhere else are we so acutely aware as at the
United Nations General Assembly that, regardless of our
origins or the colour of our skin, we have a common
destiny and that we all, North and South, the small
countries and the big countries, need one another.
Millions of people all over the world, especially our
youth, ask themselves whether we politicians and
delegates from 185 nations have drawn the right
conclusions from this; whether we can summon the
political will for joint action to improve their security, to
give them better opportunities in life, and to safeguard
their rights, or whether we will go on wasting and
destroying the natural sources of human life at their
10


expense. Those of us with adult children know how
sceptical their generation have become about the
capabilities of the governing class. That is good reason for
all of us to stop, think and take action, and to do so here
and now.
The world about which we are talking here today and
the world which we participate in shaping is not ours alone.
We have to preserve it for future generations as well. And
this we can achieve only through a united effort. For we are
only one world community that has to survive together.
There is only one boat for all, our vulnerable blue planet,
and there is only one common future, good or bad. That is
the reality we face as we cross over into the third
millennium and it is the reason why policies deriving from
a sense of responsibility are not utopian. Indeed, in our age
they are the only realistic approach.
The world organization’s programmes and funds, that
is to say, those of the United Nation’s Children’s Fund
(UNICEF), the United Nations Development Programme,
the United Nations Population Fund and the World Food
Programme, together dispense more than $4.6 billion a year
in the form of economic and social aid. That comes to
about 80 cents for every person on earth. By contrast, in
1994 the world’s Governments spent about $767 billion on
arms, which was roughly $134 per person. This gross
disproportion is intolerable.
I believe that we must all look beyond the rim of our
own national interests. There is no more time to lose. We
cannot simply come here, make and listen to speeches and
then return to business as usual for another 12 months. We
have a duty and responsibility to leave our children and
grandchildren a world which is worthy of humankind. And
that means doing something about it now, today. We must
protect the earth’s atmosphere by reducing greenhouse-gas
emissions. We must ban lethal anti-personnel landmines by
joining in the Ottawa process. We cannot accept that we
have hundreds of millions of anti-personnel landmines still
in place in the ground of many, many countries in this
world of ours.
We must halt the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, and we must streamline the United Nations
Organization. But above all, we must pay our contributions
on time and in full. These are the criteria which show
whether we are living up to our responsibility.
The opportunity for effective action is there. Despite
carping criticism, international cooperation within the
United Nations framework is working. Malnutrition and
undernourishment have been reduced by a third since
1960 and illiteracy by 50 per cent. Most of the credit for
this, no doubt, goes to the United Nations. Infant
mortality has been halved in the same period — a great
achievement by UNICEF.
Between 1990 and 1995 the world population
increased by 1.48 per cent, considerably less than the 1.72
per cent growth between 1985 and 1990. This nourishes
the hope that we have got over the hump of the
population explosion. Again, this is a big achievement
largely attributable to the work of the United Nations
Population Fund.
Much, I am pleased to note, has also been done to
improve the situation of women. This is important
because with all the tremendous social challenges we
face, the success of our efforts depends heavily on them.
They are the natural advocates of future generations. That
is why one of our main objectives still is to ensure they
have equal rights, not only on paper but also in practice.
The World Conference on Human Rights in Vienna,
the Earth Summit in Rio, the International Conference on
Population and Development in Cairo, the Summit for
Social Development in Copenhagen and the World
Conference on Women in Beijing have demonstrated that
the strategies for creating a better and more equitable
world are in place. What is missing is the political will to
put them into effect. We must learn to give common
interests priority over national interests.
We must start to think not only of the present but of
the future as well. The first step — and I think it cannot
be underlined enough — is to reform and strengthen the
Organization which embodies all these objectives: the
United Nations, our United Nations.
There has been enough talk. Time is running out. At
this fifty-second session, the General Assembly must
make decisions. The backlog of reforms must be dealt
with during this session.
True, Governments and politicians don’t possess a
magic wand with which to put the world in order. And I
readily admit, as a politician, that it is disappointing to
discover how relatively little we ourselves can change,
even in high positions, and I take it that it is the same
with the others present here. But that does not absolve us
from the responsibility to do everything in our power to
bring about necessary change and progress.
11


There is more than enough to be done. The world is
still profoundly unjust. From the moment of their birth,
millions of people have hardly any chance of leading a life
in conditions worthy of the human race. According to
UNICEF, more than 20 million children all over the world
are on the move. About 300,000 children were killed in the
Rwanda massacres. As a result of the 17-year-old war in
Afghanistan, another 280,000 or so have died from
undernourishment and disease. The civil war in Cambodia
has made some 350,000 children orphans. Every 90 minutes
a child is maimed by a landmine.
Yet it is on our children, the weakest members of any
society, be it in the North or the South of our planet, that
the world’s future and hopes depend. They are the weakest
members of any society. They are little people who need
big rights. How much worse off would they be if there
were no United Nations? What would become of the
world’s conscience? Who would demand consideration for
and solidarity with such children if we allowed this
Organization to decline?
At this moment about 25,000 soldiers, civilians and
members of non-governmental organizations are serving the
cause of peace around the globe. All of them deserve our
thanks and appreciation.
A week ago today five Germans, including the Deputy
of the High Representative, Ambassador Gerd Wagner, five
Americans, a Briton and a Pole lost their lives in a tragic
accident. We mourn their loss and share the grief of their
families. Their deaths are an admonition to redouble our
efforts for peace. They wanted to help people in need and
in doing so brought a ray of hope to Bosnia and to the
people working on the ground. That hope must not be
extinguished.
Last Saturday I attended the memorial service in
Sarajevo. I have visited the region more than once, and the
inner conflict among the people was again obvious. As
before, the main obstacles to lasting peace in the region are
hatred and fear among the various ethnic groups. On the
other hand, most Bosnians, in spite of the terrible events of
recent years, realize there is no future for them and their
children if the hatred and fear are not overcome, despite all
the terrible things that have been done, despite the rapes
and the “ethnic cleansing”.
That is why I am speaking out here today — to appeal
to all political leaders in Bosnia to change their attitude and
to mount a reconciliation campaign. The international
community has provided assistance, making millions of
dollars available. We have done a lot. We are very
committed on the ground, and we want to see the results
of what we have done. We believe that those who live in
security and peace have an obligation to help others.
So far more than 300 troops have sacrificed their
lives for the cause of peace in Bosnia. My country
alone — Germany — has spent more than 17 billion
marks on the peace process and on the more than 350,000
asylum-seekers in Germany coming from Kosovo. That is
a lot of money, and those on whom we spend it will have
to react in some way and have to give us a clear sign of
their willingness to implement the agreements.
But outside help, including military support, cannot
be provided indefinitely. And on no account — I want to
be unequivocal about this — will it be given to those who
thwart peace and reconciliation. Attempts to undermine
peace, to incite the people and to torpedo the
implementation of the Dayton Agreement, especially in
Republika Srpska — must stop.
I appeal to all political factions in the region to use
what time remains to launch a new and serious attempt to
settle their differences and to see to it that Karadzic and
other alleged war criminals and enemies of peace are
brought before the Hague Tribunal. These people must
not be allowed to sleep peacefully. But this demand must
be made by the international community, not just
Germany: these people must not be allowed to sleep
peacefully.
We Europeans have done quite a lot this year to
improve the situation on our continent in order to secure
a peaceful future for coming generations. Nations that
belong together are now growing together, and that in a
region that for centuries was divided and at war with
itself. The European Union and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization are gradually opening up to Europe’s new
democracies, while Russia and Ukraine are forming a
new, close partnership with both organizations.
And let the world be prepared. In 1999 we
Europeans, right on schedule and in conformity with
binding stability criteria, will introduce the Euro, the
common European currency. The enlargement of the
European Union and the introduction of the Euro are
historic steps to safeguard the future for coming
generations, steps that hardly anyone would have thought
possible only 10 years ago. And mark my words: there
will be no going back in Europe.
12


At the same time, we are aware that Europe
constitutes only a small section of the much larger global
construction site. Everywhere the harbingers of the new era
are knocking on the door. Nothing is like it used to be, yet
the hopes and wishes of citizens everywhere have remained
the same. They want peace and work. They want a roof
over their heads, protection from crime, and schools for
their children.
Thus the aims and ideals enshrined in the Charter are
just as valid as they were in 1945: peace, sustainable
economic and social development, protection of human
rights and democracy. These aims form a whole, and there
is no order of preference.
Eighty per cent of United Nations activities focus on
world poverty, and rightly so, because this is the big
problem that has remained unsolved since the ending of the
East-West confrontation. Nearly a quarter of the world’s
population — 1.3 billion people — live in poverty, while
840 million suffer from chronic undernourishment. In the
Agenda for Development we have adopted the right course
for the fight against poverty: good governance, market
economy, the rule of law, security for the citizen, regional
cooperation and international integration.
Following the lead of the Association of South-East
Asian Nations countries (ASEAN), the Southern Cone
Common Market (MERCOSUR) and the now-expanding
Southern African Development Community (SADC), the
nations of Central America too are forming closer ties. It is
becoming more and more apparent that this is the path of
progress. The worldwide trend towards closer multilateral
cooperation is increasing, and will lead to progress, security
and prosperity; it is the path of the future. One the one
hand, the Information Age with undreamed-of possibilities,
and, on the other, exclusive communities and citizens
without rights — this does not add up.
Yes, globalization is a great leveller. Basically, it
confronts industrial and developing countries alike with the
same question: are we going to accept the challenge of
being part of a “single world market”, or are we going to
mark time? A good number of newly industrialized and
developing countries have chosen the way forward, and it
has proved to be the right one. They have received the bulk
of global direct investment, which in 1996 increased by 8
per cent to almost $350 billion. Nor have the others been
forgotten. Within the framework of the G-8 process, the
new global partnership for development was established on
their behalf. A beginning was made at the Denver summit
in June, focusing particularly on the sub-Saharan nations
of Africa.
Since 1978 Germany has cancelled debts incurred by
the least developed countries and other land-locked
developing countries in Africa amounting to more than 9
billion marks. These countries will continue to be the
focal point of our development cooperation. Between
1991 and 1995 Germany made available 16.3 billion
marks for Africa’s sub-Saharan nations, and we are proud
of that.
I am glad that the Security Council is holding a
special meeting tomorrow on the situation in Africa.
Many positive developments have taken place there in
recent years, a fact that is often overlooked.
But light and shadow are still very close together. I
need only mention Congo Brazzaville, Sierra Leone,
Somalia and especially the Great Lakes region. My
country, the Federal Republic of Germany, has played a
humanitarian and political role in all these conflicts, and
we recognize that the African States themselves — in the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and in the
subregional organizations — are making significant
efforts to settle these conflicts. We must keep on
supporting them.
But Africa’s real problems lie deeper, in the social
and economic sphere, and in the lack of cohesion among
the different population groups. In my view, Europe’s
vast and important neighbouring continent, which has a
population of about 800 million covers about 23 per cent
of the world’s land surface, has little chance of achieving
stability and economic progress unless it follows the path
of regional cooperation. Such cooperation brings stability
where nations are too weak to achieve it individually.
Southern Africa is a good example. At the 1994
Berlin conference, cooperation between the SADC and the
European Union was raised to a new level. At our
meeting in June we and our African colleagues redefined
the framework for the dialogue between the European
Union and the OAU. Europe will stay on Africa’s side.
Part of this support is that we are helping countries
like Angola and Mozambique to rid themselves of the
scourge of mines. So far mine clearance by hand has
been, at least to me, like trying to remove a sand-dune
with a thimble. We cannot accept that. What we need for
this task is safe, large-capacity machinery.
13


The Oslo Conference gave rise to a sign of hope.
Eighty countries have put their names to a comprehensive
and verifiable ban on anti-personnel mines. I wish to thank
the Secretary-General for his personal efforts on this issue.
Anyone who, like me, has seen the poor, crippled victims
in Cambodia, Mozambique or Bosnia knows that these
treacherous killing devices are wholly — I repeat,
wholly — immoral. I therefore appeal to all countries still
on the outside to join the Ottawa process and help us ban
these infernal devices from the face of the Earth.
The world, galvanized by the spirit of freedom, has
been totally transformed. But this new freedom and its by-
products constitute a major test for us all, not only as
regards competitiveness but also as regards our solidarity,
our ability to show tolerance and to work together, and the
opening of markets.
The East-West conflict has been consigned to the past.
Here too, the question now is: are we going to try and
safeguard the future for posterity, or are we going to allow
new enemy stereotypes to divide us once again? There must
be no clash of civilizations. Hence, the dialogue of
civilizations and world religions must be raised to a new
level. To me this is the spiritual challenge as we approach
the twenty-first century, for only thus can we bring
different standpoints closer together and mobilize the
energies needed for the joint resolution of humanity’s
colossal problems.
I suggest that we hold a forum here at the United
Nations to consider how we can generate new momentum
for this dialogue worldwide. The matter is important
enough. Considerable cultural energy and potential for
innovation lie unused, and the United Nations is the proper
catalyst for their development.
But we must be very clear that there cannot and
should not be dialogue with terrorists. Terrorism has again
raised its ugly head in Mostar, Jerusalem and Cairo. The
vileness of the latest carnage in Algeria would be difficult
to exceed: it really does take your breath away. How long
can the international community look away? I know how
difficult it is to help from the outside, but the world
community cannot accept the cruel killing of utterly
innocent people in the dark of night without standing up
and reacting. We are not powerless in the face of such evil
slaughter of mostly uninvolved persons. In Denver, the
Group of Eight called upon all nations to sign the
international conventions on terrorism. We must resolutely
combat terrorism all over the world, using all democratic
means at our disposal. I call upon the General Assembly to
complete by the end of this session the negotiations on a
convention against terrorist bomb attacks, as proposed by
the Group of Eight.
Extradition or suitable punishment remains the
principle underlying our efforts to combat terrorism. No
one should give refuge to terrorists. We need a united
global front against terrorism. To combat fanatical killers
we can only consistently apply the law as well as police
and judicial measures. The source of sympathy for
terrorist objectives must be withered by political means.
In other words, we must get to the roots, which in most
cases are social problems.
On my last visit to the Middle East I spoke with
many citizens in Jerusalem, Bethlehem and Hebron, and
in the refugee camps in Gaza. I sensed their fears and
concerns. Those who have seen the wretched conditions
in the camps know that these people must be given a
chance to improve their lives. They need to be able to
hope again that the peace process is something from
which they will benefit, that the violence will stop, that
they can find work and have enough to eat, and that their
children can go to school.
For these hopes to materialize, both sides must show
a large measure of good will. President Arafat must do
everything in his power to stop the terrorism. And the
Israeli Government must desist from any measures which
cause the Palestinians to doubt Israel’s commitment to
peace. The settlements issue remains the crucial test here;
at least, that is what I believe. Continuing to build in Har
Homa only makes matters worse, so a moratorium is
essential. To my mind, this is the only way to reopen the
door to peace talks.
As for Iran, the new Government has changed its
tone. It remains to be seen whether this will lead to a
new, constructive policy, especially with regard to the
Middle East peace process, human rights and international
law. Germany has always maintained close and friendly
relations with the Iranian people, and in spite of all that
has happened, in spite of the Mykonos affair, we are
ready for talks. It is up to the Iranian Government to
provide the basis on which these can take place.
We are pleased that Mrs. Robinson has taken up her
post as the new High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Nowhere is the need for a new culture of dialogue so
great, we believe, as in the process of protecting such
rights. This is crucial to world peace and global
development. Any society that fails to respect human
14


rights, which include the right of development, is blocking
its own progress. Our policy on this matter is based on
dialogue and respect for different cultures. But we also
agree with Pope John Paul II, who has said that if we want
peace we must respect the conscience of the people. No
civilization or religion denies people their rights or
approves of murder and torture. Nor can any such action be
justified on political grounds.
We need an international criminal court of justice. The
statute of such a court is to be drawn up in Rome next
summer. The court must be empowered to act of its own
accord where genocide, crimes against humanity, war
crimes and wars of aggression are concerned, and to do so
wherever national courts either do not exist or cannot or are
unwilling to prosecute such crimes. The terrible genocides
in Rwanda and Srbrenica are warning signs. Such cardinal
crimes should not go unpunished.
Our responsibility towards future generations is
particularly acute where protection of the natural sources of
life is concerned. That is why it is crucial to maintain the
spirit engendered by the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development, the Rio Summit. That is the
purpose of the environment initiative put forward by
Chancellor Kohl together with Brazil, South Africa and
Singapore.
The climate conference to be held in Kyoto in
December will be a major test of the industrial world’s
commitment to the environment. Germany intends to reduce
its greenhouse-gas emissions by 25 per cent by the year
2010, based on 1990 levels. We and our partners in the
European Union are asking the other industrial countries to
cut theirs by at least 15 per cent. That would go part of the
way towards meeting our responsibility towards posterity.
When we look at the air pollution in southern Asia,
we cannot fail to admit that we urgently need to agree on
a forest convention. We must put an end to the ruthless
burning of forests to clear vast areas of land. Those who
deplete and destroy their own natural resources will make
us all lose out in the end. The eleventh hour is approaching.
Two weeks from now the decision on where to locate
the secretariat of the Convention to Combat Desertification
will be taken in Rome. We ask members to vote for Bonn.
Since the secretariat of the Framework Convention on
Climate Change already has its headquarters there, it makes
sense to combine the two.
The General Assembly is at a crossroads. Either we
solve our reform problems now and come out of our
introspective shell, or the United Nations will lose
political standing — that is what would happen. All
regional organizations, industrial, developing and
non-aligned countries have a joint responsibility for
implementing the reforms we have been talking about for
so long. This applies to all areas of United Nations
activity: economic and social, Security Council and
finance.
The Secretary-General has submitted a bold package
of reforms. Even though we do not agree with every
detail, we support the package as a whole. I appeal to all
Member States: let us not talk it to shreds, but make
quick decisions so that the necessary measures can be put
into effect. The United Nations has to be streamlined in
order to increase its efficiency. Whatever savings are
made through reform should be used for developments-
assistance purposes.
The Security Council must reflect today’s political
realities, one of which is the greater status of Africa,
Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean. The debate on
this matter should not be artificially prolonged. This the
most important body of the United Nations, and it cannot
credibly and effectively perform its role as the guardian
of peace in the twenty-first century if its composition
remains basically as it was in 1945.
It is gratifying to note that a large number of States
regard the reunited Germany as a suitable candidate for a
permanent seat on the Security Council. If elected, we
will be able to make a good contribution, one that is in
keeping with the spirit of the Charter.
Two years ago, on the Organization’s fiftieth
birthday, we solemnly pledged to hand on to the next
millennium a United Nations equipped and funded for its
task. That promise has to be kept, and it has to be kept by
all. This means, first and foremost, paying our
contributions in full and on time, because without
finances this Organization is a powerless one. The
European Union has submitted its proposal for changing
the scale of assessments, the purpose of which is to
ensure a fair distribution of burdens.
Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights reads,
“All human beings are born free and
equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed
15


with reason and conscience and should act
towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.”
This vision must be sustained: the vision of a world in
which it is not the law of the strongest, but the strength of
the law which prevails; a world in which both the strong
and the weak feel at home; a world fit to live in which we
can safely leave to our children and to our grandchildren.






﻿May I first say, Sir, how pleased my country is at your
election as President of the fifty-second session of the
United Nations General Assembly. I should also like to say
to the Secretary-General that France welcomes the action he
has already taken and assure him that he has our support
and confidence.
I shall begin my statement by expressing a conviction
on behalf of my country: the world needs the United
Nations more than ever. No, the United Nations did not
lose its raison d'être with the end of the cold war, the end
of the arms race between the two blocs and the head-on
clash of differing ideologies.
On the contrary, the need for a universal regulating
body has never been so apparent. The reasons are known to
all. Without regret, we left the era of bipolar confrontation
to enter, in 1991, a new, global, evolving world in which
185 States cooperate, make alliances with one another or
compete in stable or, conversely, unstable combinations.
In this world, States are no longer the sole players. The
giant conglomerates, the financial markets, the media,
opinion groups and non-governmental organizations all
play an increasing role. Because of this, there is an
overriding need for clear, fair and predictable ground
rules to establish a framework for settling conflicts or
mere differences. For, nowadays, no serious problem can
be resolved by one country, even the most powerful,
entirely on its own.
Unless we take care, unless we manage to build a
world in which the rule of law prevails among all States,
a world in equilibrium between its major centres of
power, other scenarios will ensue: the absence of a
counterweight will encourage the predominance of a
single Power, and, inevitably, that Power will be tempted
to engage in unilateralism; for want of organized regional
entities, globalization will exacerbate the economic — and
sometimes political — struggle of each against all; States
will find themselves further weakened, and some will
implode under the effects of aggressive nationalism,
which is often contagious. Fierce competition will render
virtually impossible environmental conservation, however
urgent, however vital in the true meaning of the word, as
well as the fight against drugs and crime; greater respect
for human rights will be compromised.
Our common task must be to forestall such dangers
and, at the same time, to consolidate, together, the
achievements of recent years. For this, regional groupings
are one of the best possible foundations. Europe, which
has been the crucible of so many wars, has been showing
the way for half a century. The growth rates achieved by
many countries in Asia, in Latin America and now in
Africa, announce the emergence of new centres of power
and prosperity. Political and economic entities are being
organized and institutionalized: South-East Asia meets in
the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN);
in Latin America, the Southern Cone Common Market
(MERCOSUR) is developing, as are the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) in southern Africa and
the Economic Community of West African States
19


(ECOWAS) in the west of that continent. To some extent,
one might also include cultural and political entities, such
as the Commonwealth and la Francophonie. This is a
sensible way to adapt to globalization.
However, at the global level we need a coherent,
effective United Nations with the resources necessary to
carry out its missions. It is the task of this body to facilitate
the smooth organization of international relations and to
determine universally recognized rules of law. To be sure,
other organizations exist in various sectors, and these have
their own, very important areas of authority. But none of
them can take the place of the United Nations in giving the
world of tomorrow a set of comprehensive rules. True to its
tradition, France will support all the Organization's efforts
to that end.
I come now to the main object of the session which is
beginning. To carry out the major role we expect of it, the
United Nations must retain or reacquire the means to take
decisions and to act. For this, we must resolve two matters:
United Nations reform and the financing of the
Organization. The ability of the United Nations to act in the
years ahead will depend on the solutions we find together.
France approved of the move by the new Secretary-
General at the outset of his mandate to continue the study
initiated by his predecessor, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali.
The main lines Mr. Kofi Annan has proposed for the work
and the impetus he has given to the process of revamping
the Organization have received France’s full support, a
support shared by France’s partners in the European Union.
The remarks made from this rostrum by its current
President, the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Luxembourg,
illustrate this. I should like to comment more specifically
on three points: the Security Council, financial reform and
restructuring.
The current composition of the Security Council no
longer accurately reflects the political geography of today’s
world. Clearly, it has to be reformed — that is to say,
enlarged — to become more representative.
In this connection, we must take into account the
Security Council’s indispensable role in peacekeeping and
thus elect countries able to contribute to this task, whether
they are from the North or the South.
Accordingly, my country is in favour of the accession
of Germany, Japan and three countries from the South to
permanent seats and the establishment of new
non-permanent seats. For a Security Council composed
solely of the principal countries of the North would not
be representative. Nor should we forget that, once it is
enlarged, and hence more representative, the Council will
still have to be effective. That is essential.
The proposals that have been submitted to us should
make it possible to move forward. However, we are all
aware that no consensus has yet been reached and that
debates on this matter will be difficult. National interests
and the concerns of regional groups must be given due
consideration. In any event, I welcome President Razali’s
perseverance throughout the fifty-first session of the
United Nations General Assembly, which made it possible
to draft a solid working basis from which we must now
proceed to work to find a solution.
Furthermore, financial reform of the United Nations
is a particularly complex issue. It is shocking that the
United Nations should be in a precarious state and
therefore in a situation of financial and budgetary
dependence with respect to its debtors. I believe that we
will be able to move towards a solution on the basis of
three principles: what is owed to the United Nations must
be paid in full, on time and without conditions. Finally,
the payment of contributions should not be a way of
exerting pressure on the Secretary-General and the other
Member States.
With these rudimentary principles as a basis, France
is open to discussion on all aspects of the problem. We
will have to decide on the scale for apportioning
assessments among all States. There is no perfect scale,
but some are not as bad as others. The concept of each
State’s ability to pay, which has enjoyed consensus since
the outset, still seems simple, logical and fair today. On
that basis, a solution can be found that takes account of
the needs and interests of each State. France will do its
utmost to facilitate the settlement of the financial crisis.
We can be both imaginative and conciliatory — like the
European Union’s plan. But our efforts will succeed only
if there is respect for the rules I have just recalled, which
reflect our Organization's impartiality and credibility. If
the United Nations were forced to comply with the
unilateral demands of one among us, in regard both to its
financing and its functioning, then how could it convince
anyone in the future that it is impartial and faithful to the
principle of the equality of all under the Charter, and
generate respect for its decisions?
I come now to restructuring. The Secretary-General
has undertaken to restructure and regroup the
Organization’s institutions. France appreciates the logic of
20


this approach. It therefore welcomes the establishment in
Vienna of a centre to deal specifically with combating new
transnational dangers such as organized crime, drug
trafficking and terrorism, problems that we must fight with
ever-increased vigour. It is also very much in favour of
integrating the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the Centre for Human Rights into a single entity
in Geneva where the main humanitarian aid services are
already established. It also hopes that the main issues
involving disarmament can continue to be addressed in
Geneva.
From this rostrum, I applaud the appointment of
Mrs. Mary Robinson to the post of High Commissioner for
Human Rights. Her very strong personality is
commensurate with the challenges her task entails. The
commemoration of the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, starting on 10 December this
year, will provide an opportunity to reaffirm, in the face of
persistent violations and ever-recurring acts of barbarism,
the universality of these rights. But we will also have to ask
ourselves, in addition to making the usual declarations that
are still necessary, what political and economic actions are
needed to make real headway, in specific situations,
towards respect for human rights, and how the emergence
of democracies can be encouraged from outside.
The United Nations, while adapting, must remain the
preferred instrument for taking action in the interests of
peace. At this time, the United Nations is really the only
organization that can try to bring order to an international
society which is becoming fragmented and globalized at the
same time. The United Nations is faced with both a
resurgence of every kind of micro-nationalism and the
strengthening of regional entities. Most conflicts are now
not between States but within them. Given these new
challenges, the United Nations has already demonstrated
how adaptable and flexible it is. But we must continue. To
ensure the lasting settlement of conflicts, consciences have
to be assuaged and justice needs to be done to put an end
to the endless cycle of revenge. The perpetrators of the
most serious crimes must be tried impartially, with respect
for the rights of the defence, and after an exemplary
investigation which reveals the facts in full. This is why
France supports the action of the international criminal
tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, and hopes
that the forthcoming conference on an international criminal
court will be a success.
Since the beginning of the decade, the Organization’s
actions to promote peace and international stability have
changed radically. The time has passed when large-scale
peacekeeping operations were mounted solely under the
blue flag of the United Nations, in Cambodia and the
former Yugoslavia for example, in order to take on
massive challenges alone. Today, the United Nations
intervenes more and more frequently in conjunction with
other organizations or by authorizing the action of
regional actors. In Europe, the United Nations is pooling
its efforts with those of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization in sensitive theatres of operation, and even
with those of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe. In Africa, for the first time, the
Secretaries-General of the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) have in the past
year appointed a joint special representative in the person
of Ambassador Sahnoun, in the Great Lakes region. It is
good that these two organizations are working together.
This development must be encouraged. We must also help
African States and organizations to strengthen their own
peacekeeping capabilities. To this end, countries outside
the African continent must pool their efforts and not
multiply the number of rival and sometimes redundant
initiatives. For instance, the Government of France, the
United Kingdom and the United States recently agreed to
act together with all those who wish to do so to
strengthen the peacekeeping capabilities of African
countries, under the auspices of the United Nations, of
course, and in cooperation with the OAU.
But, in France's view, encouraging Africa to become
more involved in resolving crises certainly does not mean
that the international community should relinquish its
other responsibilities with regard to the African continent.
It is therefore essential that the United Nations be ready,
once the declared conditions are met, to act in Congo-
Brazzaville. By the same token, the many recent tragedies
in the Great Lakes region make sustained international
involvement indispensable. This United Nations
commitment to promote peace and development must also
serve to further human rights. That is why it is important
for the humanitarian investigative task force in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to be able to carry out
its mission. I might add that by spending too much time
talking about crises in Africa, one might forget the
essential point, namely that the African continent is taking
off in quite an unprecedented way. My country believes
in this.
We are all still mobilized by the situation in the
Middle East. The peace process, set in train on the
initiative of clear-sighted and courageous men on both
sides, raised tremendous hopes. We can clearly see the
increasingly tragic consequences to which the current
21


stalemate would lead, were it to last. The peoples of this
region are once again stuck in an impasse, in a situation of
humiliation, resentment, and the fear of terrorism. New
efforts are therefore necessary so that these two peoples,
Israeli and Palestinian, which are matched in terms of
insecurity and fear of the future, can together find justice
and security. France gave its full support to the action by
the American Secretary of State, who recently went to the
Middle East. Indeed, the United States has a special
responsibility and special means to attempt to reinvigorate
the peace process and effectively combat the deadly acts of
extremism. France and Europe are ready to take part in any
constructive move to this end.
What can the United Nations do? It cannot take the
place of the parties concerned, which have the primary
responsibility. It is up to the Organization to state, or
restate, the law and to recall the principles which must be
the basis for any peace if we want it to last. I refer here to
the resolutions adopted by the Security Council on the
conflict in the Middle East, not forgetting resolution 425
(1978), which deals with the integrity of Lebanon in
particular.
Many other crisis situations where the wounds have
not healed could be mentioned from this rostrum — so
diverse is the work of the United Nations. In particular, I
am thinking of the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
where security has been restored but where the construction
of a State with viable democratic institutions remains
uncertain; and of Albania, where the new stability, thanks
to resolute European action authorized by the United
Nations, is giving rise to new hopes. I am also thinking of
the tenacious efforts of the United Nations to contain or
defuse the crises in Haiti, Cyprus, Georgia, Afghanistan,
Tajikistan and elsewhere.
Finally, let us not forget, now or ever, much-needed
development assistance.
Of course, the insertion of emerging economies,
including the former underdeveloped economies, into the
global economy is an excellent thing; indeed, past efforts in
this regard have proved to be well founded. But this must
not be a selfish excuse for the rich countries to give up
their effort to provide development assistance, which is
equally necessary. In any event, this is very much an
imperative for the leaders of the member States of the
Francophone community. The summit of these States in
Hanoi in November will attest to their interest in more
balanced development and also to their commitment to
respecting the multiplicity of cultures and languages.
I will say no more, however — other than to draw
one single conclusion. While the world has changed so
much over the past 50 years, and even more over the past
six years, its inhabitants still voice the same needs. The
rule of law must be continually consolidated and the
democratic ideal put into practice, faced as we are with
the temptations of oppression and the use of force, for
which new pretexts are constantly being invoked. How
can we be sure that the factors that make for war and
chaos are banned for ever from all continents, including
Europe?
At this moment of our Organization's reform, let us
not forget the lessons of history. Only international
dialogue, the common management of crises, beginning
with their prevention, and the wise conservation of the
earth’s resources make it possible for the voice of reason
and peace to prevail and for confidence in progress to be
rebuilt. The United Nations is the right and the only
legitimate forum for such international discussions, and
the only one where they are universal. Our Organization
is an irreplaceable framework and a vital necessity for us
all. In the past, it has often been able to deter, address,
resolve and prevent. Let us reform it so as to make it
even more useful.






﻿We inhabit a modern
world in which we must accept change as the normal
condition of life. Communication around the globe is
becoming faster. The distance between our countries is
becoming shorter. I travelled to New York at twice the
speed of sound and I landed before I took off. Every word
I say to the Assembly today will be sent to London down
a telephone line and within minutes it will appear on the
World Wide Web.
Our countries today are intertwined as never before in
a market place that is global. And our people have learned
that their purchasing decisions have an impact on jobs and
pay across the planet — from the fruit they buy at the
supermarket to the fuel they use in their cars. Changes to
the environment in one continent can produce changes to
the weather in another continent. Our countries are
increasingly interdependent, and the challenges we each
face are global challenges — challenges that we must face
together: poverty, conflict, climate change, international
crime and the drugs menace. These are all international
problems that require us to behave as a united nations not
just in name but in reality.
And so the United Nations should have a bigger role
than ever before. If it appears to be less relevant, it is not
for want of challenge but for want of reform. The United
Nations must modernize. It must be able to confront the
new global challenges that all its Members face. It will
need flexibility, competence and efficiency to meet the
complex needs of the twenty-first century because the
United Nations cannot give leadership to a changing
world if we ourselves refuse to change.
The outstanding leadership shown by the Secretary-
General is an important start. His proposals for
institutional reform will retain what is best in the United
Nations system but give it the flexibility and the
efficiency it needs to respond rapidly to the new
challenges of a new century. The member countries of the
United Nations must support his commitment to
modernization. We must each stop measuring each
proposal for reform in terms of narrow self-interest and,
instead, recognize that we all have a greater interest in
supporting reform.
Britain’s Labour Government is firmly committed to
the United Nations. We demonstrated this commitment as
soon as we were elected by rejoining the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) and by confirming our intention to stay in the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
(UNIDO). We were elected because we offered Britain
modernization to succeed in a new century. We pledge
ourselves to back modernization of the United Nations.
We do so because we know that our country, like all
other Member States, will benefit from a United Nations
that is efficient, representative and properly funded.
Let me take each of those in turn. Efficient does not
spell cheap. But we do want to see the United Nations do
the most it can with what it has got — a United Nations
that no longer spends $150 million producing 2,500 tons
of documents every year. We thoroughly welcome the
Secretary-General’s commitment to reduce the number of
documents by 25 per cent by next year. We want to see
an end to the duplication between United Nations
agencies, and I give my wholehearted support to the
Secretary-General’s proposal for a Special Commission to
look at the division of labour right across the United
Nations system.
15


Another way in which the United Nations is out of
date is its Security Council. We are all agreed in this
Chamber that what was appropriate in 1945 is not what is
right in 1997. The world has changed. Most of the
countries represented here today did not even exist when
the United Nations was formed. The Security Council must
move on if it is not to lose its legitimacy. Japan and
Germany should both be included in an expanded
permanent membership, and there should be a new balance
between developed and developing countries in a
modernized Security Council. We are all agreed on the
need for change; we have been discussing it for four years.
It is time that we agreed that a proposal for change which
has the backing of the vast majority of Members is better
than a status quo which has the backing of none.
It is not just all the countries of the United Nations
that must be properly represented, but all the people of
those countries. More than half those people are women.
Britain welcomes the United Nations willingness to put
gender perspective into all areas of its work. The new
Labour Government attaches particular importance to
strengthening the rights of women. Women do more than
half the world’s work. They should have equal status in the
international organizations of the world.
Let us also put the United Nations finances on a sound
basis. Speaker after speaker yesterday referred to the need
for us to cooperate to defeat those who make fortunes from
organized crime and to contain the drugs trade, second only
in value to the oil trade. We cannot defeat those well-
resourced menaces to the modern world through a United
Nations that staggers from year to year on the verge of
bankruptcy.
We need a solution based on the ability to pay. The
most equitable means of sharing the burden is to base
contributions on share of global gross national product. But
that measure will only be accepted as equitable if it is
updated regularly to reflect the rapid changes to the world
economy. And it is not equitable that some Members pay
their contributions while other Members do not. Britain
pays in full and on time. Britain expects every Member
State, however large or however small, to do the same.
These three issues — institutional reform, Security
Council reform and financial reform — are critical to the
United Nations future. Let us commit ourselves to progress
on all these issues by the end of 1997 and solutions by this
time next year. Next time we meet, let us celebrate a
modern United Nations that can face the future with
confidence, rather than looking back on another year of
agreeing about all the questions but not being able to
agree on any of the answers. And then the United Nations
will be able to get on with its job.
There are three key areas in which the United
Nations has a vital job to do — promoting sustainable
development, promoting peace and promoting human
rights. Those are not separate challenges, but different
faces of the same challenge. There can be no real and
sustainable development or respect for human rights
without peace. And there will be no permanent peace
where there is only poverty and injustice.
During every speech this week another 300 children
will die before their first birthday, most of them deaths
that could be easily and cheaply prevented. If the United
Nations is to be relevant to its Members, then more than
anything else it must enable people to lift themselves out
of poverty.
Britain supports the United Nations aid target. As
Britain’s contribution to achieving it, the mew Labour
Governments has committed itself to reversing the decline
in the British aid budget. Britain has also consistently
urged faster action in tackling the problem of debt, and at
the Commonwealth Finance Ministers meeting in
Mauritius last week, British Chancellor Gordon Brown
launched a new initiative to cut debt that will benefit 300
million of the world’s poorest people and help developing
countries escape from the debt trap.
But aid will not alone eliminate poverty. We need to
continue breaking down the barriers that deny the poorest
countries access to the world’s most lucrative markets.
We need to make sure that producers in Africa are
allowed to sell their goods to Europe and to America as
easily as their producers can sell their goods to Africa.
Sustainable development will do more than just
reduce poverty. Poverty is also one of the greatest threats
to the environment. If we want to preserve the planet for
future generations, we must make sure that development
respects the environment and does not destroy it. The
United Nations Commission on Sustainable Development
has made important progress towards this goal. But it is
not a task any country can subcontract to the United
Nations. We are all in this together. No country can opt
out of global warming or fence in its own private climate.
We need common action to save our common
environment.
16


The new Labour Government has set itself the
ambitious target of reducing Britain’s emissions of
greenhouse gases by 20 per cent by the year 2010. At the
third session of the Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, in
Kyoto, the nations of the world must sign up to binding
targets and then they must keep to them.
The second key goal is peace — preventing conflicts
before they happen, helping to end them when they do
happen and helping to rebuild lasting peace after conflict.
Each of these contributions to peace is equally vital.
But it is the United Nations peacekeeping operations
that have the highest profile, and with good reason. The
blue berets have prevented worse conflict across the world,
from Eastern Slavonia to the Western Sahara. Many have
laid down their lives, not in the conduct of war but in the
pursuit of peace. The death of a dozen international
policemen and envoys, among them a British diplomat, in
the United Nations helicopter that crashed in Bosnia last
week, was a grim reminder of the risks we ask our peace-
builders to take. I pay tribute to their courage and salute
them for their professionalism and their skill.
The last area in which the United Nations must focus
is human rights. As the world becomes smaller, and news
and ideas travel faster, so the principle that certain rights
are universal becomes even more compelling. The
Universal Declaration of Human Rights sets out the right to
freedom from the fear of violence and the right to liberty
from the threat of unjust imprisonment. Those are rights to
which every citizen of the world irrespective of race, creed
or colour. They must not be limited to any one culture or
any one continent. As the Secretary-General has pointed out
Secretary-General has pointed out, the mothers from every
culture weep when their sons and daughters are killed or
maimed by repressive rule.
Nor do human rights hinder economic development.
The past two decades have demonstrated that political
freedom and economic development are not in conflict but
are mutually reinforcing. Free societies are efficient
economies. Authoritarian rule more often produces
economic stagnation. That is why Britain supports the
Secretary-General’s proposals to integrate human rights into
all the work that the United Nations does.
This is my first General Assembly. I attend it with
both hope and with anxiety — hope that, if it modernizes,
the United Nations can help us face the global challenges
of the future; anxiety that, without modernizing, the
United Nations will lose legitimacy and its effectiveness.
We must not let that happen. There are too many
children stunted by poverty, too many mothers fearful of
war, too many people whose basic human rights are being
abuse. The United Nations offers them hope. Let us
commit ourselves this week to achieving a modern,
reformed United Nations that will turn hope into reality.




﻿Mr. President, it is a particular
pleasure for me to see you presiding over the General
Assembly. As Ambassador to the former Soviet Union for
five years, I had a long association with Ukraine, and I
retain the fondest memories of my several visits to your
beautiful country. You preside over an Assembly that will
deliberate on crucial issues before the world community,
on which your experience and guidance will be
invaluable. I would also like to congratulate your
predecessor, Ambassador Razali Ismail, on the
engagement with which he acted during his presidency to
carry our work forward. I am delighted also to see the
Secretary-General here.
We are celebrating in India the fiftieth anniversary
of our emergence as a free nation. The constitutional
moorings and the democratic forms which the new nation-
State has accepted and adopted rest on the vast foundation
of civilizational experience and ethos. This explains the
stability, coherence and creative unity of the vast Indian
society, which is a world in itself. The experience has
wrought in us the deep conviction that, while there are
universally shared values and striving, there can be no
rigid prescriptions. We see the United Nations in this
image, as a crucible in which we meld together our
individual contributions to a world civilization, yet
6


recognizing the variety of historical and cultural experiences
we bring to it.
The cold war cast an early shadow on the
Organization, creating a situation of ideological
polarization. The Non-Aligned Movement rejected this
imposition of rigidity, representing an independent and
responsible alternative to the world view. This remains true,
and the Non-Aligned Movement retains its validity and
relevance, even after the disappearance of bloc rivalries.
Non-alignment was not a by-product of the cold war. Then,
it expressed the overwhelming need of previously colonized
and disempowered nations to a voice, a perspective and an
agenda in a politically and economically unequal and
inequitable world. Today, it remains a voice of reason and
constructive engagement for the times ahead, which demand
common purpose and contribution from all sides towards a
convergence of intent on vital, even fateful, global
concerns.
Since the creation of the Charter of the United
Nations, the world should have changed far more than it
has in the half century that has elapsed. Decolonization is
almost complete, but the scars of colonization are still with
us. The present bears a heavy burden of the past. South
Africa is free, but racism rears its ugly head amidst us,
often laced with xenophobia. Development and growth —
and even human dignity — remain for much of the world
a distant dream. We must insistently ask ourselves what we
can decisively do at the United Nations to make the dreams
of the hundreds of millions come true, how we can make
the United Nations a more vibrant organization for the
world community as a whole, at a time when we need it
more than we ever have, a United Nations that is better
equipped to fully respond to the challenges of the next
century.
As an organization, the United Nations must also
evolve and adapt itself to a rapidly changing environment,
the better to serve the core needs of the world community.
As a country which sets very great store on the capacity of
the United Nations to contribute to international peace and
security, and to development — the two crucial priorities
before the world community — India, like others, has a
vital interest in a United Nations that continually makes
itself more responsive to the needs of its Member States
and prepares itself to serve them better. This, we believe,
is the objective of reform. We are hence very pleased that
the Secretary-General, immediately after taking office,
made reform one of his priorities and we congratulate him
on this commitment. Within the first seven months of his
tenure, he has produced a series of proposals of impressive
breadth and scope. These are before us, and many have
described this session as a reform General Assembly. In
this connection, I extend my good wishes to you,
Mr. Secretary-General.
We judge the agenda for reform by the measures I
have described. We are supportive of all proposals that,
in our view, will carry forward, or improve, the
Secretariat’s ability to respond to the mandates of the
international community. We will express our thoughts
constructively with the aim of strengthening the process
and direction of reform to the collective advantage of the
global community and the Organization that represents it.
We do not see reform simply as an exercise to trim the
budget of the United Nations. Instead, reforms should
contribute towards strengthening the United Nations and
its capacity to respond effectively to the priorities
identified by the overwhelming majority of its
membership.
The crisis that confronts the United Nations
manifests itself in many ways. A financial crisis has
resulted from the inability of some to fulfil their Charter
commitments, and from the laying down of pre-conditions
to meet them. The United Nations does not have the
means to execute programmes that respond to the felt
needs and priorities of its membership, precisely at a time
when such programmes are sorely necessary. As a result,
the United Nations is in danger of being marginalized as
the global forum where decisions can be taken that truly
respond to the challenges of globalization. The solution
lies not in piecemeal reform but in building trust between
nations, and in an acceptance that in international
relations democratic principles should be the norm, just as
they are being increasingly accepted in national
governance.
In our view, international peace and security and
development are inextricably linked. The one is
impossible to achieve without the other. Over the last six
or seven years, there has been a growing emphasis on the
political aspects of the tasks of development, such as
democracy and human rights. Unless the underlying
causes of underdevelopment, poverty and social alienation
are effectively addressed and removed, this emphasis will
remain unrealized. Therefore, the single most important
target that the United Nations should set itself is the
promotion of sustained economic growth in the
developing countries that will lead to the eradication of
poverty, and erase the tensions and pressures that have
led to the collapse of governance and social order in
several States, and to conflicts between others.
7


International peace and stability will be enhanced only
when all countries enjoy a minimum standard of economic
self-sufficiency and well-being. Therefore, we believe that
the thrust of any reform proposals in the United Nations
should make the promotion of sustained economic
development the principal cross-sectoral issue for the
Secretariat’s programmes. We believe that there are enough
intergovernmental mandates to permit the Secretariat to
tailor programmes towards this end.
The universality of human rights, to which we all
committed ourselves almost five years ago at Vienna,
expresses itself at one level in the international norms for
the promotion and protection of human rights and our
collective efforts to foster respect for these standards. On a
higher plane, this universality stems from the search in
different civilizations for ways of protecting the human
dignity of every individual. Next year, as we celebrate the
fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, we will reflect on whether the ideals enshrined in
the Declaration have become a reality for people in all parts
of the world. As we do so, we must build confidence in a
process that encourages introspection and self-criticism,
dialogue and consultation, rather than confrontation and
judgement. The Declaration calls for the advent of a world
order in which human beings shall enjoy freedom of speech
and belief and freedom from fear and want as the highest
aspirations of the common people. It recognizes the
importance of economic, social and cultural rights as well
as their interdependence with civil and political rights. The
full realization of all these rights is what will give true
meaning to the quest for human dignity embodied in the
Universal Declaration.
India’s approach to the observance and promotion of
human rights is inspired by the holistic vision of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Indian
Constitution. A strong constitutional framework, mutually
reinforcing safeguards, both within and outside this
framework; a policy of transparency and responsiveness to
civil society; and cooperation with the human rights system
of the United Nations — in particular with the treaty
bodies — are the main elements of this approach in the
areas of civil and political rights. Equally important, if not
more so, are the assault on poverty and underdevelopment;
the promotion of awareness of rights; and a policy of
affirmative action for the uplifting of socially and
economically vulnerable sectors of society.
This is a complex task, especially in a country of
India’s diversity. Many times, when the State has faltered
civil society has stepped in. In India, as elsewhere,
individuals have wrought miracles by working outside the
established systems and going beyond traditional ways of
thinking. In recent times, the most moving example has
been that of a frail, sari-clad woman: Mother Teresa. Her
fathomless compassion and soothing touch will be missed
by millions in India. I would like to pay tribute to this
apostle of mercy who rendered service and brought hope
to millions of poor and suffering people, not only in India
but all over the world.
While development must be our supreme objective,
we also need peace, stability and security in order to
achieve it. The dangers that threaten us have become
increasingly more frightening during the last 50 years
than any that have cast their shadow over mankind in its
entire history. The development of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons has made it possible to destroy whole
populations. As the international community, we have
decided to outlaw the production, possession and use of
chemical and biological weapons.
However, with regard to the weapons of mass
destruction capable of the total annihilation of human
civilization, the global community has lived for too long
on a diet of empty promises. The pretexts cited in favour
of clinging to nuclear arsenals, while always questionable,
have now vanished. Mere non-proliferation treaties
promoted as disarmament measures only serve to entrench
a nuclear monopoly. No credible steps towards striving to
realize a nuclear-weapon-free world are contemplated,
much less taken, by those who should be showing the
way. No justifications can be proffered, as they were
during the cold war.
The patience of the world community — as
expressed by the International Court of Justice, by the
enlightened voices of those who formerly believed in
deterrence, by political and general opinion and by
weighty voluntary initiatives — is starting to wear thin.
Nuclear-weapon Powers owe it to the world to answer the
question why they need nuclear weapons. Global opinion
wants a nuclear weapons convention — as has already
been outlined for the class of biological and chemical
weapons — and will not rest until it is achieved. We
appeal to nuclear-weapon States to align their policies
with what the world wants. We see the United Nations as
the forum in which the international community must
continue to demand universal nuclear disarmament, and
we therefore expect that the Secretariat's programmes will
support this intergovernmental objective.
8


Under the Charter, the Security Council was
constituted as a body on which the general membership
conferred primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, acting on its behalf. In
recent years, the Security Council has been able to play a
more active role in discharging its responsibilities.
However, there is often a perception that the Council’s
actions have not always reflected the sentiments of the
general membership. Therefore, it is imperative — and the
time has come — for the Security Council to take on as
permanent members developing countries which are
equipped to make important contributions through their
world views and historical experiences and the values of
their civilizations. In this way the decisions of the Council
will truly reflect the wider membership of the United
Nations. Otherwise, the Council’s actions will be seen as
progressively less representative precisely at a time when it
is being called upon to act far more frequently than before
on behalf of the world community.
India has let it be known in the General Assembly
since 1994 that it is prepared to accept the responsibilities
of permanent membership. We are the largest democracy in
the world, with a civilization replete with ancient values
and achievements, as well as a world view based on a
universalist inspiration, participatory governance, respect for
diversity and pluralism, and a readiness for constructive
engagement in the world’s affairs. These strengths, we
believe, would be an asset to an expanded Security Council.
India’s standing as one of the leading economies of the
world will be progressively strengthened, and we are
prepared to bear fully the responsibilities of permanent
membership. India’s long-standing participation in United
Nations peacekeeping operations testifies not only to the
dedication and professionalism of Indian soldiers, but also
to the political will of the Government to actively
contribute to these operations.
The core of our foreign policy is our keenness to
pursue close ties and build confidence and cooperation with
our neighbours, while recognizing fully that we are the
largest country in the region, in terms not only of size and
population but also of economic capabilities. We extend our
hand of friendship not in a spirit of mere reciprocity but in
good faith. Where we do expect reciprocity, unrelated to
size and capacity, is in mutual respect for each other’s
territorial integrity and sovereignty. We seek to advance
cohesion, synergy and mutual goodwill in our
neighbourhood so that together we can fully participate in
and derive benefits from the dynamic changes the world is
currently witnessing. Our approach has contributed to the
setting in motion of a trend towards cooperation in our
region.
As a large and diverse economy, we are developing
new partnerships that go beyond the region and revitalize
the old cultural and commercial links. Politically, this is
expressed in the active interest that we have taken in
supporting the Middle East peace process — our ties with
the Arab world reaching deep into history — and our
strong fraternal ties with developing countries in general
and with Africa in particular. In our larger
neighbourhood, with which we have a shared history, we
have enhanced our engagement with the Association of
South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) as a full-dialogue
partner and as a participant in the ASEAN Regional
Forum.
While maintaining our traditional relationships with
the United States, Russia, the European Union and Japan,
we have also been strengthening global trends in regional
cooperation by actively promoting cooperation among
countries of the Indian Ocean rim and trying to recover
the cultural and commercial connectivities that have
existed since time immemorial and which were snapped
in the colonial era.
Global society is seeking to find an equilibrium
between the opposing pulls generated by the forces of
globalization, nationalism and sub-nationalism. Indeed, it
is difficult to see just how they can be balanced, yet they
must be or else the potential for international
conflagration will be immense. Hence, the absolute need
for extreme caution to prevent established nation States
from being destabilized either through too hasty a push
towards globalization or through the pull of sub-national
demands. We see this as a challenge which we will have
to face collectively as well as individually.
A global menace that threatens international peace,
and to which open democracies are particularly
vulnerable, is terrorism. It takes innocent lives
indiscriminately, brings fear into the lives of others and
shatters the peaceful existence and the normal growth of
entire communities. Terrorism should be anathema to the
international community because it is the antithesis of
every ideal that the United Nations Charter enshrines. Its
main vehicle is violence; its aim is destruction rather than
development; its doctrines are founded on intolerance;
and, in the means it uses and the effect it has, it destroys
human rights utterly.
9


Incitement to terrorism and complicity and
participation in terrorism across borders undermine the
international system. And even though very few societies
are free from its clutches, we still have not developed a
global strategy to defeat this evil. The resolve is absent. It
is important that we find it, not least because terrorism has
a global web, spanning all countries and continents and
quickly building links with the other global menace: drugs.
We in India see in our region just how deadly a poison this
mix of terrorism and drugs is. The United Nations should
take the lead in determined global action to root out these
scourges.
The protection and preservation of the environment is
an area to which all of us attach the highest importance.
The commitment to global partnership for preventing
further degradation of the environment, made at the Rio
Summit in 1992, was reiterated and the need for effective
implementation of Agenda 21 reaffirmed during the special
session of the General Assembly in June this year. All the
elements of Agenda 21 have to be implemented in full and
we need to accelerate the process of such implementation.
Any partial or non-comprehensive implementation will be
detrimental not only to international cooperation in this
area, but also to the threatened stability of the Earth’s
fragile environment. In this connection, it is our hope that
the spirit of the Convention on Climate Change and the
Berlin Mandate will be fully encompassed by the protocol
or legal instrument to emerge from the Kyoto Conference
to be held in December 1997.
What has been touched upon represents huge
challenges beyond the capacity of any country to face on its
own. This is why it is so vital for the United Nations, now
more than ever before, to be a forum where we can pool
creative ideas and lessons from our experience and to assist
us in understanding and coping with these challenges. This
is the ultimate rationale of reform. We will be ready to
work with other countries to rebuild the United Nations in
the image of our collective aspirations and as our trusted
instrument to meet the challenges of the approaching
century.
Addressing the General Assembly at its fifteenth
regular session, I recall India’s first Prime Minister,
Jawaharlal Nehru, saying here in 1960:
“The main purpose of the United Nations is to
build up a world without war, a world based on the
cooperation of nations and peoples. It is not merely a
world where war is kept in check for a balancing of
armed forces. It is much deeper than that. It is a world
from which the major causes of war have been
removed and social structures built up which further
peaceful cooperation within a nation as well as
between nations.” (Official Records of the General
Assembly, Fifteenth session, Plenary Meetings,
882nd meeting, para. 117)
It is in this spirit that we should approach the tasks
before us. I do hope and pray that, under your guidance,
Sir, and under the spirited leadership of the Secretary-
General, these objectives will be achieved.




﻿I would like to begin by
congratulating the President on his unanimous election to
preside over the fifty-second session of the General
Assembly of the United Nations. It is my hope that at this
session the Assembly will be successful in bringing nations
closer to each other and in finding ways to address the
challenges that face all countries and nations, north and
south, east and west.
I also wish to congratulate his predecessor,
Ambassador Razali Ismail of Malaysia, for the manner in
which he carried out his duties.
We mark this year the twentieth anniversary of the
peace initiative of the late Prime Minister of Israel,
Menachem Begin, and the late President of Egypt, Anwar
Sadat. Those leaders, with their historic decision and their
courageous leadership, pioneered the way towards the first
peace treaty between Israel and an Arab neighbour, Egypt.
Throughout their entire history, the people of Israel
have aspired to live in peace. Together with our constant
call for peace with our neighbours, we have not spared any
effort to seek, whether through direct or indirect contacts,
a partner in this effort. Today, too, we continue to seek
channels for dialogue and to build bridges to peace.
In recent years, since 1991, after the principles for
negotiating peace in the Middle East were laid down at
Madrid, we have achieved a number of important
advances with the establishment of full peace between
Israel and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and the
signing of interim accords with the Palestinians.
Nevertheless, the road to full peace is still long, and
negotiations with the Palestinians and with Syria and
Lebanon still lie ahead of us.
Immediately after the last elections, the Government
of Israel accepted the need to continue to advance the
Oslo accords and has acted to implement them. In the
past year we have spared no effort to implement those
accords, but, unfortunately, the trust that is the lifeblood
of the entire process has been undermined as a result of
the failure of the Palestinians to carry out their
commitments according to the agreements they have
signed.
In the past year, while pursuing these efforts, we
have endured many tests and have suffered ongoing
terrorist attacks and bloodshed. Our deep-rooted aspiration
for peace, security and tranquillity has been stained by the
shedding of innocent blood, by the murder of men,
women and children cut down by barbaric terrorist
attacks. Yet despite our deep sorrow and mourning over
the loss of those innocent lives, the hope for peace has
not been extinguished in the hearts of the citizens of
Israel.
The citizens of Israel have taken upon themselves
great risks for peace, but there is none among them who
is willing to continue to pay the bloody price that is being
demanded in the name of peace. We must break this
tragic and violent cycle. It is only through joint action in
confronting the terror that trust will be re-established and
the doubts regarding intentions be removed.
As I stated in my remarks at the fifty-first session of
this Assembly, all Israel is united in its deep desire for
peace and for a life of calm and security. In Israel, both
right and left are united in this quest.
If trust can be restored, if the principle of reciprocity
is honoured, it will be possible for us to proceed. We
have already proved our willingness to do so, through our
decisions and actions since taking office and in the
signing and implementation of the Hebron agreement in
all its aspects.
Peace cannot live side by side with continued
incitement, hostility, violence and terror. Peace means, in
essence, the unequivocal and irreversible abandonment of
25


violence. Dialogue, negotiation, compromise and the
honouring of agreements — those are the path to peace.
These principles apply throughout the world and must
apply also in the Middle East. The existence of two parallel
tracks, one on which negotiations are pursued while a
second track of violence, terror and bloodshed continues
unimpeded, is totally unacceptable. This is a direct
challenge and affront to the very concept of peace.
Terror does not suddenly erupt from nowhere. It is not
a spontaneous phenomenon. Too often we have seen
terrorist leaders and their organizations adopt the facade of
innocent and peaceful organizations, charitable and welfare
organizations, while under this cover they contribute to the
preparation and perpetration of vicious terrorist attacks.
Terror can be likened to a volcano ready to erupt at any
moment, whose boiling lava threatens to destroy all who lie
in its path.
Those who resort to terror are seeking not only to kill
Israelis but also to hurt their own brethren. Terror cannot be
accepted as a legitimate tool for resolving differences. It
must be rejected, absolutely and unequivocally, and it must
be fought unrelentingly. We will not agree to live under its
constant threat.
The words of the President of the United States and of
the Foreign Minister of Russia at this Assembly just a few
days ago are important and should guide us all in this
matter. I quote President Clinton when he spoke from this
very rostrum:
“terrorism is always a crime and never a justifiable
political act.” [See Official Records of the General
Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Plenary Meetings, 5th
meeting]
Thus, the international community bears the responsibility
for ensuring that terrorism enjoys no political support,
recognition or legitimacy, not even implicitly.
In the 1993 Oslo accords, the Palestinian Authority
and Arafat, its leader, undertook in the name of the
Palestinian people to fight terrorism. They reaffirmed this
commitment again in the 1995 Interim Agreement, again
one year ago at the Washington summit and again in the
Hebron agreement. Much to our consternation, it has been
proved that this commitment has not been upheld as
required, thus causing the present crisis of confidence.
Israel stands firmly upon its call to the Palestinian
Authority to fulfil its promise to fight relentlessly against
terror. The Authority must act jointly and in full
cooperation with us against terrorism and violence. We
seek neither to dictate nor to coerce. We seek merely the
implementation of signed agreements. The fight against
terror, in our humble opinion, is also in the Palestinian
interest.
In response to the repeated crises in the process
caused by the failure of the Palestinian Authority to live
up to its commitments, Israel proposes a binding code of
conduct for relations between us. This code should
include, first, the rejection of violence as a means for
achieving political goals; secondly, preservation of the
framework of direct negotiations and agreement to refrain
from attempts to transfer disputes and negotiations onto
the international stage; thirdly, the institutionalization of
permanent channels of communication, including in times
of crisis; fourthly, a cessation of incitement and the call
to violence and jihad, and their replacement with the
language of reconciliation and mutual respect; and, fifthly,
the advancement and encouragement of normalization and
support for regional activities.
The purpose of this code of conduct is to facilitate
uninterrupted negotiations and crisis management, and to
create an atmosphere of dialogue. This code must respond
to the sensitivities and needs of both sides. We believe
that the adoption of the above principles will allow us to
overcome the present crisis and help in preventing future
ones as the negotiations proceed. These rules of the game
will also contribute to renewed trust between the leaders
and greater confidence between the peoples.
In the wake of the visit to the Middle East of the
United States Secretary of State, renewed agreement has
been reached to continue the efforts at restoring the peace
process to its proper track. We have been conducting
intensive talks in recent days, with the assistance of the
United States, both in Washington and here, with a view
to resuming the negotiations and advancing our efforts to
reach a permanent settlement with the Palestinians.
Israel values and appreciates the action of the United
States Secretary of State and her commitment and efforts
to extricate the peace process from its current impasse, to
bring the parties closer together and to ensure the success
of the negotiations. We are fully committed to these
efforts.
26


Israel reaffirms its proposal to conduct accelerated
negotiations, according to an agreed timetable, on
permanent status. We propose conducting negotiations in
which the sides will agree upon the desired outcomes and
the way towards achieving them. This proposal is intended
to hasten the attainment of a peaceful settlement, not to
delay it. This is also our call and our proposal to the
Palestinian Authority.
The international community can play an important
role in facilitating the dialogue between the sides, which
will make it possible for us to resolve our differences
through direct negotiations. It is only through direct
negotiations that we can bring this process to a successful
conclusion. One-sided international declarations, dictates or
pressures will not help. Attempts to internationalize the
dispute and to transfer the arena of negotiations to the
United Nations and other international forums only serve to
create unnecessary obstacles and to make already
entrenched positions more rigid.
The comprehensive peace we yearn for will not be
achieved until we reach peace agreements with Syria and
Lebanon. It is imperative to reach understandings and
agreement that will enable us to renew negotiations and to
resolve all the matters at issue between us. We expect to
find in Syria and its leadership a partner in the search for
a just peace. If Syria has indeed made a strategic choice in
favour of peace — the “peace of the brave”, as claimed by
its leadership — then we must explore together every
possible avenue, at any place and at any time, for renewing
the talks between us.
Israel cannot accept the continued violence and terror
on its northern border. The terrorist activities of
organizations such as Hezbollah and the fear of Katyusha
rockets and attacks upon our cities and towns bear the
threat of ongoing regional tension and continued bloodshed.
There is no territorial dispute between Israel and Lebanon.
We wish to see a sovereign, free and independent Lebanon
acting determinedly against the terrorist organizations that
operate from its territory.
If we are to reach peace, we cannot make do only
with agreements and contracts. The reality of peace means
normalization, open borders, freedom of movement,
commerce and cooperation for the benefit of the entire
region. These are the soul and essence of peace.
Normalization is not a prize or a gift for Israel alone.
The decisions of the Foreign Ministers of the Arab
League at their recent meeting in Cairo, just over one week
ago, stand in direct contradiction to the aspirations for
peace and undermine its foundations. The attempts to
prevent normalization with Israel, to freeze the level of
existing relations with it, to close liaison and interests
offices between Israel and Arab neighbours and to
reactivate the Arab boycott add up, in practice, to a
boycott of peace itself. This is a destructive policy which
is reversing the process.
The ongoing and intentional freeze of the
multilateral talks also has a deleterious effect on the
entrenchment of peace. The multilateral talks were meant
and should serve as a platform and incentive for building
peace. We must promote the bilateral and multilateral
channels alike and not make one conditional upon the
other, nor create further obstacles and barriers on the road
to peace. The question mark hanging over the regional
economic conference scheduled to take place later this
year in Doha, Qatar, is further evidence of this negative
drive.
The countries of the Middle East that are party to
the peace effort have a common interest in regional
stability and the advancement of prosperity and well-
being for all the nations of the region. We face together
the growing shortage of water and the ever-expanding
desert. We are also facing dangers from within our region
that threaten to undermine the stability of the regimes of
various nations and to plunge the entire region into
violence, war and bloodshed.
It was only a few years ago that the entire world
was forced into forming a coalition to combat an
aggressive dictator who sought to conquer a neighbouring
country and to terrorize our entire region. Today, we face
new and even more extreme dangers, but the lessons of
recent experience have not been learned and many
countries turn a blind eye to the threat.
The leadership of Iran continues to speak in terms
that threaten the State of Israel and call for its destruction.
Yet the international community continues to remain deaf
and refuses to speak out against Iran's policies,
declarations and actions.
Iran's efforts, like those of Iraq, to acquire
operational weapons of mass destruction of all kinds
represent the greatest threat to security and stability in the
Middle East and beyond. The ramifications of Iran's
weapons programme extend far beyond the geographical
confines of our region. They threaten the security of other
27


members of the international community and their interests.
Israel reiterates its call to the members of the
international family of nations — and at their head the
United States, Russia and the members of the European
Union and of the Commonwealth of Independent States —
to exercise the full weight of their influence and to take
concrete steps to prevent this development, which
represents a threat to the existence of the State of Israel.
After the establishment, as we hope, of peace treaties
between Israel and every country of the region, it will be
possible to create a regional security system that would
provide multilateral and shared solutions to the range of
security problems in the Middle East, including a mutually
and effectively verifiable Middle East free of chemical,
biological and nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles. These
are our goals and we must act to achieve them.
Israel is an active and responsible member of the
family of nations represented in this body. However, 50
years after the United Nations adopted, on 29 November
1947, the resolution calling for the establishment of the
State of Israel, we are still denied our equal rights in this
Organization.
We attach great importance to the fundamental reform
of the United Nations work. We also share the opinion of
other United Nations Member countries that believe that the
Organization urgently requires greater efficiency and a
redirecting of its valuable but limited resources towards its
truly important tasks. At the same time, we are convinced
that no reform can be completed so long as the question of
Israel's membership of a regional group remains unresolved.
We call upon this Organization to correct this anomaly.
Much to our chagrin, in the last year we have seen an
intensification of the political campaign waged against
Israel at the United Nations. This campaign only impedes
the peace process and further undermines confidence
between the parties. We call upon the Member States to
refrain from lending their support to such resolutions. The
time has come for this Assembly to reduce the number of
resolutions on the Middle East that it adopts each year and
to contribute positively to creating an atmosphere conducive
to direct negotiations between the parties.
As part of Israel's international and regional
commitment and of its credo as a State, we are engaged in
cooperative programmes with many countries, with which
we share the experience and knowledge we have acquired
in various fields. Israel attaches great importance to its
international cooperation programme and to assisting
various peoples to address the challenges of development
and the hazards of nature, hunger and disease.
Over more than three decades, tens of thousands of
trainees have participated in courses in Israel and in their
own countries within the framework of Israel's
cooperation and assistance programme in the fields of
education, health, agriculture, industry, social affairs and
leadership. We are especially proud of the participation in
recent years of trainees from Arab countries, amongst
them Palestinians. These trainees are emissaries of
goodwill, ambassadors of peace, who bear with them the
message and the great hope of human well-being. As in
the words of the prophet:
“Each shall help his neighbour and make him
strong”.
This year, the Jewish people in Israel and around the
world marks the jubilee of its national revival. Fifty years
ago, the Jewish people restored its national sovereignty in
its ancient homeland. Throughout the dark days of our
2,000-year dispersion, we dreamt of the day that we
would renew our national life in the land of our
forefathers, the land of Israel.
It is the privilege of our generation to fulfil this
aspiration. The Jewish people has returned and built up its
land. The Jewish people is once again gathering in its
ancient home and has succeeded in building a vibrant
and democratic society, a flourishing economy, science,
research and industry.
For the past 50 years, we have laboured to ensure
Israel's security and independence, while always seeking
peace and good-neighbourly relations in our region. Fifty
years on, the State of Israel is an irremovable reality.
This week, we mark the beginning of the Jewish
new year. At this holy time, every Jew turns his eye
towards the heavens with a prayer in his heart for the
peace of the world, the end of misery and a new dawn of
hope for all. On this day of remembrance, the blow of the
shofar is accompanied by the prayer:
“may the year and its troubles pass and a new year
and its blessings begin”.





﻿May I begin by
congratulating the President on his election to preside over
the General Assembly at its fifty-second session. We are in
good hands as we begin our work during what the
Secretary-General has called “the reform Assembly.”
I know, too, that my Foreign Minister, on whose
behalf I am speaking, would want to warmly congratulate
the outgoing President, Ambassador Razali Ismail of
Malaysia, on his efforts during the past 12 months. It has
been a challenging time, and he has demonstrated the
decisive leadership we all expected of him.
Two years ago, at the fiftieth anniversary of the
United Nations, world leaders undertook to give the twenty-
first century an Organization equipped, financed and
structured to serve effectively the peoples in whose name
it was established. With the year 2000 now only 27 months
away, we are still far from that goal. This is a matter of
great concern to New Zealand. We firmly believe in the
United Nations as a vehicle to a better life for the world's
citizens, and not just for those who live now. We have a
responsibility to strengthen the Organization for our
grandchildren and beyond. We must not let them and
ourselves down by allowing an unreformed United Nations
to slide into increasing irrelevance.
We do not pretend the process of reform is easy or
finite. As the Secretary-General has said, “Reform is not an
event; it is a process.” [A/51/950, para. 25] Our own in
volvement on the intergovernmental track, including co-
chairing the Working Group on the Strengthening of the
United Nations System and the Working Group on an
Agenda for Development, has given us a good appreciation
of the complexities involved in producing positive outcomes
acceptable to 185 Member States.
We know the Secretary-General faces the same
issues with his 16 July package. As with any package, it
is inevitable that some Member States will find fault with
individual elements. But we are firmly of the belief that
the package should be viewed as a whole. This will be
for the greater good of the Organization. Difficulties with
individual elements of the package should not be allowed
to unpick the overall good which is in it. We appeal to
Member States to acknowledge this reality and to give the
Secretary-General their generous support. It is small
countries like New Zealand, and developing countries,
which, as we see it, stand most to benefit from what the
Secretary-General is trying to achieve.
To reform and strengthen the United Nations
effectively, we see a need to redistribute resources away
from administration and into areas which are important
for those of us who place a high priority on the United
Nations itself. We support efficiencies, not cost-cutting.
The crucial difference between the two is that one
approach seeks simply to save money without regard to
the impact on the Organization. We cannot support this.
The United Nations is too important to us to allow such
a downgrading.
An approach based on efficiencies allows us to
reinvigorate the United Nations by reinvesting the money
saved from outdated administrative practices. This is
central to the Secretary-General's package. In particular,
the proposal for a “development dividend” channelling
resources freed by administrative efficiencies into
strengthening the development activities of the United
Nations is most welcome. We can certify from our own
national experience that the sort of management reforms
proposed in the package do indeed lead to a reduction in
administrative overheads, allowing more to be delivered
in terms of substantive programmes.
At a time when development funds are diminishing,
the significance of this step should not be lost. New
Zealand is a country that is increasing its overseas aid —
by 40 per cent since the 1992 United Nations Conference
on Environment and Development, the Rio Summit. Our
contributions through the United Nations system have also
increased by nearly 50 per cent over the last five years.
But the global trend is the opposite, particularly among
the larger traditional donors. It is becoming harder and
harder for Governments to meet their Charter commitment
to promote the economic and social advancement of all
peoples. One of the modest outcomes of the last two
years of reform efforts within the United Nations has
been the elaboration of an Agenda for Development
19


reaffirming the primacy of development, setting objectives
and recommending ways of achieving them. But, with the
best will in the world, implementing that Agenda will come
to naught in the absence of adequate funding.
The Secretary-General's reforms are designed to
deliver more for development. Equally important, they are
designed to boost confidence in the United Nations,
confidence which two weeks ago was given tangible form
by Mr. Ted Turner's billion-dollar grant to assist United
Nations agencies in key development activities. That
generous offer has given the Organization a real boost and
could be a catalyst for leveraging further private-sector
funds for development. We must support the Secretary-
General's efforts to make the United Nations the best
vehicle for delivering such assistance.
Member States need to trust the Secretary-General to
fulfil his responsibilities under the Charter: to give effect to
the policy directions which they set. We need to be clear
and realistic in the priorities we set for the United Nations.
We cannot mandate the Organization with more and more
new tasks and somehow expect these to be achieved within
current resources. And, having set the priorities, we must
resist the temptation to micro-manage. This will involve a
sea-change in the way Member States have become
accustomed to operating. The Fifth Committee still makes
decisions about staff numbers and placement within the
Secretariat, administrative decisions that in any modern
organization would be the responsibility of its managers.
We know that the transitional process of change will
not be easy for those working in the Secretariat either.
But — and we are conscious of our own experience in New
Zealand in instituting public-sector reform — the
managerial and results-based budgeting proposals in the
July package will improve work performance and will
deliver greater job satisfaction to those working for the
United Nations. The Organization's most important resource
is its people. The package recognizes the vital importance
of investment in staff. If the best and brightest are to be
attracted to and retained by the United Nations, they must
be recruited, trained, promoted and paid according to
procedures which are as good as the best employed by
Member States.
It is also important to stress here the loyalty owed to
the Secretary-General by those who work for him. He has
the right to expect their full support for his leadership and
for the initiatives he puts forward. Anything less would be
dishonourable, would subvert due process and would
potentially disenfranchise Member States. It could not be
tolerated.
I referred earlier to the intergovernmental track. It is
worth touching on the key issues of Security Council and
financial reform.
On the former, New Zealand will judge specific
proposals for enlargement of the Security Council by the
yardstick of democracy and the representativeness of the
institution as a whole. Increasing the proportion of
permanent to non-permanent members runs counter to this
principle. Nor could a package on Security Council
reform be acceptable to us without substantive proposals
opening up and modernizing the workings of the Council.
Sunshine, an American jurist once observed, is the best
disinfectant. Member States must continue to participate
in the debate in the search for a consensus solution.
On financial reform, New Zealand is strongly
concerned about the crisis facing the United Nations. It is
true that there are problems with the scales of assessments
for both the regular and the peacekeeping budgets. The
present floor has a negative impact on smaller, vulnerable
nations, such as the South Pacific island countries, New
Zealand's neighbours. This is just one example of the kind
of problem that needs to be addressed.
But those who want to see changes made to the
scale need to offer genuine inducements, not threats. We
cannot accept that any Member State is entitled to
withhold payments unilaterally or that the assessment of
those countries that will not pay their dues should be
picked up by others. All assessed contributions must be
paid in full, on time and unconditionally. It is a violation
of international legal obligations to do otherwise. This
must be regarded with the utmost seriousness by Member
States. It undermines the Organization's ability to operate.
It penalizes, through damage to the Organization, those
Member States that abide by their obligations. When the
State responsible for the largest percentage of arrears
owed to the United Nations is also the richest, and when
that State in addition attaches conditions to the payment
of only a portion of what it owes, it is understandable that
these actions should generate real scepticism in this
Assembly.
This sorry state of affairs must be resolved quickly.
But it can be resolved only on the basis of a credible
commitment that all conditions will be eliminated now
and that all payments will be made on time. And that
means in January each year.
20


I would like to raise another reform issue which has
not featured prominently in discussions to date, namely
United Nations regional groupings. It seems to us that this
is an issue that deserves examination. The groupings are in
need of revision to bring them up to date with present-day
geopolitical realities. It is anomalous, for example, that our
Pacific island neighbours, members with us of the South
Pacific Forum grouping, belong to the Asian Group while,
for historical reasons, New Zealand belongs to the Group
of Western European and Other States. The fundamental
importance we accord our membership of the institutions of
the South Pacific Forum, of the Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation Council and of the Regional Forum of the
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), and our
relationship with ASEAN itself, should be able to be better
reflected in the regional groupings. We accordingly see
value in a reconfiguration of New York electoral groupings
to bring them more in line with those used elsewhere in the
United Nations system, where New Zealand in most cases
sits with our South Pacific partners and our East Asian
neighbours.
Developments in other regions will result in further
anomalies in the present structure. We see at a future stage
some long and complex negotiations over regional seat
allocations for a revised system of regional groups. New
Zealand of course will join with others in negotiating new
and equitable allocations of seats. While we look forward
to the outcome of that process, we realize that it will not
come overnight. In the meantime, and as a matter of high
priority, my delegation is working to forge a closer
relationship with the Asian regional group in New York.
I would like to close my statement by focusing once
more on the utmost importance of Member States' giving
positive endorsement to the Secretary-General's package at
this General Assembly, as New Zealand will be doing —
not only because it provides a positive and concrete start to
a reform process, but also because the alternative of not
supporting the Secretary-General will, in our view,
seriously undermine the credibility of the United Nations.
For two years the United Nations has been involved in
the current reform exercise. But none of us can pretend that
reform is an end in itself, or that introspection is an
ongoing excuse for inaction. The United Nations exists to
deliver concrete, substantive assistance to the hundreds of
millions most in need. No amount of self-analysis is a
substitute for that. Moreover, sustained emphasis on
introspection will erode the Organization's capacity, and
possibly also its will, to perform the tasks for which it was
created.
The challenge now is to embrace the bold
programme of reform outlined by the Secretary-General,
to use this General Assembly to begin to implement it,
and then to direct our energy where it rightly belongs, to
taking practical steps to reduce suffering and build a
better and more peaceful world: like drawing up a solid,
practical programme for alleviating poverty in the coming
decade; like establishing an international criminal court
which will ensure that individuals are held responsible for
war crimes; like supporting and enhancing the United
Nations capability for preventive diplomacy; and like
invigorating the United Nations capacity for
peacekeeping.
These are the standards by which the real success or
failure of the United Nations will be judged. New Zealand
is determined that the verdict will be a positive one.
Working together, we can ensure that it is.





﻿Mr. President, allow me sincerely to
congratulate you, a representative of friendly Ukraine, on
your election to this responsible and honoured post. We
are confident that under your Presidency, the General
Assembly will be able to achieve significant results.
In just a little over 800 days, mankind will enter
upon the twenty-first century. From a historical point of
view, this is indeed no more than a sprinter’s lap, and
thus the need to look at what lies ahead, at what awaits
us, would appear quite natural.
One year ago, in speaking from this rostrum, I spoke
about the emerging process of a transition to a multipolar
world order. The developments of the past year support
that. There is a growing diversity in the political,
economic and cultural development of countries. New
centres of economic and political influence in the world
are shaping up, coupled, at the same time, with increased
intermeshing of the interests of different States and
peoples.
The horizons opening up to the international
community in the twenty-first century are making new
demands. These are the assertion of the ideals of
interdependency and partnership in inter-State relations;
the prevention of the emergence of new dividing lines or
exclusive bloc structures; and strict adherence by all to
the principles and rules of international law. As a separate
issue, I should like to cite not only the creation of
conditions for economic and social progress of all
countries, but also the maintenance of environmental
balance.
There is also a need to mention that the transition
from a confrontational bipolar world to a multipolar
system per se would not provide a solution to these
17


problems. Furthermore, realistically minded people realize
that although we are moving farther away from the
simplistic stereotypes of the ideological confrontation era,
the number of existing risks and threats in the world is not
decreasing.
Regional conflicts continue to be one of the major
sources of instability on the global level; they should not be
allowed to continue into the twenty-first century. How can
this be achieved? A characteristic of our days is the
increasing number of intra-State problems — conflicts of an
ethnic rather than social nature. There are many
multinational States in the world today, and we support the
initiatives designed to prevent their forcible disintegration.
The formula for settling such conflicts in today’s
world — and, of course, in the twenty-first century — can
and must combine the need to preserve the territorial
integrity of those States with the provision of the maximum
possible number of rights to their national minorities. To
abandon any of the principles of this two-track formula
would result not only in the continuation but in the
dangerous escalation of such conflict situations.
Likewise, I wish to draw the Assembly’s particular
attention to a dangerous aspect of regional conflicts: their
ability to trigger terrorist waves and spread them far and
wide beyond the borders of the actual conflict zone. For
example, many of the militants who launched a bloody
campaign of terror in a number of countries emerged out of
the ongoing armed conflict that still rages in Afghanistan.
We strongly support the combat against terrorism,
whatever trappings it may don, be it in Ireland or in Israel.
Today, we will not be able to prevail in this fight without
all States pooling their efforts to combat this greatest of
evils. While we oppose the backing of terrorism in any
form by any Government, we believe that we cannot
stigmatize individual Member States forever as international
rogues, irrespective of changes in their policies, simply
because of their suspected links to terrorists.
In the present-day world, no country can hold a
monopoly on any kind of conflict-resolution effort. This
fully applies as well to the long-standing conflict in the
Middle East, where the settlement process has been
stalemated. As the saying goes, “it takes two hands to
applaud”. Broad-based international efforts are required to
undo the taut Middle East knot. Russia, as one of the co-
sponsors of the peace process launched in 1991 in Madrid,
is prepared actively to cooperate actively with all to attain
this goal.
For many years, so too has the Cyprus issue been
awaiting the effective international cooperation needed for
its resolution.
A synergy of efforts would provide the shortest cut
to the resolution of both long-standing and of relatively
new conflicts. But our stance by no means implies — and
I wish to emphasize this — that any individual country
that has influence in a zone of conflict or that can exert
it over conflicting parties should not make active use of
its own potential. It must do so, however, without putting
up a high fence around itself to ward off others.
I should like in this connection to draw the
Assembly’s attention to Russia’s peacekeeping efforts in
the Commonwealth of Independent States region. First of
all, as concerns Tajikistan, Russia is doing a great deal
since we are equipped with the particular tools needed to
do the job, in part for historical reasons. Our efforts have
proved rather effective. Recently in Moscow an
agreement was signed that put an end to the armed strife
between the Government and the opposition in that
country. The return to Dushanbe of Mr. Nuri, the
opposition leader, shows that the agreement is already
working.
Nevertheless, we want only our fair share of the
deal. We note with satisfaction that the attitudes of Russia
and the United Nations towards the parameters of the
operation in Tajikistan are in concurrence, based on the
close cooperation between the United Nations Observer
Mission, the collective Commonwealth of Independent
States peacekeeping force, and the contingent of Russian
border troops. We welcome the intention of the United
Nations to expand the mandate of its observers and to
increase their number.
Nagorny Karabakh provides yet another example.
Acting on its own, Russia has done a great deal to
stabilize the situation in the region. But I believe that we
have quite productively cooperated with the United States
and France, which, jointly with Russia, are acting as co-
chairmen of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe’s Minsk process to settle the
Nagorny Karabakh conflict. The Georgian-Abkhaz
conflict offers a similar example.
I should now like to say a few words about
peacekeeping as a whole. Over the last few years, a trend
has been observed towards its decentralization. Naturally,
there are objective reasons for this: the financial
constraints placed on the United Nations, and the increase
18


in the number of regional organizations working, inter alia,
in peacekeeping. We see nothing wrong with such
decentralization.
However, it is extremely important that peacekeeping
activities, whatever their sponsorship, should rely first and
foremost on the underlying principles developed within the
United Nations framework. We need here to be extremely
cautious in dealing with peacekeeping activities. We believe
that actions involving force should be carried out solely
when authorized by the Security Council and under its
direct supervision, as provided for in the Charter of the
United Nations.
As we move towards a multipolar world in the twenty-
first century, it is essential to create conditions that will
bring stability to a new world order. To that end, work
must be completed to demolish the hurdles of the past and,
above all, the legacy of the massive, decades-long arms
race.
We are moving together along this path, and we are
determined to proceed further. Together with the United
States, we have been steadily reducing our national strategic
arsenals. President Yeltsin of Russia and President Clinton
of the United States have reached an understanding on the
basic parameters for agreement in this area.
On the agenda now are systematic measures for a
reduction in the nuclear arsenals of all the nuclear Powers.
But let us be perfectly clear here: the stability of a
multipolar world cannot be ensured simply by ending the
nuclear-arms race of the past. It is also essential to have
guarantees against the re-emergence of that arms race on a
new basis, and here I have in mind the desire of individual
countries to acquire nuclear weapons. This once again
proves the need for urgent measures to relieve tensions in
the relations between India and Pakistan.
Hence the essential need for the entire international
community to give a universal dimension to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Those few
countries that have so far remained outside the Treaty must,
in our view, come to grips with their responsibility. They
must realize that their own security is an integral part of
global security, and they must assume those obligations to
which over 180 States have already committed themselves
as parties to the Treaty.
The entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) on a global scale, as well as the
forthcoming talks to ban the production of weapon-grade
fissile materials, figures likewise among those badly
needed steps intended to impart stability to global security
in the twenty-first century.
The implementation of the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling
and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction
is getting under way. We consider this document as one
of the major instruments designed to eliminate one of the
weapons of mass destruction subject to the greatest
proliferation. We have been working together with the
deputies of the State Duma to ratify the Convention, and
we look forward to the early, successful completion of
those efforts.
But even now it is conventional weaponry that is
killing people in local conflicts, often in situations where
hostilities have already stopped. In this connection, we are
fully aware of the humanitarian dimension of the problem
of landmines. We think that the elimination of the threat
of landmines to people, especially to civilian populations,
is long overdue. We advocate active, phased efforts and
negotiations to resolve it.
Stability on a global or regional level is impossible
without the establishment of security systems. We have
made headway in this direction on the European
continent. We feel confident that only a universal
organization which brings together all the members of the
European family of nations can serve as a foundation for
a genuinely durable security system in Europe in the
twenty-first century. I am talking here about the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). It is first and foremost in the frame of that
forum that it is possible to seek agreement with a view to
meeting the new and diverse challenges, which are not
necessarily of a military and political nature.
A beneficial effect on the improvement of the
European climate has already been exerted by the
Founding Act on Mutual Relations, Cooperation and
Security between the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
and the Russian Federation, which was born out of the
agonizing quest for compromise. This document will have
broad international resonance and will doubtless play an
essential role in European politics. Of course, the signing
of that document has not changed our negative view of
NATO’s enlargement, which, on the one hand, totally
ignores current realities and, on the other, is fraught with
the risk of creating new dividing lines.
19


I must mention yet another contribution to the
strengthening of good-neighbourly relations in Europe. I am
referring to the agreements signed recently by Russia,
Ukraine and Belarus that have allowed our three countries
to take major steps forward in developing mutually
beneficial, equitable relations which have strengthened
stability in the region.
Russia has an interest in the security and stability of
its Baltic neighbours and is ready to guarantee their
security. Such guarantees could be provided in the form of
our commitment backed by an agreement on good-
neighbourly relations between Russia and the Baltic States.
Such an agreement could become a kind of pact on regional
security and stability.
The Asia-Pacific dimension is also of great
significance to us. We are convinced that the Russian-
Chinese agreements on borders and military détente in the
frontier zone, which were also signed by Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan, will become a long-term factor
for stability in that vast region. Russia also holds a number
of other Asian countries — including India, Japan and the
States of the Association of South-East Asian Nations
(ASEAN) — among its priority partners.
At the same time, our future in the twenty-first century
at both the global and the regional levels depends directly
on whether the international community will be able to stop
and reverse the economic impoverishment of a great
number of the Member States of the United Nations.
A central role in resolving the most important tasks
facing all the countries of the world today belongs to the
United Nations.
Established over half a century ago, the Organization
in general has succeeded in passing the durability test,
traversed the thorny road of the bloc-confrontation era,
survived both the ice-age period and the thaw in
international relations. But today this could be viewed as
axiomatic — the United Nations needs a rational
renovation, referred to by virtually all the speakers in this
debate. The substantive report of Secretary-General Kofi
Annan gives clear proof of this need. Today, figuratively
speaking, the image of this Organization in the twenty-first
century is being shaped.
It is our strong conviction that the priority objective
of the Organization’s reform is to enhance the usefulness
of the United Nations. Naturally, it is impossible to
reform the United Nations in order to increase its
effectiveness without overcoming the financial problems.
We must note that the financial problems of the United
Nations have unfortunately become chronic. It must
therefore be emphasized that the responsibility for the
financial health of the United Nations is borne by all
Member States and that they must all pay their dues
properly.
We are also in favour of expanding the membership
of the Security Council. A decision to that effect is long
overdue. But this expansion should not render our
Organization less efficient.
The reform of the United Nations will take place
against the background of the ever increasing role of
regional organizations. This is a fully logical process. At
the same time, we are convinced that the special leading
role of the United Nations among all other universally
recognized international organizations must be preserved.
We see the United Nations in the twenty-first
century as a highly efficient Organization, free from
bureaucratic constraints, and as a proactive Organization
capable of swiftly responding to the challenges of the
contemporary world.
I began my remarks by encouraging concerted action
by the international community to concentrate on current
problems and on the prospects for the coming century.
And I shall conclude by citing a well-known saying:
“Pessimists are no more than casual observers, it is the
optimists who can change the world”. We are optimists,
and we believe that the United Nations will be able to
play a positive role in the ongoing evolution of the
international community.





﻿Five years ago, when I first
addressed this Assembly, the cold war had only just
ended and the transition to a new era was beginning.
Now, together, we are making that historic transition.
Behind us, we leave a century full of humanity's capacity
for the worst and its genius for the best. Before us, at the
dawn of a new millennium, we can envision a new era
that escapes the twentieth century's darkest moments,
fulfils its most brilliant possibilities and crosses frontiers
yet unimagined.
We are off to a promising start. For the first time in
history, more than half the people represented in this
Assembly freely choose their own Governments. Free
markets are growing, spreading individual opportunity and
national well-being. Early in the twenty-first century,
more than 20 of this Assembly's members - home to
half the earth's population - will lift themselves from
the ranks of low-income nations.
Powerful forces are bringing us closer together,
profoundly changing the way we work, live and relate to
each other. Every day, millions of our citizens on every
continent use laptops and satellites to send information,
products and money across the planet in seconds. Bit by
bit, the information age is chipping away at barriers -
economic, political and social - that once kept people
locked in and ideas locked out. Science is unravelling
mysteries in the tiniest of human genes and in the vast
cosmos. Never in the course of human history have we
had a greater opportunity to make our people healthier
and wiser, to protect our planet from decay and abuse and
to reap the benefits of free markets without abandoning
the social contract and its concern for the common good.
Yet today's possibilities are not tomorrow's
guarantees. We have work to do.
7


The forces of global integration are a great tide,
inexorably wearing away the established order of things.
But we must decide what will be left in its wake. People
fear change when they feel its burdens but not its benefits.
They are susceptible to misguided protectionism and to the
poisoned appeals of extreme nationalism, and ethnic, racial
and religious hatreds. New global environmental challenges
require us to find ways to work together without damaging
legitimate aspirations for progress. We are all vulnerable to
the reckless acts of rogue States and to an unholy axis of
terrorists, drug traffickers and international criminals.
These twenty-first-century predators feed on the free
flow of information, ideas and people we cherish. They
abuse the vast power of technology to build black markets
for weapons, to compromise law enforcement with huge
bribes of illicit cash and to launder money with the
keystroke of a computer. These forces are our enemies. We
must face them together because no one can defeat them
alone.
To seize the opportunities and move against the threats
of this new global era, we need a new strategy of security.
Over the past five years, nations have begun to put that
strategy in place through a new network of institutions and
arrangements, with distinct missions, but a common
purpose: to secure and strengthen the gains of democracy
and free markets while turning back their enemies.
We see this strategy taking shape on every continent:
in expanded military alliances, such as the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO), its Partnership for Peace and
its partnerships with a democratic Russia and a democratic
Ukraine; in free trade arrangements, such as the World
Trade Organization and the global Information Technology
Agreement, and in the movement towards free-trade areas
by nations in the Americas, the Asia-Pacific region and
elsewhere around the world; in strong arms-control regimes,
such as the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons; in
multinational coalitions with zero tolerance for terrorism,
corruption, crime and drug trafficking; and in binding
international commitments to protect the environment and
safeguard human rights.
Through this web of institutions and arrangements,
nations are setting the international ground rules for the
twenty-first century, laying a foundation for security and
prosperity for those who live within them, while isolating
those who challenge them from the outside. This system
will develop and endure only if those who follow the rules
of peace and freedom fully reap their rewards. Only then
will our people believe that they have a stake in
supporting and shaping the emerging international system.
The United Nations must play a leading role in this
effort, filling in the fault lines of the new global era. The
core missions it has pursued during its first half century
will be just as relevant during the next half century: the
pursuit of peace and security, promoting human rights and
moving people from poverty to dignity and prosperity
through sustainable development.
Conceived in the cauldron of war, the United
Nations first task must remain the pursuit of peace and
security. For 50 years the United Nations has helped
prevent world war and nuclear holocaust. Unfortunately,
conflicts between nations, and within nations, have
endured. From 1945 until today, they have cost 20 million
lives. Just since the end of the cold war, each year there
have been more than 30 armed conflicts in which more
than 1,000 people have lost their lives - including, of
course, a quarter of a million killed in the former
Yugoslavia and more than half a million in Rwanda.
Millions of personal tragedies the world over are a
warning that we dare not be complacent or indifferent;
trouble in a far corner can become a plague on everyone's
house. People the world over cheer the hopeful
developments in Northern Ireland, grieve over the loss of
innocent lives and the stalling of the peace process in the
Middle East and long for a resolution of the differences
on the Korean peninsula, between Greece and Turkey or
between the great nations of India and Pakistan as they
celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of their birth.
The United Nations continues to keep many nations
away from bloodshed: in El Salvador and Mozambique;
in Haiti and Namibia; in Cyprus; and in Bosnia, where so
much remains to be done but can still be done because
the bloodshed has ended.
The United Nations record of service has left a
legacy of sacrifice. Just last week we lost some of our
finest sons and daughters in the crash of a United Nations
helicopter in Bosnia. Five were American, five German,
one Polish and one British - all citizens of the world we
are trying to make, each a selfless servant of peace. The
world is poorer for their passing.
At this very moment, the United Nations is keeping
the peace in 16 countries, often in partnership with
regional organizations such as NATO, the Organization of
American States, the Association of South-East Asian
8


Nations and the Economic Community of West African
States, avoiding wider conflicts and even greater suffering.
Our shared commitment to more realistic peacekeeping
training for United Nations troops, a stronger role for
civilian police and better integration between military and
civilian agencies - all these will help the United Nations
fulfil these missions in the years ahead.
At the same time, we must improve the United
Nations capabilities after a conflict ends to help peace
become self-sustaining. The United Nations cannot build
nations, but it can help nations build themselves by
fostering legitimate institutions of government, monitoring
elections and laying a strong foundation for economic
reconstruction.
This week the Security Council will hold an
unprecedented ministerial meeting on African security,
which our Secretary of State is proud to chair, and which
President Mugabe, Chairman of the Organization of African
Unity, will address. It will highlight the role the United
Nations can and should play in preventing conflict on a
continent where amazing progress towards democracy and
development is occurring alongside still too much discord,
disease and distress.
In the twenty-first century our security will be
challenged increasingly by interconnected groups that traffic
in terror, organized crime and drug smuggling. Already,
these international crime and drug syndicates drain up to
$750 billion a year from legitimate economies. That sum
that exceeds the combined gross national product of more
than half the nations in this Hall. These groups threaten to
undermine confidence in the fragile new democracies and
market economies that so many of you are working so hard
to see endure.
Two years ago I called upon all the members of this
Assembly to join in the fight against these forces. I applaud
the recent United Nations resolution calling on its Members
to join the major international anti-terrorism conventions,
making clear the emerging international consensus that
terrorism is always a crime and never a justifiable political
act. As more countries sign on, terrorists will have fewer
places to run or hide. I also applaud the steps that Members
are taking to implement the Declaration on Crime and
Public Security that the United States proposed two years
ago, calling for increased cooperation to strengthen every
citizen's right to basic safety, through cooperation on
extradition and asset forfeiture, shutting down grey markets
for guns and false documents, attacking corruption and
bringing higher standards to law enforcement in new
democracies.
The spread of these global criminal syndicates also
has made all the more urgent our common quest to
eliminate weapons of mass destruction. We cannot allow
them to fall into or remain in the wrong hands. Here too,
the United Nations must lead, and it has led - from the
United Nations Special Commission in Iraq to the
International Atomic Energy Agency, now the most
expansive global inspection system ever devised to police
arms-control agreements.
When we met here last year, I was honoured to be
the first of 146 leaders to sign the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT), our commitment to end
all nuclear tests for all time, the longest-sought, hardest-
fought prize in the history of arms control. It will help
prevent the nuclear Powers from developing more
advanced and more dangerous weapons. It will limit the
possibilities for other States to acquire such devices. I am
pleased to announce that today I am sending this crucial
Treaty to the United States Senate for ratification. Our
common goal should be for the CTBT to enter into force
as soon as possible. I ask for of you to support that goal.
The United Nations second core mission must be to
defend and extend universal human rights and to help
democracy's remarkable gains endure. Fifty years ago the
United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights
stated the international community's conviction that
people everywhere have the right to be treated with
dignity, to give voice to their opinions and to choose their
leaders; that these rights are universal - not American
rights, not Western rights, not rights for the developed
world only, but rights inherent in the humanity of people
everywhere.
Over the past decades these rights have become a
reality for more people than ever, from Asia to Africa,
from Europe to the Americas. In a world that links rich
and poor, North and South, city and countryside in an
electronic network of shared images in real time, the
more these universal rights take hold, the more people
who do not enjoy them will demand them. Armed with
photocopiers and fax machines, e-mail and the Internet;
supported by an increasingly important community of
non-governmental organizations, they will make their
demands known, spreading the spirit of freedom -
which, as the history of the last 10 years has shown us,
ultimately will prevail.
9


The United Nations must be prepared to respond -
not only by setting standards but by implementing them. To
deter abuses, we should strengthen the United Nations field
operations and early-warning systems. To strengthen
democratic institutions - the best guarantors of human
rights - we must pursue programmes to help new legal,
parliamentary and electoral institutions get off the ground.
To punish those responsible for crimes against humanity,
and to promote justice so that peace endures, we must
maintain our strong support for the United Nations war-
crime tribunals and truth commissions. And before the
century ends, we should establish a permanent international
court to prosecute the most serious violations of
humanitarian law.
The United States welcomes the Secretary General's
efforts to strengthen the role of human rights within the
United Nations system and his splendid choice of Mary
Robinson as the new High Commissioner for Human
Rights. We will work hard to make sure that she has the
support she needs to carry out her mandate.
Finally, the United Nations has a special responsibility
to make sure that as the global economy creates greater
wealth, it does not produce growing disparities between the
haves and have-nots or threaten the global environment, our
common home. Progress is not yet everyone's partner.
More than half the world's people are two days' walk from
a telephone, literally disconnected from the global economy.
Tens of millions lack the education, the training and the
skills they need to make the most of their God-given
abilities.
The men and women of the United Nations have
expertise across the entire range of humanitarian and
development activities. Every day they are making a
difference. We see it in nourished bodies of once-starving
children, in the full lives of those immunized against
disease, in the bright eyes of children exposed to education
through the rich storehouse of human knowledge, in
refugees cared for and returned to their homes and in the
health of rivers and lakes restored.
The United Nations must focus even more on shifting
resources from handouts to "hand ups", on giving people
the tools they need to make the most of their own destinies.
Spreading ideas and education and technology - the true
wealth of nations - is the best way to give the people the
chance to succeed.
The United Nations must continue to lead in ensuring
that today's progress does not come at tomorrow's expense.
When the nations of the world gather again next
December in Kyoto for the Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, all of us - developed and developing nations -
must seize the opportunity to turn back the clock on
greenhouse-gas emissions so that we can leave a healthy
planet to our children.
In these efforts, the United Nations no longer can,
and no longer need, go it alone. Innovative partnerships
with the private sector, non-governmental organizations
and the international financial institutions can leverage its
effectiveness many times over. Last week a truly
visionary American, Ted Turner, made a remarkable
donation to strengthen the United Nations development
and humanitarian programmes. His gesture highlights the
potential for partnership between the United Nations and
the private sector, in contributions of time, resources and
expertise. I hope more will follow his lead.
In this area and others, the Secretary-General is
aggressively pursuing the most far-reaching reform of the
United Nations in its history - not to make the United
Nations smaller as an end in itself, but to make it better.
The United States strongly supports his leadership. We
should pass the Secretary-General's reform agenda at this
session.
On every previous occasion I have addressed this
Assembly, the issue of our country's dues has brought the
commitment of the United States to the United Nations
into question. The United States was a founder of the
United Nations. We are proud to be its host. We believe
in its ideals. We continue to be, as we have been, its
largest contributor. We are committed to seeing the
United Nations succeed in the twenty-first century.
This year, for the first time since I have been
President, we have an opportunity to put the question of
debts and dues behind us once and for all and to put the
United Nations on a sounder financial footing for the
future. I have made it a priority to work with our
Congress on comprehensive legislation that would allow
us to pay off the bulk of our arrears and assure full
financing of America's assessment in the years ahead.
Our Congress's actions to solve this problem reflect a
strong bipartisan commitment to the United Nations and
to America's role within it. At the same time, we look to
Member States to adopt a more equitable scale of
assessments. Let me say that we also strongly support
expanding the Security Council to give more countries a
voice in the most important work of the United Nations.
10


In more equitably sharing responsibility for its successes,
we can make the United Nations stronger and more
democratic than it is today. I ask the General Assembly to
act on these proposals this year so that we can move
forward together.
At the dawn of a new century so full of hope but not
free of peril, more than ever we need a United Nations
where people of reason can work through shared problems
and take action to combat them, where nations of goodwill
can join in the struggle for freedom and prosperity and
where we can shape a future of peace, progress and the
preservation of our planet. We have the knowledge; we
have the intelligence; we have the energy; we have the
resources for the work before us. We are building the
necessary networks of cooperation. The great question
remaining is whether we have the vision and the heart
necessary to imagine a future that is different from the
past - necessary to free ourselves from destructive patterns
of relations with each other and within our own nations and
to live a future that is different.
A new century in a new millennium is upon us. We
are literally present at the future, and it is the great gift we
are obligated to leave to our children.




﻿South Africa welcomes your
election, Sir, as the President of the General Assembly at
its fifty-second session. We congratulate you having
experienced at first hand your skills and role as Vice-
Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid. We
also express our appreciation to Ambassador Razali Ismail
for his tireless work as President of the General Assembly
at its fifty-first session.
May I also congratulate His Excellency Mr. Kofi
Annan on his election as the seventh Secretary-General of
the United Nations. The zeal that the Secretary-General
has displayed in addressing, through his reform proposals,
the difficulties confronting this Organization is
impressive. The Secretary-General’s reform programme
is one that in many respects complements the
intergovernmental process regarding the revitalization of
the Organization.
The General Assembly is well aware of the need to
reform the United Nations. The process of reform should
produce a revitalized Organization capable of addressing
humanity’s vital issues of peace and security. Central to
the process of modernization of the United Nations is the
restructuring of the Security Council to redress existing
imbalances and transform it into a transparent organ
accountable to the broader membership of the
Organization.
South Africa fully supports the Non-Aligned
Movement’s position that there should be no partial or
selective expansion in the membership of the Security
Council to the detriment of developing countries.
The reaffirmation at the Organization of African
Unity’s Harare Summit of Africa’s claim to two
permanent and five non-permanent seats, with the same
powers and prerogatives enjoyed by the current permanent
members in an expanded Security Council, is consistent
with the Charter principle of equitable geographical
representation. If the Security Council is to fulfil the role
of custodian of international peace and security envisaged
for it in the Charter, it must be perceived to be fully
legitimate by States and peoples.
South Africa is therefore of the view that a limited
expansion of only five or six new Security Council seats
will not fulfil the crucial requirement of transforming the
Security Council into a representative organ.
Central to the Security Council reform process is the
question of the veto, which has been a focal point in our
deliberations for the last three and a half years. Indeed,
the democratization of the Council hinges on the veto
being either eliminated or extended to the new permanent
members. Accordingly, the issue of the status of the veto
must of necessity form an integral part of a
comprehensive reform package. Permanent membership
without the veto represents merely a symbolic gesture to
new permanent members which would serve to perpetuate
13


an unjust and discriminatory practice and accord them an
inferior status.
I wish to recall that last year in the General Assembly,
I registered South Africa’s disappointment with the slow
pace of the debate relating to the reform of the Security
Council. The time has come for us all to display the
necessary political will and determination in order to reach
agreement on a comprehensive set of measures which will
lead to the creation of a Security Council which is
transparent, democratic, accountable and thus credible and
legitimate.
The fifty-first session of the General Assembly also
witnessed the conclusion of the work of the Open-ended
High-level Working Group on the Strengthening of the
United Nations System. Its notable recommendations
regarding the strengthening of the role and functions of the
General Assembly attest to the importance which we as
Member States attach to this body as the supreme political
organ of the Organization.
It is, however, disappointing that on the issue relating
to the election of a Secretary-General, the Working Group
was unable to reach consensus on the recommendation to
the permanent members of the Security Council to refrain
from using the veto to block the outcome of the election.
As a result of Africa’s painful past experiences under
colonial domination, as well as the abhorrent system of
apartheid, my Government is committed to the final
eradication of colonialism and fully supports the effective
implementation of the Plan of Action for the International
Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism. We believe,
therefore, that the Committee of 24 should continue its
work in order to determine the interests of the peoples of
Non-Self-Governing Territories regarding their future
political status. We call on the administering Powers to lend
their full cooperation to the Committee.
South Africa is concerned that intra-State conflicts in
Africa continue to pose a threat to the continent’s stability.
These conflicts lead to loss of life and economic hardships
and are a major stumbling block on the road towards peace
and development. It is a matter of concern that conflicts in
Africa persist despite the commendable efforts of the
Organization of African Unity and of African leaders in
conflict resolution.
We therefore urge parties to the conflict in the
Republic of the Congo to observe the ceasefire agreement
and to make all efforts to ensure that the interim measures
for the holding of national elections in 1998 are instituted.
Similarly, we condemn the coup in Sierra Leone and
implore Member States of the United Nations to support
Africa’s efforts to restore constitutional order by
refraining from recognizing or giving support in any form
to the military Government.
South Africa is committed to the promotion of peace
in Angola, which we believe will contribute to the
consolidation and extension of stability to the whole of
our region of southern Africa. We are therefore concerned
about the failure of UNITA to fulfil its obligations under
the Lusaka Protocol. In this regard, my Government
welcomes the decision of the Security Council to impose
the punitive measures envisaged in its resolution 1127
(1997), as a means of ensuring UNITA’s compliance.
South Africa has followed the unfolding
developments in the Middle East with cautious optimism.
South Africa, and indeed the international community,
welcomed the signing of the Oslo accord by the Palestine
Liberation Organization and the Israeli Government and
applauded it as representing a positive step towards the
full realization of the long-awaited comprehensive and
just settlement in the region. But the decision of the
Government of Israel to construct new Jewish settlements
in Jebel Abu Ghneim has given rise to tensions and has
generated a crisis situation which has reignited conflict in
the region. We all know that this decision is a flagrant
violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and
of the relevant resolutions of this body. It is no doubt an
attempt to change the legal status of Jerusalem and to pre-
empt the final status negotiations.
The inalienable right of the Palestinian people to
self-determination is a prerequisite for achieving a durable
and comprehensive peace. For peace and stability to
prevail, the region requires the unconditional withdrawal
of Israel from all Palestinian and Arab territories occupied
since 1967.
South Africa welcomes the Secretary-General’s latest
initiatives currently under way to seek a lasting solution
to the question of Cyprus. We urge all parties to make
concerted efforts in working with the Secretary-General
and his good offices towards an overall comprehensive
settlement to this question, which has been on the agenda
of the United Nations for more than 30 years.
South Africa attaches great importance to preventive
diplomacy as a means of forestalling the possibility of
conflict. We commend the report of the Special
14


Committee on Peacekeeping Operations because it provides
us with measures aimed at strengthening the role of the
United Nations in peacekeeping. We also welcome the
Committee’s 1997 report on peacekeeping operations and
urge the Committee to address the question of the rapidly
deployable mission headquarters and the further
development of United Nations standby arrangements.
South Africa believes that progress on disarmament
issues will create a world free of war. The end of the cold
war heralded a period of progress in disarmament and non-
proliferation, as was evidenced by the entry into force of
the Chemical Weapons Convention and the conclusion of
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. However, the
re-emergence of maximalist positions in the disarmament
debate retards global disarmament, as demonstrated by the
disappointing progress made at the Conference on
Disarmament this year. Despite the consensual adoption of
a mandate for the negotiation of a fissile-material cut-off
treaty, one of the essential elements for complete nuclear
disarmament, little progress has been made. Nevertheless,
South Africa is encouraged by the large number of States
which have committed themselves to the complete
eradication of weapons of mass destruction by joining
various non-proliferation and disarmament treaties during
the past year. Universal adherence to important
disarmament treaties will pave the way towards a world
free of weapons of mass destruction.
Humanity is faced with the daily threat of harm from
the use of conventional weapons. High priority should be
placed on strategies and policies intended to prevent the
proliferation of conventional weapons and to reduce their
flow to conflict areas. The conclusions reached by the
United Nations Panel of Governmental Experts on Small
Arms lay the foundation for future action by the
international community.
On 18 September 1997, the Oslo Diplomatic
Conference adopted the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-
Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction. The Convention
is a clear and total ban on anti-personnel mines and
establishes a compelling new international norm against this
scourge which has for so long afflicted humanity, especially
innocent civilians, mostly women and children. South
Africa looks forward to the early entry into force of the
Convention and appeals to all States to heed the call of the
international community against these inhumane weapons.
South Africa has often expressed grave concern at the
involvement of its nationals in mercenary activities, because
these activities inhibit the achievement of peaceful
solutions to internal conflicts and destabilize regions.
Consequently, we have drafted legislation to regulate the
rendering of military assistance by private individuals and
companies to foreign Governments and agencies.
The South African Government puts a high premium
on the promotion and protection of human rights as a
cornerstone of its foreign policy. As we approach the
fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and the thirtieth of the International Year
for Human Rights, we reaffirm our commitment to the
preeminent values of basic human dignity, values for
which we have fought and for which we must continue to
fight. Our peoples deserve no less. In this context, my
delegation supports the recommendation to convene a
world conference on racism and racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance.
My Government remains committed to addressing
gender inequities. The worst manifestations of these
unequal gender relations are the acts of violence
committed against women and girls. My Government has
pledged itself to preventing and combating this violence
by, among other initiatives, aligning its legislation,
policies and strategies with international instruments such
as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women.
South Africa believes in the strengthening of the role
of the United Nations in the promotion of international
cooperation for economic and social development. To this
end, we welcome those measures in the Secretary-
General’s proposed reform package which seek to
strengthen the capacity of the United Nations and to
revitalize its role in the context of development.
The adoption of the Agenda for Development by the
General Assembly was a milestone in our collective
search for a meaningful global partnership for
development. That the membership could reach agreement
on so complex a matter is testimony to the seriousness
with which States view the issue, and to the dynamics of
consensus-building in fostering a global partnership.
Member States should act to implement the Agenda for
Development in a coordinated manner, by creating
dynamic structures susceptible of successful delivery.
South Africa remains committed to an action-
orientated Agenda for Development which gives priority
to international cooperation for development. Partnerships
15


for development, as envisaged also in the Midrand
Ministerial Declaration and Partnership for Growth and
Development, should be established to ensure effective
delivery of assistance to the developing world.
The problems of abject poverty and social deprivation
continue to afflict and haunt many countries, particularly in
the developing world. In order to address this scourge,
which affects least-developed countries in particular,
effective and consistent measures need to be undertaken
within the context of the United Nations Decade for the
Eradication of Poverty.
The issue of external indebtedness continues to
frustrate the ability of the least-developed countries to
promote economic and social development. It is therefore
incumbent upon the international community to address and
find a solution to this problem as a matter of urgency.
One year after the conclusion of the mid-term review
of the United Nations New Agenda for the Development of
Africa in the 1990s, we need to take stock and review
progress to see if the requisite resource mobilization levels
are anywhere near being met and whether the central
development goals are in place. As with the mid-term
review of the New Agenda, this would enable the
international community to take urgent and practical action
on behalf of the African continent to eradicate poverty and
underdevelopment.
We in southern Africa, as a region whose potential for
development was hamstrung by the repressive policies of
apartheid, cannot but seek the promotion of our people
through cooperation. It follows therefore that we should be
committed to the transformation of our Southern African
Development Community into an institution which provides
a framework for the promotion of the imperatives of
reconstruction and development. This would enhance the
degree to which, individually and collectively, the region
offers a basis to ensure a better life for all our peoples.
The global partnership for sustainable development
will be enhanced through the transfer of essential and
environmentally sound technologies to developing States on
preferential and concessional terms. The financial resources
and mechanisms necessary for the implementation of
Agenda 21 are still inadequate. Developed countries should
honour their commitment to raise official development
assistance flows to the United Nations target of 0.7 per cent
of gross domestic product. Those few countries which have
achieved this objective are commended.
We encourage the promotion and sustainable
management of the global environment to ensure a higher
quality of life for all. The objective of sustainable
development should be the integration of environmental,
economic and social policies in order to meet basic
human needs and to manage the environment on a
sustainable basis.
The disappointing lack of consensus at the special
session of the General Assembly on the environment held
in June 1997 leaves considerable follow-up action to be
undertaken in order to accelerate the implementation of
Agenda 21. In this respect, the role and importance of the
United Nations Environment Programme as one of the
leading United Nations bodies in the field of the
environment should be strengthened.
We commend the decision to convene a special
session on drugs to deal effectively with the illicit
production, sale, demand, trafficking and distribution of
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances. The special
session will offer Member States an opportunity to join
their efforts to combat drug abuse and illicit trafficking.
South Africa strongly favours the early establishment
of a permanent, independent and effective international
criminal court. An opportunity now exists to establish the
court before the turn of the century. We must therefore
redouble our efforts during the forthcoming sessions of
the Preparatory Committee to ensure that the diplomatic
conference in Rome can complete its work successfully.
It is imperative that all Member States continue fully
to support the international criminal tribunals for Rwanda
and the former Yugoslavia. To this end, my Government,
in collaboration with the Parliamentarians for Global
Action, recently hosted an international workshop on
securing State cooperation and compliance with the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. Its purpose
was to review cooperation with the Rwanda Tribunal and
encourage the enactment of domestic legislation by
Member States, thus ensuring that those accused of acts
of genocide are swiftly brought to trial.
My Government welcomes efforts to elaborate a
draft convention to define terrorism. It is our belief that
acts of terrorism must be clearly distinguished from
national liberation struggles in pursuit of the right to self-
determination by peoples subjected to foreign or colonial
domination.
16


I should like to take this opportunity to announce to
the Assembly that on 20 August 1997, the South African
Cabinet approved ratification of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea. South Africa, a country
with considerable maritime interests, will, for its part,
continue to play a meaningful and constructive role in the
governance of the world’s oceans.
The continuing financial crisis of the Organization is
of great concern to my delegation. We fully support the
Secretary-General’s commitment to ending the long and
persistent near-bankruptcy of the Organization. It behoves
Member States to discharge their Charter obligation by
paying their contributions in full, on time and without
conditions.
The lofty ideals that brought us together should
continue to serve as an inspiration for us to strengthen the
authority and capacity of the United Nations as we move
into the next millennium.





﻿Please allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the General Assembly at
its current session. I believe your wisdom and experience
will enable you to accomplish your lofty mission with
distinction. At the same time, I would like to express my
appreciation to Mr. Razali Ismail for his contribution as
President of the General Assembly at its last session.
This year, 1997, is no ordinary year for China. Last
February, when Deng Xiaoping, the chief architect of
China’s reform and opening-up, passed away, the 1.2
billion Chinese people were immersed in deep sorrow.
Turning grief into strength, we are determined to heed his
behest by deepening reform, opening the country still wider
to the outside world, stepping up national development and
promoting the cause of world peace. Here, on behalf of the
Chinese Government and people, I would like once again
to thank the United Nations and its Member States for the
sincere condolences they expressed on the passing of Deng
Xiaoping. Your kind words gave us strength at our time of
bereavement.
Just a few days ago, the Fifteenth National Congress
of the Communist Party of China came to a triumphant
conclusion in Beijing. This Congress, holding high the great
banner of Deng Xiaoping theory, charts the future course of
China’s development with a blueprint and displays the
resolve to carry forward the cause of building socialism
with Chinese characteristics well into the twenty-first
century.
On 1 July of this year, China resumed its exercise of
sovereignty over Hong Kong, which wiped out our national
humiliation of one and a half centuries and opened up a
new chapter in our peaceful reunification. During the more
than two months since its return, Hong Kong has enjoyed
social stability and economic prosperity, which fills the
people of Hong Kong, of China and of the world at large
with great joy.
The realization of Deng Xiaoping’s concept of “one
country, two systems” in Hong Kong carries profound
significance. Firmly adhering to this concept, we will
keep up the peaceful reunification of our motherland by
ensuring a smooth return of Macao and eventually
resolving the Taiwan question. Taiwan is an inalienable
part of Chinese territory, and the Taiwan question is
purely an internal affair of China. Any country that
attempts to use the Taiwan question to put pressure on
China or even clamours for “two Chinas” or “one China,
one Taiwan” has acted in total contravention of the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and
the relevant General Assembly resolutions. Such
behaviour will be absolutely unacceptable to the Chinese
people, as well as to all the countries upholding justice in
the world.
As the international situation continues to undergo
profound changes, peace and development have become
the main themes of our times. The world is evolving
towards multipolarity with growing diversity in countries’
political, economic and cultural lives. This trend has
become an irresistible tide of history.
The two world wars in the first half of the twentieth
century plunged mankind into unprecedented havoc. And
the cold war, which lasted for more than four decades in
the latter half of our century, kept humanity in the dark
shadow of war. Reviewing the past and looking to the
future, people throughout the world are anxiously waiting
for the establishment of a just and equitable new
international political and economic order, and they are
hoping to see lasting peace and prosperity for all in the
coming century.
The cold-war security regime that featured military
alliances and the arms race is, as has been proved,
incapable of making peace. Expanding military blocs and
enhancing military alliances under new circumstances can
do little to bring about greater security. Relations between
States should be based on the five principles of mutual
respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual
non-aggression, non-interference in each other’s internal
affairs, equality and mutual benefit and peaceful
coexistence. Each country has the right to choose a road
of development according to its own national conditions,
and no country should interfere in the internal affairs of
other countries on whatever grounds. This must serve as
the political prerequisite for global and regional security.
16


All countries should increase their mutually beneficial
cooperation in the economic field, eliminate unequal
practices in trade and economic relations, and do away with
discriminatory policies with a view to gradually narrowing
the gap between the rich and the poor and achieving
common prosperity. This should serve as the economic
foundation for global and regional security.
All countries should step up consultation and
cooperation in the security field, increase mutual
understanding and trust, and undertake to settle through
peaceful means, whatever differences and disputes they may
have. This is the practical way to achieve global and
regional security.
In the first half of the year, five countries — China,
Russia, Kazakhstan, Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan — signed
the agreement on mutual reduction of military forces in the
border areas; the four-party talks aimed at bringing about a
new peace mechanism on the Korean peninsula were
launched; and the Regional Forum of the Association of
South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) introduced a
preliminary form of cooperation on security issues featuring
equal participation and negotiated consensus. These are
some of the examples of searching for new models of
security cooperation and of the initial progress already
made.
We feel concerned about the recent setbacks in the
Middle East peace process. We are of the view that the
relevant United Nations resolutions should be complied
with, agreements reached among the parties concerned in
the peace process should be honoured, the principle of land
for peace should be adhered to, and terrorist activities
should stop. We hope that the parties concerned will work
together on that basis so that the Madrid Peace Conference
on peace in the Middle East will resume at an early date.
We are also deeply concerned about the incessant conflicts
and turmoil which have plagued Africa since the beginning
of this year, and wish the African countries steady progress
along the road of peace and development.
The past year has seen new progress in the field of
international arms control and disarmament. The Chemical
Weapons Convention has entered into force; the Preparatory
Committee of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
has started its work; the extent of nuclear-weapon-free
zones is increasing; and negotiations on the efficacy of the
Biological Weapons Convention have made further
headway.
In our view, no one should try to monopolize the
market in the name of preventing proliferation or try to
interfere in the economic and technological cooperation of
other countries, developing countries in particular. An
overhaul of the discriminatory and exclusive
non-proliferation regimes and arrangements is thus
necessary, on the basis of universal participation, and the
United Nations should see to it that it accomplishes
something in this regard.
We maintain that continued efforts should be made
to advance the process of multilateral arms control and
disarmament. The universality of international arms-
control treaties should be strengthened and complete
adherence to them ensured. Instead of weakening and
undermining security, arms-control and disarmament
efforts should reinforce it. The target of disarmament
should not be shifted to developing countries, as countries
with the largest and most sophisticated arsenals bear a
special responsibility for disarmament.
I would also like to draw the Assembly’s attention
to China’s recent announcement of a unilateral step of
disarmament — that is, having reduced its troop strength
by 1 million in the 1980s, China will further reduce its
military by 500,000 troops within the next three years.
This is a move of major significance in the field of
disarmament.
In the past year, the overall situation of the world
economy has been good. Economic links and mutual
penetration among countries and regions are on the
constant increase. The importance of international
cooperation should be given a fresh evaluation with a
view to making it broader, closer and more fruitful.
Developing countries are most vulnerable to the
impact of adverse environmental conditions because of
their weak economic foundations. At present, the
international financial market is highly globalized and
very risky. We should work to stabilize the financial
market and ensure steady economic growth of the
developing countries.
The Uruguay Round agreements should be
implemented in a comprehensive, faithful and balanced
manner, and attempts to impose a linkage between
environmental or labour standards and trade must be
opposed.
Environment and development pose a common
challenge to mankind. The United Nations has held two
17


important conferences in the 1990s, setting forth a set of
guiding principles for the solution of the issue. We hope the
international community, developed countries in particular,
will honour its pledges to provide funds and transfer
technology to the developing countries so as to translate the
declaration of partnership into real action.
Many transboundary issues, such as poverty,
unemployment, refugees, drugs and crime, need to be
addressed through consultation by the international
community. The work of the United Nations in the social
field needs to be strengthened. All countries should, in
keeping with the principles of mutual respect, equality and
mutual benefit, endeavour to promote international
cooperation. They should get down to practical tasks, the
first of which is to help developing countries deal with their
most urgent difficulties. We hope that the special session of
the General Assembly on international drug control,
scheduled for next year, will yield positive results by
formulating a cross-century strategy for combating drug-
related crimes through strengthened international
cooperation along with effective measures of
implementation.
China will continue to support the United Nations in
its work in the social field and will make a greater
contribution to social progress around the world.
The realization of human rights is the common ideal
of mankind. All countries have made great efforts to this
end, with both achievements and lessons. We maintain that
the universality of human rights should be respected; yet
their realization must be integrated with the conditions of
each country. A review of United Nations practice over the
past 50 years and more shows that when countries or
regions do this they will enjoy social stability, economic
development and popular contentment. When they do not,
society will face disintegration, with people losing their
most basic human rights and freedoms, and gross violations
of human rights will even take place when chaos erupts as
a result of war.
We say it is quite natural for people to differ on the
human rights issue. The question is how to deal with these
differences. Which is the better approach: dialogue or
confrontation? I opt for dialogue. Only dialogue can
enhance mutual understanding and cooperation.
Confrontation, on the other hand, can only lead to further
estrangement and do nobody any good. We are pleased to
see that more and more countries are in favour of dialogue
in handling the human rights issue.
The Chinese Government attaches importance to
human rights and is dedicated to promoting and protecting
human rights of its people. Having repeatedly suffered
from foreign aggression in the past, the Chinese people
know full well how state sovereignty and territorial
integrity fundamentally guarantee the realization of their
human rights. We in China — taking upon ourselves the
task of feeding, clothing, sheltering and educating, and
providing travel facilities to, our 1.2 billion people —
know full well how vitally important our right to
subsistence and our right to development are. To enable
our people to lead a freer, happier and more democratic
life, we are focusing above all on the development of our
economy and on advancing democracy and our legal
system.
China will soon sign the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and is studying
earnestly the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights. We stand ready to work with other countries in a
continued effort to promote cooperation in the
international human rights field.
As the most important intergovernmental
organization in the world, the United Nations occupies an
irreplaceable position in international life. At the same
time, an evolving situation calls for reform of the United
Nations.
Last July, Secretary-General Kofi Annan submitted
an extensive report on the reform of the United Nations.
We appreciate his effort.
We are in favour of reforming the United Nations.
The purpose of such reform is to strengthen the role of
the United Nations and enhance its efficiency. Measures
taken in this regard must reflect the common interests of
all Member States and the results must be able to stand
the test of time. To this end, we offer the following
views.
United Nations reform is the shared cause of all
Member States. It should allow full play to democracy,
heed the voices of all sides and take into account the
interests of various parties. The reform plan should be
widely acceptable to Member States.
To enhance efficiency, an appropriate reduction of
personnel and expenditure is necessary. What is
important, however, is for the reform to put greater
emphasis on development issues with a view to
18


strengthening rather than weakening the United Nations role
in the promotion of economic and social development.
The reform should help preserve the diversity in the
United Nations, which is a microcosm of the diversity of
the world. Only when world diversity is recognized and
respected can different countries live in harmony and make
progress together.
The reform should stress practical results, place value
on quality, and progress in an incremental manner.
The enlargement of the Security Council should follow
the principle of equitable geographical distribution and
ensure a proper balance between developing and developed
countries. The Security Council will better perform the lofty
mission entrusted to it under the United Nations Charter
only when it becomes more broadly representative.
Payment of assessed dues is the bounden duty of
every Member State under the Charter of the United
Nations. We urge the countries concerned to pay off their
arrears without conditions and as early as possible in order
to put the United Nations on a sound financial basis for
normal operation.
Countries around the world need the United Nations.
So does the United Nations need their support.






﻿I congratulate
you, Mr. President, on assuming your responsible office.
Major decisions are to be taken at this session and I wish
you good fortune in your conduct of the proceedings.
I wish to thank Ambassador Razali for his
exceptional commitment. He has made us all aware of the
great responsibility we carry during this phase of reform.
The Secretary-General, through the impressive manner in
which he presented his reform proposals, has
re-emphasized that responsibility.
Nowhere else are we so acutely aware as at the
United Nations General Assembly that, regardless of our
origins or the colour of our skin, we have a common
destiny and that we all, North and South, the small
countries and the big countries, need one another.
Millions of people all over the world, especially our
youth, ask themselves whether we politicians and
delegates from 185 nations have drawn the right
conclusions from this; whether we can summon the
political will for joint action to improve their security, to
give them better opportunities in life, and to safeguard
their rights, or whether we will go on wasting and
destroying the natural sources of human life at their
10


expense. Those of us with adult children know how
sceptical their generation have become about the
capabilities of the governing class. That is good reason for
all of us to stop, think and take action, and to do so here
and now.
The world about which we are talking here today and
the world which we participate in shaping is not ours alone.
We have to preserve it for future generations as well. And
this we can achieve only through a united effort. For we are
only one world community that has to survive together.
There is only one boat for all, our vulnerable blue planet,
and there is only one common future, good or bad. That is
the reality we face as we cross over into the third
millennium and it is the reason why policies deriving from
a sense of responsibility are not utopian. Indeed, in our age
they are the only realistic approach.
The world organization’s programmes and funds, that
is to say, those of the United Nation’s Children’s Fund
(UNICEF), the United Nations Development Programme,
the United Nations Population Fund and the World Food
Programme, together dispense more than $4.6 billion a year
in the form of economic and social aid. That comes to
about 80 cents for every person on earth. By contrast, in
1994 the world’s Governments spent about $767 billion on
arms, which was roughly $134 per person. This gross
disproportion is intolerable.
I believe that we must all look beyond the rim of our
own national interests. There is no more time to lose. We
cannot simply come here, make and listen to speeches and
then return to business as usual for another 12 months. We
have a duty and responsibility to leave our children and
grandchildren a world which is worthy of humankind. And
that means doing something about it now, today. We must
protect the earth’s atmosphere by reducing greenhouse-gas
emissions. We must ban lethal anti-personnel landmines by
joining in the Ottawa process. We cannot accept that we
have hundreds of millions of anti-personnel landmines still
in place in the ground of many, many countries in this
world of ours.
We must halt the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, and we must streamline the United Nations
Organization. But above all, we must pay our contributions
on time and in full. These are the criteria which show
whether we are living up to our responsibility.
The opportunity for effective action is there. Despite
carping criticism, international cooperation within the
United Nations framework is working. Malnutrition and
undernourishment have been reduced by a third since
1960 and illiteracy by 50 per cent. Most of the credit for
this, no doubt, goes to the United Nations. Infant
mortality has been halved in the same period — a great
achievement by UNICEF.
Between 1990 and 1995 the world population
increased by 1.48 per cent, considerably less than the 1.72
per cent growth between 1985 and 1990. This nourishes
the hope that we have got over the hump of the
population explosion. Again, this is a big achievement
largely attributable to the work of the United Nations
Population Fund.
Much, I am pleased to note, has also been done to
improve the situation of women. This is important
because with all the tremendous social challenges we
face, the success of our efforts depends heavily on them.
They are the natural advocates of future generations. That
is why one of our main objectives still is to ensure they
have equal rights, not only on paper but also in practice.
The World Conference on Human Rights in Vienna,
the Earth Summit in Rio, the International Conference on
Population and Development in Cairo, the Summit for
Social Development in Copenhagen and the World
Conference on Women in Beijing have demonstrated that
the strategies for creating a better and more equitable
world are in place. What is missing is the political will to
put them into effect. We must learn to give common
interests priority over national interests.
We must start to think not only of the present but of
the future as well. The first step — and I think it cannot
be underlined enough — is to reform and strengthen the
Organization which embodies all these objectives: the
United Nations, our United Nations.
There has been enough talk. Time is running out. At
this fifty-second session, the General Assembly must
make decisions. The backlog of reforms must be dealt
with during this session.
True, Governments and politicians don’t possess a
magic wand with which to put the world in order. And I
readily admit, as a politician, that it is disappointing to
discover how relatively little we ourselves can change,
even in high positions, and I take it that it is the same
with the others present here. But that does not absolve us
from the responsibility to do everything in our power to
bring about necessary change and progress.
11


There is more than enough to be done. The world is
still profoundly unjust. From the moment of their birth,
millions of people have hardly any chance of leading a life
in conditions worthy of the human race. According to
UNICEF, more than 20 million children all over the world
are on the move. About 300,000 children were killed in the
Rwanda massacres. As a result of the 17-year-old war in
Afghanistan, another 280,000 or so have died from
undernourishment and disease. The civil war in Cambodia
has made some 350,000 children orphans. Every 90 minutes
a child is maimed by a landmine.
Yet it is on our children, the weakest members of any
society, be it in the North or the South of our planet, that
the world’s future and hopes depend. They are the weakest
members of any society. They are little people who need
big rights. How much worse off would they be if there
were no United Nations? What would become of the
world’s conscience? Who would demand consideration for
and solidarity with such children if we allowed this
Organization to decline?
At this moment about 25,000 soldiers, civilians and
members of non-governmental organizations are serving the
cause of peace around the globe. All of them deserve our
thanks and appreciation.
A week ago today five Germans, including the Deputy
of the High Representative, Ambassador Gerd Wagner, five
Americans, a Briton and a Pole lost their lives in a tragic
accident. We mourn their loss and share the grief of their
families. Their deaths are an admonition to redouble our
efforts for peace. They wanted to help people in need and
in doing so brought a ray of hope to Bosnia and to the
people working on the ground. That hope must not be
extinguished.
Last Saturday I attended the memorial service in
Sarajevo. I have visited the region more than once, and the
inner conflict among the people was again obvious. As
before, the main obstacles to lasting peace in the region are
hatred and fear among the various ethnic groups. On the
other hand, most Bosnians, in spite of the terrible events of
recent years, realize there is no future for them and their
children if the hatred and fear are not overcome, despite all
the terrible things that have been done, despite the rapes
and the “ethnic cleansing”.
That is why I am speaking out here today — to appeal
to all political leaders in Bosnia to change their attitude and
to mount a reconciliation campaign. The international
community has provided assistance, making millions of
dollars available. We have done a lot. We are very
committed on the ground, and we want to see the results
of what we have done. We believe that those who live in
security and peace have an obligation to help others.
So far more than 300 troops have sacrificed their
lives for the cause of peace in Bosnia. My country
alone — Germany — has spent more than 17 billion
marks on the peace process and on the more than 350,000
asylum-seekers in Germany coming from Kosovo. That is
a lot of money, and those on whom we spend it will have
to react in some way and have to give us a clear sign of
their willingness to implement the agreements.
But outside help, including military support, cannot
be provided indefinitely. And on no account — I want to
be unequivocal about this — will it be given to those who
thwart peace and reconciliation. Attempts to undermine
peace, to incite the people and to torpedo the
implementation of the Dayton Agreement, especially in
Republika Srpska — must stop.
I appeal to all political factions in the region to use
what time remains to launch a new and serious attempt to
settle their differences and to see to it that Karadzic and
other alleged war criminals and enemies of peace are
brought before the Hague Tribunal. These people must
not be allowed to sleep peacefully. But this demand must
be made by the international community, not just
Germany: these people must not be allowed to sleep
peacefully.
We Europeans have done quite a lot this year to
improve the situation on our continent in order to secure
a peaceful future for coming generations. Nations that
belong together are now growing together, and that in a
region that for centuries was divided and at war with
itself. The European Union and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization are gradually opening up to Europe’s new
democracies, while Russia and Ukraine are forming a
new, close partnership with both organizations.
And let the world be prepared. In 1999 we
Europeans, right on schedule and in conformity with
binding stability criteria, will introduce the Euro, the
common European currency. The enlargement of the
European Union and the introduction of the Euro are
historic steps to safeguard the future for coming
generations, steps that hardly anyone would have thought
possible only 10 years ago. And mark my words: there
will be no going back in Europe.
12


At the same time, we are aware that Europe
constitutes only a small section of the much larger global
construction site. Everywhere the harbingers of the new era
are knocking on the door. Nothing is like it used to be, yet
the hopes and wishes of citizens everywhere have remained
the same. They want peace and work. They want a roof
over their heads, protection from crime, and schools for
their children.
Thus the aims and ideals enshrined in the Charter are
just as valid as they were in 1945: peace, sustainable
economic and social development, protection of human
rights and democracy. These aims form a whole, and there
is no order of preference.
Eighty per cent of United Nations activities focus on
world poverty, and rightly so, because this is the big
problem that has remained unsolved since the ending of the
East-West confrontation. Nearly a quarter of the world’s
population — 1.3 billion people — live in poverty, while
840 million suffer from chronic undernourishment. In the
Agenda for Development we have adopted the right course
for the fight against poverty: good governance, market
economy, the rule of law, security for the citizen, regional
cooperation and international integration.
Following the lead of the Association of South-East
Asian Nations countries (ASEAN), the Southern Cone
Common Market (MERCOSUR) and the now-expanding
Southern African Development Community (SADC), the
nations of Central America too are forming closer ties. It is
becoming more and more apparent that this is the path of
progress. The worldwide trend towards closer multilateral
cooperation is increasing, and will lead to progress, security
and prosperity; it is the path of the future. One the one
hand, the Information Age with undreamed-of possibilities,
and, on the other, exclusive communities and citizens
without rights — this does not add up.
Yes, globalization is a great leveller. Basically, it
confronts industrial and developing countries alike with the
same question: are we going to accept the challenge of
being part of a “single world market”, or are we going to
mark time? A good number of newly industrialized and
developing countries have chosen the way forward, and it
has proved to be the right one. They have received the bulk
of global direct investment, which in 1996 increased by 8
per cent to almost $350 billion. Nor have the others been
forgotten. Within the framework of the G-8 process, the
new global partnership for development was established on
their behalf. A beginning was made at the Denver summit
in June, focusing particularly on the sub-Saharan nations
of Africa.
Since 1978 Germany has cancelled debts incurred by
the least developed countries and other land-locked
developing countries in Africa amounting to more than 9
billion marks. These countries will continue to be the
focal point of our development cooperation. Between
1991 and 1995 Germany made available 16.3 billion
marks for Africa’s sub-Saharan nations, and we are proud
of that.
I am glad that the Security Council is holding a
special meeting tomorrow on the situation in Africa.
Many positive developments have taken place there in
recent years, a fact that is often overlooked.
But light and shadow are still very close together. I
need only mention Congo Brazzaville, Sierra Leone,
Somalia and especially the Great Lakes region. My
country, the Federal Republic of Germany, has played a
humanitarian and political role in all these conflicts, and
we recognize that the African States themselves — in the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and in the
subregional organizations — are making significant
efforts to settle these conflicts. We must keep on
supporting them.
But Africa’s real problems lie deeper, in the social
and economic sphere, and in the lack of cohesion among
the different population groups. In my view, Europe’s
vast and important neighbouring continent, which has a
population of about 800 million covers about 23 per cent
of the world’s land surface, has little chance of achieving
stability and economic progress unless it follows the path
of regional cooperation. Such cooperation brings stability
where nations are too weak to achieve it individually.
Southern Africa is a good example. At the 1994
Berlin conference, cooperation between the SADC and the
European Union was raised to a new level. At our
meeting in June we and our African colleagues redefined
the framework for the dialogue between the European
Union and the OAU. Europe will stay on Africa’s side.
Part of this support is that we are helping countries
like Angola and Mozambique to rid themselves of the
scourge of mines. So far mine clearance by hand has
been, at least to me, like trying to remove a sand-dune
with a thimble. We cannot accept that. What we need for
this task is safe, large-capacity machinery.
13


The Oslo Conference gave rise to a sign of hope.
Eighty countries have put their names to a comprehensive
and verifiable ban on anti-personnel mines. I wish to thank
the Secretary-General for his personal efforts on this issue.
Anyone who, like me, has seen the poor, crippled victims
in Cambodia, Mozambique or Bosnia knows that these
treacherous killing devices are wholly — I repeat,
wholly — immoral. I therefore appeal to all countries still
on the outside to join the Ottawa process and help us ban
these infernal devices from the face of the Earth.
The world, galvanized by the spirit of freedom, has
been totally transformed. But this new freedom and its by-
products constitute a major test for us all, not only as
regards competitiveness but also as regards our solidarity,
our ability to show tolerance and to work together, and the
opening of markets.
The East-West conflict has been consigned to the past.
Here too, the question now is: are we going to try and
safeguard the future for posterity, or are we going to allow
new enemy stereotypes to divide us once again? There must
be no clash of civilizations. Hence, the dialogue of
civilizations and world religions must be raised to a new
level. To me this is the spiritual challenge as we approach
the twenty-first century, for only thus can we bring
different standpoints closer together and mobilize the
energies needed for the joint resolution of humanity’s
colossal problems.
I suggest that we hold a forum here at the United
Nations to consider how we can generate new momentum
for this dialogue worldwide. The matter is important
enough. Considerable cultural energy and potential for
innovation lie unused, and the United Nations is the proper
catalyst for their development.
But we must be very clear that there cannot and
should not be dialogue with terrorists. Terrorism has again
raised its ugly head in Mostar, Jerusalem and Cairo. The
vileness of the latest carnage in Algeria would be difficult
to exceed: it really does take your breath away. How long
can the international community look away? I know how
difficult it is to help from the outside, but the world
community cannot accept the cruel killing of utterly
innocent people in the dark of night without standing up
and reacting. We are not powerless in the face of such evil
slaughter of mostly uninvolved persons. In Denver, the
Group of Eight called upon all nations to sign the
international conventions on terrorism. We must resolutely
combat terrorism all over the world, using all democratic
means at our disposal. I call upon the General Assembly to
complete by the end of this session the negotiations on a
convention against terrorist bomb attacks, as proposed by
the Group of Eight.
Extradition or suitable punishment remains the
principle underlying our efforts to combat terrorism. No
one should give refuge to terrorists. We need a united
global front against terrorism. To combat fanatical killers
we can only consistently apply the law as well as police
and judicial measures. The source of sympathy for
terrorist objectives must be withered by political means.
In other words, we must get to the roots, which in most
cases are social problems.
On my last visit to the Middle East I spoke with
many citizens in Jerusalem, Bethlehem and Hebron, and
in the refugee camps in Gaza. I sensed their fears and
concerns. Those who have seen the wretched conditions
in the camps know that these people must be given a
chance to improve their lives. They need to be able to
hope again that the peace process is something from
which they will benefit, that the violence will stop, that
they can find work and have enough to eat, and that their
children can go to school.
For these hopes to materialize, both sides must show
a large measure of good will. President Arafat must do
everything in his power to stop the terrorism. And the
Israeli Government must desist from any measures which
cause the Palestinians to doubt Israel’s commitment to
peace. The settlements issue remains the crucial test here;
at least, that is what I believe. Continuing to build in Har
Homa only makes matters worse, so a moratorium is
essential. To my mind, this is the only way to reopen the
door to peace talks.
As for Iran, the new Government has changed its
tone. It remains to be seen whether this will lead to a
new, constructive policy, especially with regard to the
Middle East peace process, human rights and international
law. Germany has always maintained close and friendly
relations with the Iranian people, and in spite of all that
has happened, in spite of the Mykonos affair, we are
ready for talks. It is up to the Iranian Government to
provide the basis on which these can take place.
We are pleased that Mrs. Robinson has taken up her
post as the new High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Nowhere is the need for a new culture of dialogue so
great, we believe, as in the process of protecting such
rights. This is crucial to world peace and global
development. Any society that fails to respect human
14


rights, which include the right of development, is blocking
its own progress. Our policy on this matter is based on
dialogue and respect for different cultures. But we also
agree with Pope John Paul II, who has said that if we want
peace we must respect the conscience of the people. No
civilization or religion denies people their rights or
approves of murder and torture. Nor can any such action be
justified on political grounds.
We need an international criminal court of justice. The
statute of such a court is to be drawn up in Rome next
summer. The court must be empowered to act of its own
accord where genocide, crimes against humanity, war
crimes and wars of aggression are concerned, and to do so
wherever national courts either do not exist or cannot or are
unwilling to prosecute such crimes. The terrible genocides
in Rwanda and Srbrenica are warning signs. Such cardinal
crimes should not go unpunished.
Our responsibility towards future generations is
particularly acute where protection of the natural sources of
life is concerned. That is why it is crucial to maintain the
spirit engendered by the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development, the Rio Summit. That is the
purpose of the environment initiative put forward by
Chancellor Kohl together with Brazil, South Africa and
Singapore.
The climate conference to be held in Kyoto in
December will be a major test of the industrial world’s
commitment to the environment. Germany intends to reduce
its greenhouse-gas emissions by 25 per cent by the year
2010, based on 1990 levels. We and our partners in the
European Union are asking the other industrial countries to
cut theirs by at least 15 per cent. That would go part of the
way towards meeting our responsibility towards posterity.
When we look at the air pollution in southern Asia,
we cannot fail to admit that we urgently need to agree on
a forest convention. We must put an end to the ruthless
burning of forests to clear vast areas of land. Those who
deplete and destroy their own natural resources will make
us all lose out in the end. The eleventh hour is approaching.
Two weeks from now the decision on where to locate
the secretariat of the Convention to Combat Desertification
will be taken in Rome. We ask members to vote for Bonn.
Since the secretariat of the Framework Convention on
Climate Change already has its headquarters there, it makes
sense to combine the two.
The General Assembly is at a crossroads. Either we
solve our reform problems now and come out of our
introspective shell, or the United Nations will lose
political standing — that is what would happen. All
regional organizations, industrial, developing and
non-aligned countries have a joint responsibility for
implementing the reforms we have been talking about for
so long. This applies to all areas of United Nations
activity: economic and social, Security Council and
finance.
The Secretary-General has submitted a bold package
of reforms. Even though we do not agree with every
detail, we support the package as a whole. I appeal to all
Member States: let us not talk it to shreds, but make
quick decisions so that the necessary measures can be put
into effect. The United Nations has to be streamlined in
order to increase its efficiency. Whatever savings are
made through reform should be used for developments-
assistance purposes.
The Security Council must reflect today’s political
realities, one of which is the greater status of Africa,
Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean. The debate on
this matter should not be artificially prolonged. This the
most important body of the United Nations, and it cannot
credibly and effectively perform its role as the guardian
of peace in the twenty-first century if its composition
remains basically as it was in 1945.
It is gratifying to note that a large number of States
regard the reunited Germany as a suitable candidate for a
permanent seat on the Security Council. If elected, we
will be able to make a good contribution, one that is in
keeping with the spirit of the Charter.
Two years ago, on the Organization’s fiftieth
birthday, we solemnly pledged to hand on to the next
millennium a United Nations equipped and funded for its
task. That promise has to be kept, and it has to be kept by
all. This means, first and foremost, paying our
contributions in full and on time, because without
finances this Organization is a powerless one. The
European Union has submitted its proposal for changing
the scale of assessments, the purpose of which is to
ensure a fair distribution of burdens.
Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights reads,
“All human beings are born free and
equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed
15


with reason and conscience and should act
towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.”
This vision must be sustained: the vision of a world in
which it is not the law of the strongest, but the strength of
the law which prevails; a world in which both the strong
and the weak feel at home; a world fit to live in which we
can safely leave to our children and to our grandchildren.






﻿May I first say, Sir, how pleased my country is at your
election as President of the fifty-second session of the
United Nations General Assembly. I should also like to say
to the Secretary-General that France welcomes the action he
has already taken and assure him that he has our support
and confidence.
I shall begin my statement by expressing a conviction
on behalf of my country: the world needs the United
Nations more than ever. No, the United Nations did not
lose its raison d'être with the end of the cold war, the end
of the arms race between the two blocs and the head-on
clash of differing ideologies.
On the contrary, the need for a universal regulating
body has never been so apparent. The reasons are known to
all. Without regret, we left the era of bipolar confrontation
to enter, in 1991, a new, global, evolving world in which
185 States cooperate, make alliances with one another or
compete in stable or, conversely, unstable combinations.
In this world, States are no longer the sole players. The
giant conglomerates, the financial markets, the media,
opinion groups and non-governmental organizations all
play an increasing role. Because of this, there is an
overriding need for clear, fair and predictable ground
rules to establish a framework for settling conflicts or
mere differences. For, nowadays, no serious problem can
be resolved by one country, even the most powerful,
entirely on its own.
Unless we take care, unless we manage to build a
world in which the rule of law prevails among all States,
a world in equilibrium between its major centres of
power, other scenarios will ensue: the absence of a
counterweight will encourage the predominance of a
single Power, and, inevitably, that Power will be tempted
to engage in unilateralism; for want of organized regional
entities, globalization will exacerbate the economic — and
sometimes political — struggle of each against all; States
will find themselves further weakened, and some will
implode under the effects of aggressive nationalism,
which is often contagious. Fierce competition will render
virtually impossible environmental conservation, however
urgent, however vital in the true meaning of the word, as
well as the fight against drugs and crime; greater respect
for human rights will be compromised.
Our common task must be to forestall such dangers
and, at the same time, to consolidate, together, the
achievements of recent years. For this, regional groupings
are one of the best possible foundations. Europe, which
has been the crucible of so many wars, has been showing
the way for half a century. The growth rates achieved by
many countries in Asia, in Latin America and now in
Africa, announce the emergence of new centres of power
and prosperity. Political and economic entities are being
organized and institutionalized: South-East Asia meets in
the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN);
in Latin America, the Southern Cone Common Market
(MERCOSUR) is developing, as are the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) in southern Africa and
the Economic Community of West African States
19


(ECOWAS) in the west of that continent. To some extent,
one might also include cultural and political entities, such
as the Commonwealth and la Francophonie. This is a
sensible way to adapt to globalization.
However, at the global level we need a coherent,
effective United Nations with the resources necessary to
carry out its missions. It is the task of this body to facilitate
the smooth organization of international relations and to
determine universally recognized rules of law. To be sure,
other organizations exist in various sectors, and these have
their own, very important areas of authority. But none of
them can take the place of the United Nations in giving the
world of tomorrow a set of comprehensive rules. True to its
tradition, France will support all the Organization's efforts
to that end.
I come now to the main object of the session which is
beginning. To carry out the major role we expect of it, the
United Nations must retain or reacquire the means to take
decisions and to act. For this, we must resolve two matters:
United Nations reform and the financing of the
Organization. The ability of the United Nations to act in the
years ahead will depend on the solutions we find together.
France approved of the move by the new Secretary-
General at the outset of his mandate to continue the study
initiated by his predecessor, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali.
The main lines Mr. Kofi Annan has proposed for the work
and the impetus he has given to the process of revamping
the Organization have received France’s full support, a
support shared by France’s partners in the European Union.
The remarks made from this rostrum by its current
President, the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Luxembourg,
illustrate this. I should like to comment more specifically
on three points: the Security Council, financial reform and
restructuring.
The current composition of the Security Council no
longer accurately reflects the political geography of today’s
world. Clearly, it has to be reformed — that is to say,
enlarged — to become more representative.
In this connection, we must take into account the
Security Council’s indispensable role in peacekeeping and
thus elect countries able to contribute to this task, whether
they are from the North or the South.
Accordingly, my country is in favour of the accession
of Germany, Japan and three countries from the South to
permanent seats and the establishment of new
non-permanent seats. For a Security Council composed
solely of the principal countries of the North would not
be representative. Nor should we forget that, once it is
enlarged, and hence more representative, the Council will
still have to be effective. That is essential.
The proposals that have been submitted to us should
make it possible to move forward. However, we are all
aware that no consensus has yet been reached and that
debates on this matter will be difficult. National interests
and the concerns of regional groups must be given due
consideration. In any event, I welcome President Razali’s
perseverance throughout the fifty-first session of the
United Nations General Assembly, which made it possible
to draft a solid working basis from which we must now
proceed to work to find a solution.
Furthermore, financial reform of the United Nations
is a particularly complex issue. It is shocking that the
United Nations should be in a precarious state and
therefore in a situation of financial and budgetary
dependence with respect to its debtors. I believe that we
will be able to move towards a solution on the basis of
three principles: what is owed to the United Nations must
be paid in full, on time and without conditions. Finally,
the payment of contributions should not be a way of
exerting pressure on the Secretary-General and the other
Member States.
With these rudimentary principles as a basis, France
is open to discussion on all aspects of the problem. We
will have to decide on the scale for apportioning
assessments among all States. There is no perfect scale,
but some are not as bad as others. The concept of each
State’s ability to pay, which has enjoyed consensus since
the outset, still seems simple, logical and fair today. On
that basis, a solution can be found that takes account of
the needs and interests of each State. France will do its
utmost to facilitate the settlement of the financial crisis.
We can be both imaginative and conciliatory — like the
European Union’s plan. But our efforts will succeed only
if there is respect for the rules I have just recalled, which
reflect our Organization's impartiality and credibility. If
the United Nations were forced to comply with the
unilateral demands of one among us, in regard both to its
financing and its functioning, then how could it convince
anyone in the future that it is impartial and faithful to the
principle of the equality of all under the Charter, and
generate respect for its decisions?
I come now to restructuring. The Secretary-General
has undertaken to restructure and regroup the
Organization’s institutions. France appreciates the logic of
20


this approach. It therefore welcomes the establishment in
Vienna of a centre to deal specifically with combating new
transnational dangers such as organized crime, drug
trafficking and terrorism, problems that we must fight with
ever-increased vigour. It is also very much in favour of
integrating the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the Centre for Human Rights into a single entity
in Geneva where the main humanitarian aid services are
already established. It also hopes that the main issues
involving disarmament can continue to be addressed in
Geneva.
From this rostrum, I applaud the appointment of
Mrs. Mary Robinson to the post of High Commissioner for
Human Rights. Her very strong personality is
commensurate with the challenges her task entails. The
commemoration of the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, starting on 10 December this
year, will provide an opportunity to reaffirm, in the face of
persistent violations and ever-recurring acts of barbarism,
the universality of these rights. But we will also have to ask
ourselves, in addition to making the usual declarations that
are still necessary, what political and economic actions are
needed to make real headway, in specific situations,
towards respect for human rights, and how the emergence
of democracies can be encouraged from outside.
The United Nations, while adapting, must remain the
preferred instrument for taking action in the interests of
peace. At this time, the United Nations is really the only
organization that can try to bring order to an international
society which is becoming fragmented and globalized at the
same time. The United Nations is faced with both a
resurgence of every kind of micro-nationalism and the
strengthening of regional entities. Most conflicts are now
not between States but within them. Given these new
challenges, the United Nations has already demonstrated
how adaptable and flexible it is. But we must continue. To
ensure the lasting settlement of conflicts, consciences have
to be assuaged and justice needs to be done to put an end
to the endless cycle of revenge. The perpetrators of the
most serious crimes must be tried impartially, with respect
for the rights of the defence, and after an exemplary
investigation which reveals the facts in full. This is why
France supports the action of the international criminal
tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, and hopes
that the forthcoming conference on an international criminal
court will be a success.
Since the beginning of the decade, the Organization’s
actions to promote peace and international stability have
changed radically. The time has passed when large-scale
peacekeeping operations were mounted solely under the
blue flag of the United Nations, in Cambodia and the
former Yugoslavia for example, in order to take on
massive challenges alone. Today, the United Nations
intervenes more and more frequently in conjunction with
other organizations or by authorizing the action of
regional actors. In Europe, the United Nations is pooling
its efforts with those of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization in sensitive theatres of operation, and even
with those of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe. In Africa, for the first time, the
Secretaries-General of the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) have in the past
year appointed a joint special representative in the person
of Ambassador Sahnoun, in the Great Lakes region. It is
good that these two organizations are working together.
This development must be encouraged. We must also help
African States and organizations to strengthen their own
peacekeeping capabilities. To this end, countries outside
the African continent must pool their efforts and not
multiply the number of rival and sometimes redundant
initiatives. For instance, the Government of France, the
United Kingdom and the United States recently agreed to
act together with all those who wish to do so to
strengthen the peacekeeping capabilities of African
countries, under the auspices of the United Nations, of
course, and in cooperation with the OAU.
But, in France's view, encouraging Africa to become
more involved in resolving crises certainly does not mean
that the international community should relinquish its
other responsibilities with regard to the African continent.
It is therefore essential that the United Nations be ready,
once the declared conditions are met, to act in Congo-
Brazzaville. By the same token, the many recent tragedies
in the Great Lakes region make sustained international
involvement indispensable. This United Nations
commitment to promote peace and development must also
serve to further human rights. That is why it is important
for the humanitarian investigative task force in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to be able to carry out
its mission. I might add that by spending too much time
talking about crises in Africa, one might forget the
essential point, namely that the African continent is taking
off in quite an unprecedented way. My country believes
in this.
We are all still mobilized by the situation in the
Middle East. The peace process, set in train on the
initiative of clear-sighted and courageous men on both
sides, raised tremendous hopes. We can clearly see the
increasingly tragic consequences to which the current
21


stalemate would lead, were it to last. The peoples of this
region are once again stuck in an impasse, in a situation of
humiliation, resentment, and the fear of terrorism. New
efforts are therefore necessary so that these two peoples,
Israeli and Palestinian, which are matched in terms of
insecurity and fear of the future, can together find justice
and security. France gave its full support to the action by
the American Secretary of State, who recently went to the
Middle East. Indeed, the United States has a special
responsibility and special means to attempt to reinvigorate
the peace process and effectively combat the deadly acts of
extremism. France and Europe are ready to take part in any
constructive move to this end.
What can the United Nations do? It cannot take the
place of the parties concerned, which have the primary
responsibility. It is up to the Organization to state, or
restate, the law and to recall the principles which must be
the basis for any peace if we want it to last. I refer here to
the resolutions adopted by the Security Council on the
conflict in the Middle East, not forgetting resolution 425
(1978), which deals with the integrity of Lebanon in
particular.
Many other crisis situations where the wounds have
not healed could be mentioned from this rostrum — so
diverse is the work of the United Nations. In particular, I
am thinking of the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
where security has been restored but where the construction
of a State with viable democratic institutions remains
uncertain; and of Albania, where the new stability, thanks
to resolute European action authorized by the United
Nations, is giving rise to new hopes. I am also thinking of
the tenacious efforts of the United Nations to contain or
defuse the crises in Haiti, Cyprus, Georgia, Afghanistan,
Tajikistan and elsewhere.
Finally, let us not forget, now or ever, much-needed
development assistance.
Of course, the insertion of emerging economies,
including the former underdeveloped economies, into the
global economy is an excellent thing; indeed, past efforts in
this regard have proved to be well founded. But this must
not be a selfish excuse for the rich countries to give up
their effort to provide development assistance, which is
equally necessary. In any event, this is very much an
imperative for the leaders of the member States of the
Francophone community. The summit of these States in
Hanoi in November will attest to their interest in more
balanced development and also to their commitment to
respecting the multiplicity of cultures and languages.
I will say no more, however — other than to draw
one single conclusion. While the world has changed so
much over the past 50 years, and even more over the past
six years, its inhabitants still voice the same needs. The
rule of law must be continually consolidated and the
democratic ideal put into practice, faced as we are with
the temptations of oppression and the use of force, for
which new pretexts are constantly being invoked. How
can we be sure that the factors that make for war and
chaos are banned for ever from all continents, including
Europe?
At this moment of our Organization's reform, let us
not forget the lessons of history. Only international
dialogue, the common management of crises, beginning
with their prevention, and the wise conservation of the
earth’s resources make it possible for the voice of reason
and peace to prevail and for confidence in progress to be
rebuilt. The United Nations is the right and the only
legitimate forum for such international discussions, and
the only one where they are universal. Our Organization
is an irreplaceable framework and a vital necessity for us
all. In the past, it has often been able to deter, address,
resolve and prevent. Let us reform it so as to make it
even more useful.






﻿We inhabit a modern
world in which we must accept change as the normal
condition of life. Communication around the globe is
becoming faster. The distance between our countries is
becoming shorter. I travelled to New York at twice the
speed of sound and I landed before I took off. Every word
I say to the Assembly today will be sent to London down
a telephone line and within minutes it will appear on the
World Wide Web.
Our countries today are intertwined as never before in
a market place that is global. And our people have learned
that their purchasing decisions have an impact on jobs and
pay across the planet — from the fruit they buy at the
supermarket to the fuel they use in their cars. Changes to
the environment in one continent can produce changes to
the weather in another continent. Our countries are
increasingly interdependent, and the challenges we each
face are global challenges — challenges that we must face
together: poverty, conflict, climate change, international
crime and the drugs menace. These are all international
problems that require us to behave as a united nations not
just in name but in reality.
And so the United Nations should have a bigger role
than ever before. If it appears to be less relevant, it is not
for want of challenge but for want of reform. The United
Nations must modernize. It must be able to confront the
new global challenges that all its Members face. It will
need flexibility, competence and efficiency to meet the
complex needs of the twenty-first century because the
United Nations cannot give leadership to a changing
world if we ourselves refuse to change.
The outstanding leadership shown by the Secretary-
General is an important start. His proposals for
institutional reform will retain what is best in the United
Nations system but give it the flexibility and the
efficiency it needs to respond rapidly to the new
challenges of a new century. The member countries of the
United Nations must support his commitment to
modernization. We must each stop measuring each
proposal for reform in terms of narrow self-interest and,
instead, recognize that we all have a greater interest in
supporting reform.
Britain’s Labour Government is firmly committed to
the United Nations. We demonstrated this commitment as
soon as we were elected by rejoining the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) and by confirming our intention to stay in the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
(UNIDO). We were elected because we offered Britain
modernization to succeed in a new century. We pledge
ourselves to back modernization of the United Nations.
We do so because we know that our country, like all
other Member States, will benefit from a United Nations
that is efficient, representative and properly funded.
Let me take each of those in turn. Efficient does not
spell cheap. But we do want to see the United Nations do
the most it can with what it has got — a United Nations
that no longer spends $150 million producing 2,500 tons
of documents every year. We thoroughly welcome the
Secretary-General’s commitment to reduce the number of
documents by 25 per cent by next year. We want to see
an end to the duplication between United Nations
agencies, and I give my wholehearted support to the
Secretary-General’s proposal for a Special Commission to
look at the division of labour right across the United
Nations system.
15


Another way in which the United Nations is out of
date is its Security Council. We are all agreed in this
Chamber that what was appropriate in 1945 is not what is
right in 1997. The world has changed. Most of the
countries represented here today did not even exist when
the United Nations was formed. The Security Council must
move on if it is not to lose its legitimacy. Japan and
Germany should both be included in an expanded
permanent membership, and there should be a new balance
between developed and developing countries in a
modernized Security Council. We are all agreed on the
need for change; we have been discussing it for four years.
It is time that we agreed that a proposal for change which
has the backing of the vast majority of Members is better
than a status quo which has the backing of none.
It is not just all the countries of the United Nations
that must be properly represented, but all the people of
those countries. More than half those people are women.
Britain welcomes the United Nations willingness to put
gender perspective into all areas of its work. The new
Labour Government attaches particular importance to
strengthening the rights of women. Women do more than
half the world’s work. They should have equal status in the
international organizations of the world.
Let us also put the United Nations finances on a sound
basis. Speaker after speaker yesterday referred to the need
for us to cooperate to defeat those who make fortunes from
organized crime and to contain the drugs trade, second only
in value to the oil trade. We cannot defeat those well-
resourced menaces to the modern world through a United
Nations that staggers from year to year on the verge of
bankruptcy.
We need a solution based on the ability to pay. The
most equitable means of sharing the burden is to base
contributions on share of global gross national product. But
that measure will only be accepted as equitable if it is
updated regularly to reflect the rapid changes to the world
economy. And it is not equitable that some Members pay
their contributions while other Members do not. Britain
pays in full and on time. Britain expects every Member
State, however large or however small, to do the same.
These three issues — institutional reform, Security
Council reform and financial reform — are critical to the
United Nations future. Let us commit ourselves to progress
on all these issues by the end of 1997 and solutions by this
time next year. Next time we meet, let us celebrate a
modern United Nations that can face the future with
confidence, rather than looking back on another year of
agreeing about all the questions but not being able to
agree on any of the answers. And then the United Nations
will be able to get on with its job.
There are three key areas in which the United
Nations has a vital job to do — promoting sustainable
development, promoting peace and promoting human
rights. Those are not separate challenges, but different
faces of the same challenge. There can be no real and
sustainable development or respect for human rights
without peace. And there will be no permanent peace
where there is only poverty and injustice.
During every speech this week another 300 children
will die before their first birthday, most of them deaths
that could be easily and cheaply prevented. If the United
Nations is to be relevant to its Members, then more than
anything else it must enable people to lift themselves out
of poverty.
Britain supports the United Nations aid target. As
Britain’s contribution to achieving it, the mew Labour
Governments has committed itself to reversing the decline
in the British aid budget. Britain has also consistently
urged faster action in tackling the problem of debt, and at
the Commonwealth Finance Ministers meeting in
Mauritius last week, British Chancellor Gordon Brown
launched a new initiative to cut debt that will benefit 300
million of the world’s poorest people and help developing
countries escape from the debt trap.
But aid will not alone eliminate poverty. We need to
continue breaking down the barriers that deny the poorest
countries access to the world’s most lucrative markets.
We need to make sure that producers in Africa are
allowed to sell their goods to Europe and to America as
easily as their producers can sell their goods to Africa.
Sustainable development will do more than just
reduce poverty. Poverty is also one of the greatest threats
to the environment. If we want to preserve the planet for
future generations, we must make sure that development
respects the environment and does not destroy it. The
United Nations Commission on Sustainable Development
has made important progress towards this goal. But it is
not a task any country can subcontract to the United
Nations. We are all in this together. No country can opt
out of global warming or fence in its own private climate.
We need common action to save our common
environment.
16


The new Labour Government has set itself the
ambitious target of reducing Britain’s emissions of
greenhouse gases by 20 per cent by the year 2010. At the
third session of the Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, in
Kyoto, the nations of the world must sign up to binding
targets and then they must keep to them.
The second key goal is peace — preventing conflicts
before they happen, helping to end them when they do
happen and helping to rebuild lasting peace after conflict.
Each of these contributions to peace is equally vital.
But it is the United Nations peacekeeping operations
that have the highest profile, and with good reason. The
blue berets have prevented worse conflict across the world,
from Eastern Slavonia to the Western Sahara. Many have
laid down their lives, not in the conduct of war but in the
pursuit of peace. The death of a dozen international
policemen and envoys, among them a British diplomat, in
the United Nations helicopter that crashed in Bosnia last
week, was a grim reminder of the risks we ask our peace-
builders to take. I pay tribute to their courage and salute
them for their professionalism and their skill.
The last area in which the United Nations must focus
is human rights. As the world becomes smaller, and news
and ideas travel faster, so the principle that certain rights
are universal becomes even more compelling. The
Universal Declaration of Human Rights sets out the right to
freedom from the fear of violence and the right to liberty
from the threat of unjust imprisonment. Those are rights to
which every citizen of the world irrespective of race, creed
or colour. They must not be limited to any one culture or
any one continent. As the Secretary-General has pointed out
Secretary-General has pointed out, the mothers from every
culture weep when their sons and daughters are killed or
maimed by repressive rule.
Nor do human rights hinder economic development.
The past two decades have demonstrated that political
freedom and economic development are not in conflict but
are mutually reinforcing. Free societies are efficient
economies. Authoritarian rule more often produces
economic stagnation. That is why Britain supports the
Secretary-General’s proposals to integrate human rights into
all the work that the United Nations does.
This is my first General Assembly. I attend it with
both hope and with anxiety — hope that, if it modernizes,
the United Nations can help us face the global challenges
of the future; anxiety that, without modernizing, the
United Nations will lose legitimacy and its effectiveness.
We must not let that happen. There are too many
children stunted by poverty, too many mothers fearful of
war, too many people whose basic human rights are being
abuse. The United Nations offers them hope. Let us
commit ourselves this week to achieving a modern,
reformed United Nations that will turn hope into reality.




﻿Mr. President, it is a particular
pleasure for me to see you presiding over the General
Assembly. As Ambassador to the former Soviet Union for
five years, I had a long association with Ukraine, and I
retain the fondest memories of my several visits to your
beautiful country. You preside over an Assembly that will
deliberate on crucial issues before the world community,
on which your experience and guidance will be
invaluable. I would also like to congratulate your
predecessor, Ambassador Razali Ismail, on the
engagement with which he acted during his presidency to
carry our work forward. I am delighted also to see the
Secretary-General here.
We are celebrating in India the fiftieth anniversary
of our emergence as a free nation. The constitutional
moorings and the democratic forms which the new nation-
State has accepted and adopted rest on the vast foundation
of civilizational experience and ethos. This explains the
stability, coherence and creative unity of the vast Indian
society, which is a world in itself. The experience has
wrought in us the deep conviction that, while there are
universally shared values and striving, there can be no
rigid prescriptions. We see the United Nations in this
image, as a crucible in which we meld together our
individual contributions to a world civilization, yet
6


recognizing the variety of historical and cultural experiences
we bring to it.
The cold war cast an early shadow on the
Organization, creating a situation of ideological
polarization. The Non-Aligned Movement rejected this
imposition of rigidity, representing an independent and
responsible alternative to the world view. This remains true,
and the Non-Aligned Movement retains its validity and
relevance, even after the disappearance of bloc rivalries.
Non-alignment was not a by-product of the cold war. Then,
it expressed the overwhelming need of previously colonized
and disempowered nations to a voice, a perspective and an
agenda in a politically and economically unequal and
inequitable world. Today, it remains a voice of reason and
constructive engagement for the times ahead, which demand
common purpose and contribution from all sides towards a
convergence of intent on vital, even fateful, global
concerns.
Since the creation of the Charter of the United
Nations, the world should have changed far more than it
has in the half century that has elapsed. Decolonization is
almost complete, but the scars of colonization are still with
us. The present bears a heavy burden of the past. South
Africa is free, but racism rears its ugly head amidst us,
often laced with xenophobia. Development and growth —
and even human dignity — remain for much of the world
a distant dream. We must insistently ask ourselves what we
can decisively do at the United Nations to make the dreams
of the hundreds of millions come true, how we can make
the United Nations a more vibrant organization for the
world community as a whole, at a time when we need it
more than we ever have, a United Nations that is better
equipped to fully respond to the challenges of the next
century.
As an organization, the United Nations must also
evolve and adapt itself to a rapidly changing environment,
the better to serve the core needs of the world community.
As a country which sets very great store on the capacity of
the United Nations to contribute to international peace and
security, and to development — the two crucial priorities
before the world community — India, like others, has a
vital interest in a United Nations that continually makes
itself more responsive to the needs of its Member States
and prepares itself to serve them better. This, we believe,
is the objective of reform. We are hence very pleased that
the Secretary-General, immediately after taking office,
made reform one of his priorities and we congratulate him
on this commitment. Within the first seven months of his
tenure, he has produced a series of proposals of impressive
breadth and scope. These are before us, and many have
described this session as a reform General Assembly. In
this connection, I extend my good wishes to you,
Mr. Secretary-General.
We judge the agenda for reform by the measures I
have described. We are supportive of all proposals that,
in our view, will carry forward, or improve, the
Secretariat’s ability to respond to the mandates of the
international community. We will express our thoughts
constructively with the aim of strengthening the process
and direction of reform to the collective advantage of the
global community and the Organization that represents it.
We do not see reform simply as an exercise to trim the
budget of the United Nations. Instead, reforms should
contribute towards strengthening the United Nations and
its capacity to respond effectively to the priorities
identified by the overwhelming majority of its
membership.
The crisis that confronts the United Nations
manifests itself in many ways. A financial crisis has
resulted from the inability of some to fulfil their Charter
commitments, and from the laying down of pre-conditions
to meet them. The United Nations does not have the
means to execute programmes that respond to the felt
needs and priorities of its membership, precisely at a time
when such programmes are sorely necessary. As a result,
the United Nations is in danger of being marginalized as
the global forum where decisions can be taken that truly
respond to the challenges of globalization. The solution
lies not in piecemeal reform but in building trust between
nations, and in an acceptance that in international
relations democratic principles should be the norm, just as
they are being increasingly accepted in national
governance.
In our view, international peace and security and
development are inextricably linked. The one is
impossible to achieve without the other. Over the last six
or seven years, there has been a growing emphasis on the
political aspects of the tasks of development, such as
democracy and human rights. Unless the underlying
causes of underdevelopment, poverty and social alienation
are effectively addressed and removed, this emphasis will
remain unrealized. Therefore, the single most important
target that the United Nations should set itself is the
promotion of sustained economic growth in the
developing countries that will lead to the eradication of
poverty, and erase the tensions and pressures that have
led to the collapse of governance and social order in
several States, and to conflicts between others.
7


International peace and stability will be enhanced only
when all countries enjoy a minimum standard of economic
self-sufficiency and well-being. Therefore, we believe that
the thrust of any reform proposals in the United Nations
should make the promotion of sustained economic
development the principal cross-sectoral issue for the
Secretariat’s programmes. We believe that there are enough
intergovernmental mandates to permit the Secretariat to
tailor programmes towards this end.
The universality of human rights, to which we all
committed ourselves almost five years ago at Vienna,
expresses itself at one level in the international norms for
the promotion and protection of human rights and our
collective efforts to foster respect for these standards. On a
higher plane, this universality stems from the search in
different civilizations for ways of protecting the human
dignity of every individual. Next year, as we celebrate the
fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, we will reflect on whether the ideals enshrined in
the Declaration have become a reality for people in all parts
of the world. As we do so, we must build confidence in a
process that encourages introspection and self-criticism,
dialogue and consultation, rather than confrontation and
judgement. The Declaration calls for the advent of a world
order in which human beings shall enjoy freedom of speech
and belief and freedom from fear and want as the highest
aspirations of the common people. It recognizes the
importance of economic, social and cultural rights as well
as their interdependence with civil and political rights. The
full realization of all these rights is what will give true
meaning to the quest for human dignity embodied in the
Universal Declaration.
India’s approach to the observance and promotion of
human rights is inspired by the holistic vision of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Indian
Constitution. A strong constitutional framework, mutually
reinforcing safeguards, both within and outside this
framework; a policy of transparency and responsiveness to
civil society; and cooperation with the human rights system
of the United Nations — in particular with the treaty
bodies — are the main elements of this approach in the
areas of civil and political rights. Equally important, if not
more so, are the assault on poverty and underdevelopment;
the promotion of awareness of rights; and a policy of
affirmative action for the uplifting of socially and
economically vulnerable sectors of society.
This is a complex task, especially in a country of
India’s diversity. Many times, when the State has faltered
civil society has stepped in. In India, as elsewhere,
individuals have wrought miracles by working outside the
established systems and going beyond traditional ways of
thinking. In recent times, the most moving example has
been that of a frail, sari-clad woman: Mother Teresa. Her
fathomless compassion and soothing touch will be missed
by millions in India. I would like to pay tribute to this
apostle of mercy who rendered service and brought hope
to millions of poor and suffering people, not only in India
but all over the world.
While development must be our supreme objective,
we also need peace, stability and security in order to
achieve it. The dangers that threaten us have become
increasingly more frightening during the last 50 years
than any that have cast their shadow over mankind in its
entire history. The development of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons has made it possible to destroy whole
populations. As the international community, we have
decided to outlaw the production, possession and use of
chemical and biological weapons.
However, with regard to the weapons of mass
destruction capable of the total annihilation of human
civilization, the global community has lived for too long
on a diet of empty promises. The pretexts cited in favour
of clinging to nuclear arsenals, while always questionable,
have now vanished. Mere non-proliferation treaties
promoted as disarmament measures only serve to entrench
a nuclear monopoly. No credible steps towards striving to
realize a nuclear-weapon-free world are contemplated,
much less taken, by those who should be showing the
way. No justifications can be proffered, as they were
during the cold war.
The patience of the world community — as
expressed by the International Court of Justice, by the
enlightened voices of those who formerly believed in
deterrence, by political and general opinion and by
weighty voluntary initiatives — is starting to wear thin.
Nuclear-weapon Powers owe it to the world to answer the
question why they need nuclear weapons. Global opinion
wants a nuclear weapons convention — as has already
been outlined for the class of biological and chemical
weapons — and will not rest until it is achieved. We
appeal to nuclear-weapon States to align their policies
with what the world wants. We see the United Nations as
the forum in which the international community must
continue to demand universal nuclear disarmament, and
we therefore expect that the Secretariat's programmes will
support this intergovernmental objective.
8


Under the Charter, the Security Council was
constituted as a body on which the general membership
conferred primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, acting on its behalf. In
recent years, the Security Council has been able to play a
more active role in discharging its responsibilities.
However, there is often a perception that the Council’s
actions have not always reflected the sentiments of the
general membership. Therefore, it is imperative — and the
time has come — for the Security Council to take on as
permanent members developing countries which are
equipped to make important contributions through their
world views and historical experiences and the values of
their civilizations. In this way the decisions of the Council
will truly reflect the wider membership of the United
Nations. Otherwise, the Council’s actions will be seen as
progressively less representative precisely at a time when it
is being called upon to act far more frequently than before
on behalf of the world community.
India has let it be known in the General Assembly
since 1994 that it is prepared to accept the responsibilities
of permanent membership. We are the largest democracy in
the world, with a civilization replete with ancient values
and achievements, as well as a world view based on a
universalist inspiration, participatory governance, respect for
diversity and pluralism, and a readiness for constructive
engagement in the world’s affairs. These strengths, we
believe, would be an asset to an expanded Security Council.
India’s standing as one of the leading economies of the
world will be progressively strengthened, and we are
prepared to bear fully the responsibilities of permanent
membership. India’s long-standing participation in United
Nations peacekeeping operations testifies not only to the
dedication and professionalism of Indian soldiers, but also
to the political will of the Government to actively
contribute to these operations.
The core of our foreign policy is our keenness to
pursue close ties and build confidence and cooperation with
our neighbours, while recognizing fully that we are the
largest country in the region, in terms not only of size and
population but also of economic capabilities. We extend our
hand of friendship not in a spirit of mere reciprocity but in
good faith. Where we do expect reciprocity, unrelated to
size and capacity, is in mutual respect for each other’s
territorial integrity and sovereignty. We seek to advance
cohesion, synergy and mutual goodwill in our
neighbourhood so that together we can fully participate in
and derive benefits from the dynamic changes the world is
currently witnessing. Our approach has contributed to the
setting in motion of a trend towards cooperation in our
region.
As a large and diverse economy, we are developing
new partnerships that go beyond the region and revitalize
the old cultural and commercial links. Politically, this is
expressed in the active interest that we have taken in
supporting the Middle East peace process — our ties with
the Arab world reaching deep into history — and our
strong fraternal ties with developing countries in general
and with Africa in particular. In our larger
neighbourhood, with which we have a shared history, we
have enhanced our engagement with the Association of
South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) as a full-dialogue
partner and as a participant in the ASEAN Regional
Forum.
While maintaining our traditional relationships with
the United States, Russia, the European Union and Japan,
we have also been strengthening global trends in regional
cooperation by actively promoting cooperation among
countries of the Indian Ocean rim and trying to recover
the cultural and commercial connectivities that have
existed since time immemorial and which were snapped
in the colonial era.
Global society is seeking to find an equilibrium
between the opposing pulls generated by the forces of
globalization, nationalism and sub-nationalism. Indeed, it
is difficult to see just how they can be balanced, yet they
must be or else the potential for international
conflagration will be immense. Hence, the absolute need
for extreme caution to prevent established nation States
from being destabilized either through too hasty a push
towards globalization or through the pull of sub-national
demands. We see this as a challenge which we will have
to face collectively as well as individually.
A global menace that threatens international peace,
and to which open democracies are particularly
vulnerable, is terrorism. It takes innocent lives
indiscriminately, brings fear into the lives of others and
shatters the peaceful existence and the normal growth of
entire communities. Terrorism should be anathema to the
international community because it is the antithesis of
every ideal that the United Nations Charter enshrines. Its
main vehicle is violence; its aim is destruction rather than
development; its doctrines are founded on intolerance;
and, in the means it uses and the effect it has, it destroys
human rights utterly.
9


Incitement to terrorism and complicity and
participation in terrorism across borders undermine the
international system. And even though very few societies
are free from its clutches, we still have not developed a
global strategy to defeat this evil. The resolve is absent. It
is important that we find it, not least because terrorism has
a global web, spanning all countries and continents and
quickly building links with the other global menace: drugs.
We in India see in our region just how deadly a poison this
mix of terrorism and drugs is. The United Nations should
take the lead in determined global action to root out these
scourges.
The protection and preservation of the environment is
an area to which all of us attach the highest importance.
The commitment to global partnership for preventing
further degradation of the environment, made at the Rio
Summit in 1992, was reiterated and the need for effective
implementation of Agenda 21 reaffirmed during the special
session of the General Assembly in June this year. All the
elements of Agenda 21 have to be implemented in full and
we need to accelerate the process of such implementation.
Any partial or non-comprehensive implementation will be
detrimental not only to international cooperation in this
area, but also to the threatened stability of the Earth’s
fragile environment. In this connection, it is our hope that
the spirit of the Convention on Climate Change and the
Berlin Mandate will be fully encompassed by the protocol
or legal instrument to emerge from the Kyoto Conference
to be held in December 1997.
What has been touched upon represents huge
challenges beyond the capacity of any country to face on its
own. This is why it is so vital for the United Nations, now
more than ever before, to be a forum where we can pool
creative ideas and lessons from our experience and to assist
us in understanding and coping with these challenges. This
is the ultimate rationale of reform. We will be ready to
work with other countries to rebuild the United Nations in
the image of our collective aspirations and as our trusted
instrument to meet the challenges of the approaching
century.
Addressing the General Assembly at its fifteenth
regular session, I recall India’s first Prime Minister,
Jawaharlal Nehru, saying here in 1960:
“The main purpose of the United Nations is to
build up a world without war, a world based on the
cooperation of nations and peoples. It is not merely a
world where war is kept in check for a balancing of
armed forces. It is much deeper than that. It is a world
from which the major causes of war have been
removed and social structures built up which further
peaceful cooperation within a nation as well as
between nations.” (Official Records of the General
Assembly, Fifteenth session, Plenary Meetings,
882nd meeting, para. 117)
It is in this spirit that we should approach the tasks
before us. I do hope and pray that, under your guidance,
Sir, and under the spirited leadership of the Secretary-
General, these objectives will be achieved.




﻿I would like to begin by
congratulating the President on his unanimous election to
preside over the fifty-second session of the General
Assembly of the United Nations. It is my hope that at this
session the Assembly will be successful in bringing nations
closer to each other and in finding ways to address the
challenges that face all countries and nations, north and
south, east and west.
I also wish to congratulate his predecessor,
Ambassador Razali Ismail of Malaysia, for the manner in
which he carried out his duties.
We mark this year the twentieth anniversary of the
peace initiative of the late Prime Minister of Israel,
Menachem Begin, and the late President of Egypt, Anwar
Sadat. Those leaders, with their historic decision and their
courageous leadership, pioneered the way towards the first
peace treaty between Israel and an Arab neighbour, Egypt.
Throughout their entire history, the people of Israel
have aspired to live in peace. Together with our constant
call for peace with our neighbours, we have not spared any
effort to seek, whether through direct or indirect contacts,
a partner in this effort. Today, too, we continue to seek
channels for dialogue and to build bridges to peace.
In recent years, since 1991, after the principles for
negotiating peace in the Middle East were laid down at
Madrid, we have achieved a number of important
advances with the establishment of full peace between
Israel and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and the
signing of interim accords with the Palestinians.
Nevertheless, the road to full peace is still long, and
negotiations with the Palestinians and with Syria and
Lebanon still lie ahead of us.
Immediately after the last elections, the Government
of Israel accepted the need to continue to advance the
Oslo accords and has acted to implement them. In the
past year we have spared no effort to implement those
accords, but, unfortunately, the trust that is the lifeblood
of the entire process has been undermined as a result of
the failure of the Palestinians to carry out their
commitments according to the agreements they have
signed.
In the past year, while pursuing these efforts, we
have endured many tests and have suffered ongoing
terrorist attacks and bloodshed. Our deep-rooted aspiration
for peace, security and tranquillity has been stained by the
shedding of innocent blood, by the murder of men,
women and children cut down by barbaric terrorist
attacks. Yet despite our deep sorrow and mourning over
the loss of those innocent lives, the hope for peace has
not been extinguished in the hearts of the citizens of
Israel.
The citizens of Israel have taken upon themselves
great risks for peace, but there is none among them who
is willing to continue to pay the bloody price that is being
demanded in the name of peace. We must break this
tragic and violent cycle. It is only through joint action in
confronting the terror that trust will be re-established and
the doubts regarding intentions be removed.
As I stated in my remarks at the fifty-first session of
this Assembly, all Israel is united in its deep desire for
peace and for a life of calm and security. In Israel, both
right and left are united in this quest.
If trust can be restored, if the principle of reciprocity
is honoured, it will be possible for us to proceed. We
have already proved our willingness to do so, through our
decisions and actions since taking office and in the
signing and implementation of the Hebron agreement in
all its aspects.
Peace cannot live side by side with continued
incitement, hostility, violence and terror. Peace means, in
essence, the unequivocal and irreversible abandonment of
25


violence. Dialogue, negotiation, compromise and the
honouring of agreements — those are the path to peace.
These principles apply throughout the world and must
apply also in the Middle East. The existence of two parallel
tracks, one on which negotiations are pursued while a
second track of violence, terror and bloodshed continues
unimpeded, is totally unacceptable. This is a direct
challenge and affront to the very concept of peace.
Terror does not suddenly erupt from nowhere. It is not
a spontaneous phenomenon. Too often we have seen
terrorist leaders and their organizations adopt the facade of
innocent and peaceful organizations, charitable and welfare
organizations, while under this cover they contribute to the
preparation and perpetration of vicious terrorist attacks.
Terror can be likened to a volcano ready to erupt at any
moment, whose boiling lava threatens to destroy all who lie
in its path.
Those who resort to terror are seeking not only to kill
Israelis but also to hurt their own brethren. Terror cannot be
accepted as a legitimate tool for resolving differences. It
must be rejected, absolutely and unequivocally, and it must
be fought unrelentingly. We will not agree to live under its
constant threat.
The words of the President of the United States and of
the Foreign Minister of Russia at this Assembly just a few
days ago are important and should guide us all in this
matter. I quote President Clinton when he spoke from this
very rostrum:
“terrorism is always a crime and never a justifiable
political act.” [See Official Records of the General
Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Plenary Meetings, 5th
meeting]
Thus, the international community bears the responsibility
for ensuring that terrorism enjoys no political support,
recognition or legitimacy, not even implicitly.
In the 1993 Oslo accords, the Palestinian Authority
and Arafat, its leader, undertook in the name of the
Palestinian people to fight terrorism. They reaffirmed this
commitment again in the 1995 Interim Agreement, again
one year ago at the Washington summit and again in the
Hebron agreement. Much to our consternation, it has been
proved that this commitment has not been upheld as
required, thus causing the present crisis of confidence.
Israel stands firmly upon its call to the Palestinian
Authority to fulfil its promise to fight relentlessly against
terror. The Authority must act jointly and in full
cooperation with us against terrorism and violence. We
seek neither to dictate nor to coerce. We seek merely the
implementation of signed agreements. The fight against
terror, in our humble opinion, is also in the Palestinian
interest.
In response to the repeated crises in the process
caused by the failure of the Palestinian Authority to live
up to its commitments, Israel proposes a binding code of
conduct for relations between us. This code should
include, first, the rejection of violence as a means for
achieving political goals; secondly, preservation of the
framework of direct negotiations and agreement to refrain
from attempts to transfer disputes and negotiations onto
the international stage; thirdly, the institutionalization of
permanent channels of communication, including in times
of crisis; fourthly, a cessation of incitement and the call
to violence and jihad, and their replacement with the
language of reconciliation and mutual respect; and, fifthly,
the advancement and encouragement of normalization and
support for regional activities.
The purpose of this code of conduct is to facilitate
uninterrupted negotiations and crisis management, and to
create an atmosphere of dialogue. This code must respond
to the sensitivities and needs of both sides. We believe
that the adoption of the above principles will allow us to
overcome the present crisis and help in preventing future
ones as the negotiations proceed. These rules of the game
will also contribute to renewed trust between the leaders
and greater confidence between the peoples.
In the wake of the visit to the Middle East of the
United States Secretary of State, renewed agreement has
been reached to continue the efforts at restoring the peace
process to its proper track. We have been conducting
intensive talks in recent days, with the assistance of the
United States, both in Washington and here, with a view
to resuming the negotiations and advancing our efforts to
reach a permanent settlement with the Palestinians.
Israel values and appreciates the action of the United
States Secretary of State and her commitment and efforts
to extricate the peace process from its current impasse, to
bring the parties closer together and to ensure the success
of the negotiations. We are fully committed to these
efforts.
26


Israel reaffirms its proposal to conduct accelerated
negotiations, according to an agreed timetable, on
permanent status. We propose conducting negotiations in
which the sides will agree upon the desired outcomes and
the way towards achieving them. This proposal is intended
to hasten the attainment of a peaceful settlement, not to
delay it. This is also our call and our proposal to the
Palestinian Authority.
The international community can play an important
role in facilitating the dialogue between the sides, which
will make it possible for us to resolve our differences
through direct negotiations. It is only through direct
negotiations that we can bring this process to a successful
conclusion. One-sided international declarations, dictates or
pressures will not help. Attempts to internationalize the
dispute and to transfer the arena of negotiations to the
United Nations and other international forums only serve to
create unnecessary obstacles and to make already
entrenched positions more rigid.
The comprehensive peace we yearn for will not be
achieved until we reach peace agreements with Syria and
Lebanon. It is imperative to reach understandings and
agreement that will enable us to renew negotiations and to
resolve all the matters at issue between us. We expect to
find in Syria and its leadership a partner in the search for
a just peace. If Syria has indeed made a strategic choice in
favour of peace — the “peace of the brave”, as claimed by
its leadership — then we must explore together every
possible avenue, at any place and at any time, for renewing
the talks between us.
Israel cannot accept the continued violence and terror
on its northern border. The terrorist activities of
organizations such as Hezbollah and the fear of Katyusha
rockets and attacks upon our cities and towns bear the
threat of ongoing regional tension and continued bloodshed.
There is no territorial dispute between Israel and Lebanon.
We wish to see a sovereign, free and independent Lebanon
acting determinedly against the terrorist organizations that
operate from its territory.
If we are to reach peace, we cannot make do only
with agreements and contracts. The reality of peace means
normalization, open borders, freedom of movement,
commerce and cooperation for the benefit of the entire
region. These are the soul and essence of peace.
Normalization is not a prize or a gift for Israel alone.
The decisions of the Foreign Ministers of the Arab
League at their recent meeting in Cairo, just over one week
ago, stand in direct contradiction to the aspirations for
peace and undermine its foundations. The attempts to
prevent normalization with Israel, to freeze the level of
existing relations with it, to close liaison and interests
offices between Israel and Arab neighbours and to
reactivate the Arab boycott add up, in practice, to a
boycott of peace itself. This is a destructive policy which
is reversing the process.
The ongoing and intentional freeze of the
multilateral talks also has a deleterious effect on the
entrenchment of peace. The multilateral talks were meant
and should serve as a platform and incentive for building
peace. We must promote the bilateral and multilateral
channels alike and not make one conditional upon the
other, nor create further obstacles and barriers on the road
to peace. The question mark hanging over the regional
economic conference scheduled to take place later this
year in Doha, Qatar, is further evidence of this negative
drive.
The countries of the Middle East that are party to
the peace effort have a common interest in regional
stability and the advancement of prosperity and well-
being for all the nations of the region. We face together
the growing shortage of water and the ever-expanding
desert. We are also facing dangers from within our region
that threaten to undermine the stability of the regimes of
various nations and to plunge the entire region into
violence, war and bloodshed.
It was only a few years ago that the entire world
was forced into forming a coalition to combat an
aggressive dictator who sought to conquer a neighbouring
country and to terrorize our entire region. Today, we face
new and even more extreme dangers, but the lessons of
recent experience have not been learned and many
countries turn a blind eye to the threat.
The leadership of Iran continues to speak in terms
that threaten the State of Israel and call for its destruction.
Yet the international community continues to remain deaf
and refuses to speak out against Iran's policies,
declarations and actions.
Iran's efforts, like those of Iraq, to acquire
operational weapons of mass destruction of all kinds
represent the greatest threat to security and stability in the
Middle East and beyond. The ramifications of Iran's
weapons programme extend far beyond the geographical
confines of our region. They threaten the security of other
27


members of the international community and their interests.
Israel reiterates its call to the members of the
international family of nations — and at their head the
United States, Russia and the members of the European
Union and of the Commonwealth of Independent States —
to exercise the full weight of their influence and to take
concrete steps to prevent this development, which
represents a threat to the existence of the State of Israel.
After the establishment, as we hope, of peace treaties
between Israel and every country of the region, it will be
possible to create a regional security system that would
provide multilateral and shared solutions to the range of
security problems in the Middle East, including a mutually
and effectively verifiable Middle East free of chemical,
biological and nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles. These
are our goals and we must act to achieve them.
Israel is an active and responsible member of the
family of nations represented in this body. However, 50
years after the United Nations adopted, on 29 November
1947, the resolution calling for the establishment of the
State of Israel, we are still denied our equal rights in this
Organization.
We attach great importance to the fundamental reform
of the United Nations work. We also share the opinion of
other United Nations Member countries that believe that the
Organization urgently requires greater efficiency and a
redirecting of its valuable but limited resources towards its
truly important tasks. At the same time, we are convinced
that no reform can be completed so long as the question of
Israel's membership of a regional group remains unresolved.
We call upon this Organization to correct this anomaly.
Much to our chagrin, in the last year we have seen an
intensification of the political campaign waged against
Israel at the United Nations. This campaign only impedes
the peace process and further undermines confidence
between the parties. We call upon the Member States to
refrain from lending their support to such resolutions. The
time has come for this Assembly to reduce the number of
resolutions on the Middle East that it adopts each year and
to contribute positively to creating an atmosphere conducive
to direct negotiations between the parties.
As part of Israel's international and regional
commitment and of its credo as a State, we are engaged in
cooperative programmes with many countries, with which
we share the experience and knowledge we have acquired
in various fields. Israel attaches great importance to its
international cooperation programme and to assisting
various peoples to address the challenges of development
and the hazards of nature, hunger and disease.
Over more than three decades, tens of thousands of
trainees have participated in courses in Israel and in their
own countries within the framework of Israel's
cooperation and assistance programme in the fields of
education, health, agriculture, industry, social affairs and
leadership. We are especially proud of the participation in
recent years of trainees from Arab countries, amongst
them Palestinians. These trainees are emissaries of
goodwill, ambassadors of peace, who bear with them the
message and the great hope of human well-being. As in
the words of the prophet:
“Each shall help his neighbour and make him
strong”.
This year, the Jewish people in Israel and around the
world marks the jubilee of its national revival. Fifty years
ago, the Jewish people restored its national sovereignty in
its ancient homeland. Throughout the dark days of our
2,000-year dispersion, we dreamt of the day that we
would renew our national life in the land of our
forefathers, the land of Israel.
It is the privilege of our generation to fulfil this
aspiration. The Jewish people has returned and built up its
land. The Jewish people is once again gathering in its
ancient home and has succeeded in building a vibrant
and democratic society, a flourishing economy, science,
research and industry.
For the past 50 years, we have laboured to ensure
Israel's security and independence, while always seeking
peace and good-neighbourly relations in our region. Fifty
years on, the State of Israel is an irremovable reality.
This week, we mark the beginning of the Jewish
new year. At this holy time, every Jew turns his eye
towards the heavens with a prayer in his heart for the
peace of the world, the end of misery and a new dawn of
hope for all. On this day of remembrance, the blow of the
shofar is accompanied by the prayer:
“may the year and its troubles pass and a new year
and its blessings begin”.





﻿May I begin by
congratulating the President on his election to preside over
the General Assembly at its fifty-second session. We are in
good hands as we begin our work during what the
Secretary-General has called “the reform Assembly.”
I know, too, that my Foreign Minister, on whose
behalf I am speaking, would want to warmly congratulate
the outgoing President, Ambassador Razali Ismail of
Malaysia, on his efforts during the past 12 months. It has
been a challenging time, and he has demonstrated the
decisive leadership we all expected of him.
Two years ago, at the fiftieth anniversary of the
United Nations, world leaders undertook to give the twenty-
first century an Organization equipped, financed and
structured to serve effectively the peoples in whose name
it was established. With the year 2000 now only 27 months
away, we are still far from that goal. This is a matter of
great concern to New Zealand. We firmly believe in the
United Nations as a vehicle to a better life for the world's
citizens, and not just for those who live now. We have a
responsibility to strengthen the Organization for our
grandchildren and beyond. We must not let them and
ourselves down by allowing an unreformed United Nations
to slide into increasing irrelevance.
We do not pretend the process of reform is easy or
finite. As the Secretary-General has said, “Reform is not an
event; it is a process.” [A/51/950, para. 25] Our own in
volvement on the intergovernmental track, including co-
chairing the Working Group on the Strengthening of the
United Nations System and the Working Group on an
Agenda for Development, has given us a good appreciation
of the complexities involved in producing positive outcomes
acceptable to 185 Member States.
We know the Secretary-General faces the same
issues with his 16 July package. As with any package, it
is inevitable that some Member States will find fault with
individual elements. But we are firmly of the belief that
the package should be viewed as a whole. This will be
for the greater good of the Organization. Difficulties with
individual elements of the package should not be allowed
to unpick the overall good which is in it. We appeal to
Member States to acknowledge this reality and to give the
Secretary-General their generous support. It is small
countries like New Zealand, and developing countries,
which, as we see it, stand most to benefit from what the
Secretary-General is trying to achieve.
To reform and strengthen the United Nations
effectively, we see a need to redistribute resources away
from administration and into areas which are important
for those of us who place a high priority on the United
Nations itself. We support efficiencies, not cost-cutting.
The crucial difference between the two is that one
approach seeks simply to save money without regard to
the impact on the Organization. We cannot support this.
The United Nations is too important to us to allow such
a downgrading.
An approach based on efficiencies allows us to
reinvigorate the United Nations by reinvesting the money
saved from outdated administrative practices. This is
central to the Secretary-General's package. In particular,
the proposal for a “development dividend” channelling
resources freed by administrative efficiencies into
strengthening the development activities of the United
Nations is most welcome. We can certify from our own
national experience that the sort of management reforms
proposed in the package do indeed lead to a reduction in
administrative overheads, allowing more to be delivered
in terms of substantive programmes.
At a time when development funds are diminishing,
the significance of this step should not be lost. New
Zealand is a country that is increasing its overseas aid —
by 40 per cent since the 1992 United Nations Conference
on Environment and Development, the Rio Summit. Our
contributions through the United Nations system have also
increased by nearly 50 per cent over the last five years.
But the global trend is the opposite, particularly among
the larger traditional donors. It is becoming harder and
harder for Governments to meet their Charter commitment
to promote the economic and social advancement of all
peoples. One of the modest outcomes of the last two
years of reform efforts within the United Nations has
been the elaboration of an Agenda for Development
19


reaffirming the primacy of development, setting objectives
and recommending ways of achieving them. But, with the
best will in the world, implementing that Agenda will come
to naught in the absence of adequate funding.
The Secretary-General's reforms are designed to
deliver more for development. Equally important, they are
designed to boost confidence in the United Nations,
confidence which two weeks ago was given tangible form
by Mr. Ted Turner's billion-dollar grant to assist United
Nations agencies in key development activities. That
generous offer has given the Organization a real boost and
could be a catalyst for leveraging further private-sector
funds for development. We must support the Secretary-
General's efforts to make the United Nations the best
vehicle for delivering such assistance.
Member States need to trust the Secretary-General to
fulfil his responsibilities under the Charter: to give effect to
the policy directions which they set. We need to be clear
and realistic in the priorities we set for the United Nations.
We cannot mandate the Organization with more and more
new tasks and somehow expect these to be achieved within
current resources. And, having set the priorities, we must
resist the temptation to micro-manage. This will involve a
sea-change in the way Member States have become
accustomed to operating. The Fifth Committee still makes
decisions about staff numbers and placement within the
Secretariat, administrative decisions that in any modern
organization would be the responsibility of its managers.
We know that the transitional process of change will
not be easy for those working in the Secretariat either.
But — and we are conscious of our own experience in New
Zealand in instituting public-sector reform — the
managerial and results-based budgeting proposals in the
July package will improve work performance and will
deliver greater job satisfaction to those working for the
United Nations. The Organization's most important resource
is its people. The package recognizes the vital importance
of investment in staff. If the best and brightest are to be
attracted to and retained by the United Nations, they must
be recruited, trained, promoted and paid according to
procedures which are as good as the best employed by
Member States.
It is also important to stress here the loyalty owed to
the Secretary-General by those who work for him. He has
the right to expect their full support for his leadership and
for the initiatives he puts forward. Anything less would be
dishonourable, would subvert due process and would
potentially disenfranchise Member States. It could not be
tolerated.
I referred earlier to the intergovernmental track. It is
worth touching on the key issues of Security Council and
financial reform.
On the former, New Zealand will judge specific
proposals for enlargement of the Security Council by the
yardstick of democracy and the representativeness of the
institution as a whole. Increasing the proportion of
permanent to non-permanent members runs counter to this
principle. Nor could a package on Security Council
reform be acceptable to us without substantive proposals
opening up and modernizing the workings of the Council.
Sunshine, an American jurist once observed, is the best
disinfectant. Member States must continue to participate
in the debate in the search for a consensus solution.
On financial reform, New Zealand is strongly
concerned about the crisis facing the United Nations. It is
true that there are problems with the scales of assessments
for both the regular and the peacekeeping budgets. The
present floor has a negative impact on smaller, vulnerable
nations, such as the South Pacific island countries, New
Zealand's neighbours. This is just one example of the kind
of problem that needs to be addressed.
But those who want to see changes made to the
scale need to offer genuine inducements, not threats. We
cannot accept that any Member State is entitled to
withhold payments unilaterally or that the assessment of
those countries that will not pay their dues should be
picked up by others. All assessed contributions must be
paid in full, on time and unconditionally. It is a violation
of international legal obligations to do otherwise. This
must be regarded with the utmost seriousness by Member
States. It undermines the Organization's ability to operate.
It penalizes, through damage to the Organization, those
Member States that abide by their obligations. When the
State responsible for the largest percentage of arrears
owed to the United Nations is also the richest, and when
that State in addition attaches conditions to the payment
of only a portion of what it owes, it is understandable that
these actions should generate real scepticism in this
Assembly.
This sorry state of affairs must be resolved quickly.
But it can be resolved only on the basis of a credible
commitment that all conditions will be eliminated now
and that all payments will be made on time. And that
means in January each year.
20


I would like to raise another reform issue which has
not featured prominently in discussions to date, namely
United Nations regional groupings. It seems to us that this
is an issue that deserves examination. The groupings are in
need of revision to bring them up to date with present-day
geopolitical realities. It is anomalous, for example, that our
Pacific island neighbours, members with us of the South
Pacific Forum grouping, belong to the Asian Group while,
for historical reasons, New Zealand belongs to the Group
of Western European and Other States. The fundamental
importance we accord our membership of the institutions of
the South Pacific Forum, of the Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation Council and of the Regional Forum of the
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), and our
relationship with ASEAN itself, should be able to be better
reflected in the regional groupings. We accordingly see
value in a reconfiguration of New York electoral groupings
to bring them more in line with those used elsewhere in the
United Nations system, where New Zealand in most cases
sits with our South Pacific partners and our East Asian
neighbours.
Developments in other regions will result in further
anomalies in the present structure. We see at a future stage
some long and complex negotiations over regional seat
allocations for a revised system of regional groups. New
Zealand of course will join with others in negotiating new
and equitable allocations of seats. While we look forward
to the outcome of that process, we realize that it will not
come overnight. In the meantime, and as a matter of high
priority, my delegation is working to forge a closer
relationship with the Asian regional group in New York.
I would like to close my statement by focusing once
more on the utmost importance of Member States' giving
positive endorsement to the Secretary-General's package at
this General Assembly, as New Zealand will be doing —
not only because it provides a positive and concrete start to
a reform process, but also because the alternative of not
supporting the Secretary-General will, in our view,
seriously undermine the credibility of the United Nations.
For two years the United Nations has been involved in
the current reform exercise. But none of us can pretend that
reform is an end in itself, or that introspection is an
ongoing excuse for inaction. The United Nations exists to
deliver concrete, substantive assistance to the hundreds of
millions most in need. No amount of self-analysis is a
substitute for that. Moreover, sustained emphasis on
introspection will erode the Organization's capacity, and
possibly also its will, to perform the tasks for which it was
created.
The challenge now is to embrace the bold
programme of reform outlined by the Secretary-General,
to use this General Assembly to begin to implement it,
and then to direct our energy where it rightly belongs, to
taking practical steps to reduce suffering and build a
better and more peaceful world: like drawing up a solid,
practical programme for alleviating poverty in the coming
decade; like establishing an international criminal court
which will ensure that individuals are held responsible for
war crimes; like supporting and enhancing the United
Nations capability for preventive diplomacy; and like
invigorating the United Nations capacity for
peacekeeping.
These are the standards by which the real success or
failure of the United Nations will be judged. New Zealand
is determined that the verdict will be a positive one.
Working together, we can ensure that it is.





﻿Mr. President, allow me sincerely to
congratulate you, a representative of friendly Ukraine, on
your election to this responsible and honoured post. We
are confident that under your Presidency, the General
Assembly will be able to achieve significant results.
In just a little over 800 days, mankind will enter
upon the twenty-first century. From a historical point of
view, this is indeed no more than a sprinter’s lap, and
thus the need to look at what lies ahead, at what awaits
us, would appear quite natural.
One year ago, in speaking from this rostrum, I spoke
about the emerging process of a transition to a multipolar
world order. The developments of the past year support
that. There is a growing diversity in the political,
economic and cultural development of countries. New
centres of economic and political influence in the world
are shaping up, coupled, at the same time, with increased
intermeshing of the interests of different States and
peoples.
The horizons opening up to the international
community in the twenty-first century are making new
demands. These are the assertion of the ideals of
interdependency and partnership in inter-State relations;
the prevention of the emergence of new dividing lines or
exclusive bloc structures; and strict adherence by all to
the principles and rules of international law. As a separate
issue, I should like to cite not only the creation of
conditions for economic and social progress of all
countries, but also the maintenance of environmental
balance.
There is also a need to mention that the transition
from a confrontational bipolar world to a multipolar
system per se would not provide a solution to these
17


problems. Furthermore, realistically minded people realize
that although we are moving farther away from the
simplistic stereotypes of the ideological confrontation era,
the number of existing risks and threats in the world is not
decreasing.
Regional conflicts continue to be one of the major
sources of instability on the global level; they should not be
allowed to continue into the twenty-first century. How can
this be achieved? A characteristic of our days is the
increasing number of intra-State problems — conflicts of an
ethnic rather than social nature. There are many
multinational States in the world today, and we support the
initiatives designed to prevent their forcible disintegration.
The formula for settling such conflicts in today’s
world — and, of course, in the twenty-first century — can
and must combine the need to preserve the territorial
integrity of those States with the provision of the maximum
possible number of rights to their national minorities. To
abandon any of the principles of this two-track formula
would result not only in the continuation but in the
dangerous escalation of such conflict situations.
Likewise, I wish to draw the Assembly’s particular
attention to a dangerous aspect of regional conflicts: their
ability to trigger terrorist waves and spread them far and
wide beyond the borders of the actual conflict zone. For
example, many of the militants who launched a bloody
campaign of terror in a number of countries emerged out of
the ongoing armed conflict that still rages in Afghanistan.
We strongly support the combat against terrorism,
whatever trappings it may don, be it in Ireland or in Israel.
Today, we will not be able to prevail in this fight without
all States pooling their efforts to combat this greatest of
evils. While we oppose the backing of terrorism in any
form by any Government, we believe that we cannot
stigmatize individual Member States forever as international
rogues, irrespective of changes in their policies, simply
because of their suspected links to terrorists.
In the present-day world, no country can hold a
monopoly on any kind of conflict-resolution effort. This
fully applies as well to the long-standing conflict in the
Middle East, where the settlement process has been
stalemated. As the saying goes, “it takes two hands to
applaud”. Broad-based international efforts are required to
undo the taut Middle East knot. Russia, as one of the co-
sponsors of the peace process launched in 1991 in Madrid,
is prepared actively to cooperate actively with all to attain
this goal.
For many years, so too has the Cyprus issue been
awaiting the effective international cooperation needed for
its resolution.
A synergy of efforts would provide the shortest cut
to the resolution of both long-standing and of relatively
new conflicts. But our stance by no means implies — and
I wish to emphasize this — that any individual country
that has influence in a zone of conflict or that can exert
it over conflicting parties should not make active use of
its own potential. It must do so, however, without putting
up a high fence around itself to ward off others.
I should like in this connection to draw the
Assembly’s attention to Russia’s peacekeeping efforts in
the Commonwealth of Independent States region. First of
all, as concerns Tajikistan, Russia is doing a great deal
since we are equipped with the particular tools needed to
do the job, in part for historical reasons. Our efforts have
proved rather effective. Recently in Moscow an
agreement was signed that put an end to the armed strife
between the Government and the opposition in that
country. The return to Dushanbe of Mr. Nuri, the
opposition leader, shows that the agreement is already
working.
Nevertheless, we want only our fair share of the
deal. We note with satisfaction that the attitudes of Russia
and the United Nations towards the parameters of the
operation in Tajikistan are in concurrence, based on the
close cooperation between the United Nations Observer
Mission, the collective Commonwealth of Independent
States peacekeeping force, and the contingent of Russian
border troops. We welcome the intention of the United
Nations to expand the mandate of its observers and to
increase their number.
Nagorny Karabakh provides yet another example.
Acting on its own, Russia has done a great deal to
stabilize the situation in the region. But I believe that we
have quite productively cooperated with the United States
and France, which, jointly with Russia, are acting as co-
chairmen of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe’s Minsk process to settle the
Nagorny Karabakh conflict. The Georgian-Abkhaz
conflict offers a similar example.
I should now like to say a few words about
peacekeeping as a whole. Over the last few years, a trend
has been observed towards its decentralization. Naturally,
there are objective reasons for this: the financial
constraints placed on the United Nations, and the increase
18


in the number of regional organizations working, inter alia,
in peacekeeping. We see nothing wrong with such
decentralization.
However, it is extremely important that peacekeeping
activities, whatever their sponsorship, should rely first and
foremost on the underlying principles developed within the
United Nations framework. We need here to be extremely
cautious in dealing with peacekeeping activities. We believe
that actions involving force should be carried out solely
when authorized by the Security Council and under its
direct supervision, as provided for in the Charter of the
United Nations.
As we move towards a multipolar world in the twenty-
first century, it is essential to create conditions that will
bring stability to a new world order. To that end, work
must be completed to demolish the hurdles of the past and,
above all, the legacy of the massive, decades-long arms
race.
We are moving together along this path, and we are
determined to proceed further. Together with the United
States, we have been steadily reducing our national strategic
arsenals. President Yeltsin of Russia and President Clinton
of the United States have reached an understanding on the
basic parameters for agreement in this area.
On the agenda now are systematic measures for a
reduction in the nuclear arsenals of all the nuclear Powers.
But let us be perfectly clear here: the stability of a
multipolar world cannot be ensured simply by ending the
nuclear-arms race of the past. It is also essential to have
guarantees against the re-emergence of that arms race on a
new basis, and here I have in mind the desire of individual
countries to acquire nuclear weapons. This once again
proves the need for urgent measures to relieve tensions in
the relations between India and Pakistan.
Hence the essential need for the entire international
community to give a universal dimension to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Those few
countries that have so far remained outside the Treaty must,
in our view, come to grips with their responsibility. They
must realize that their own security is an integral part of
global security, and they must assume those obligations to
which over 180 States have already committed themselves
as parties to the Treaty.
The entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) on a global scale, as well as the
forthcoming talks to ban the production of weapon-grade
fissile materials, figures likewise among those badly
needed steps intended to impart stability to global security
in the twenty-first century.
The implementation of the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling
and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction
is getting under way. We consider this document as one
of the major instruments designed to eliminate one of the
weapons of mass destruction subject to the greatest
proliferation. We have been working together with the
deputies of the State Duma to ratify the Convention, and
we look forward to the early, successful completion of
those efforts.
But even now it is conventional weaponry that is
killing people in local conflicts, often in situations where
hostilities have already stopped. In this connection, we are
fully aware of the humanitarian dimension of the problem
of landmines. We think that the elimination of the threat
of landmines to people, especially to civilian populations,
is long overdue. We advocate active, phased efforts and
negotiations to resolve it.
Stability on a global or regional level is impossible
without the establishment of security systems. We have
made headway in this direction on the European
continent. We feel confident that only a universal
organization which brings together all the members of the
European family of nations can serve as a foundation for
a genuinely durable security system in Europe in the
twenty-first century. I am talking here about the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). It is first and foremost in the frame of that
forum that it is possible to seek agreement with a view to
meeting the new and diverse challenges, which are not
necessarily of a military and political nature.
A beneficial effect on the improvement of the
European climate has already been exerted by the
Founding Act on Mutual Relations, Cooperation and
Security between the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
and the Russian Federation, which was born out of the
agonizing quest for compromise. This document will have
broad international resonance and will doubtless play an
essential role in European politics. Of course, the signing
of that document has not changed our negative view of
NATO’s enlargement, which, on the one hand, totally
ignores current realities and, on the other, is fraught with
the risk of creating new dividing lines.
19


I must mention yet another contribution to the
strengthening of good-neighbourly relations in Europe. I am
referring to the agreements signed recently by Russia,
Ukraine and Belarus that have allowed our three countries
to take major steps forward in developing mutually
beneficial, equitable relations which have strengthened
stability in the region.
Russia has an interest in the security and stability of
its Baltic neighbours and is ready to guarantee their
security. Such guarantees could be provided in the form of
our commitment backed by an agreement on good-
neighbourly relations between Russia and the Baltic States.
Such an agreement could become a kind of pact on regional
security and stability.
The Asia-Pacific dimension is also of great
significance to us. We are convinced that the Russian-
Chinese agreements on borders and military détente in the
frontier zone, which were also signed by Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan, will become a long-term factor
for stability in that vast region. Russia also holds a number
of other Asian countries — including India, Japan and the
States of the Association of South-East Asian Nations
(ASEAN) — among its priority partners.
At the same time, our future in the twenty-first century
at both the global and the regional levels depends directly
on whether the international community will be able to stop
and reverse the economic impoverishment of a great
number of the Member States of the United Nations.
A central role in resolving the most important tasks
facing all the countries of the world today belongs to the
United Nations.
Established over half a century ago, the Organization
in general has succeeded in passing the durability test,
traversed the thorny road of the bloc-confrontation era,
survived both the ice-age period and the thaw in
international relations. But today this could be viewed as
axiomatic — the United Nations needs a rational
renovation, referred to by virtually all the speakers in this
debate. The substantive report of Secretary-General Kofi
Annan gives clear proof of this need. Today, figuratively
speaking, the image of this Organization in the twenty-first
century is being shaped.
It is our strong conviction that the priority objective
of the Organization’s reform is to enhance the usefulness
of the United Nations. Naturally, it is impossible to
reform the United Nations in order to increase its
effectiveness without overcoming the financial problems.
We must note that the financial problems of the United
Nations have unfortunately become chronic. It must
therefore be emphasized that the responsibility for the
financial health of the United Nations is borne by all
Member States and that they must all pay their dues
properly.
We are also in favour of expanding the membership
of the Security Council. A decision to that effect is long
overdue. But this expansion should not render our
Organization less efficient.
The reform of the United Nations will take place
against the background of the ever increasing role of
regional organizations. This is a fully logical process. At
the same time, we are convinced that the special leading
role of the United Nations among all other universally
recognized international organizations must be preserved.
We see the United Nations in the twenty-first
century as a highly efficient Organization, free from
bureaucratic constraints, and as a proactive Organization
capable of swiftly responding to the challenges of the
contemporary world.
I began my remarks by encouraging concerted action
by the international community to concentrate on current
problems and on the prospects for the coming century.
And I shall conclude by citing a well-known saying:
“Pessimists are no more than casual observers, it is the
optimists who can change the world”. We are optimists,
and we believe that the United Nations will be able to
play a positive role in the ongoing evolution of the
international community.





﻿Five years ago, when I first
addressed this Assembly, the cold war had only just
ended and the transition to a new era was beginning.
Now, together, we are making that historic transition.
Behind us, we leave a century full of humanity's capacity
for the worst and its genius for the best. Before us, at the
dawn of a new millennium, we can envision a new era
that escapes the twentieth century's darkest moments,
fulfils its most brilliant possibilities and crosses frontiers
yet unimagined.
We are off to a promising start. For the first time in
history, more than half the people represented in this
Assembly freely choose their own Governments. Free
markets are growing, spreading individual opportunity and
national well-being. Early in the twenty-first century,
more than 20 of this Assembly's members - home to
half the earth's population - will lift themselves from
the ranks of low-income nations.
Powerful forces are bringing us closer together,
profoundly changing the way we work, live and relate to
each other. Every day, millions of our citizens on every
continent use laptops and satellites to send information,
products and money across the planet in seconds. Bit by
bit, the information age is chipping away at barriers -
economic, political and social - that once kept people
locked in and ideas locked out. Science is unravelling
mysteries in the tiniest of human genes and in the vast
cosmos. Never in the course of human history have we
had a greater opportunity to make our people healthier
and wiser, to protect our planet from decay and abuse and
to reap the benefits of free markets without abandoning
the social contract and its concern for the common good.
Yet today's possibilities are not tomorrow's
guarantees. We have work to do.
7


The forces of global integration are a great tide,
inexorably wearing away the established order of things.
But we must decide what will be left in its wake. People
fear change when they feel its burdens but not its benefits.
They are susceptible to misguided protectionism and to the
poisoned appeals of extreme nationalism, and ethnic, racial
and religious hatreds. New global environmental challenges
require us to find ways to work together without damaging
legitimate aspirations for progress. We are all vulnerable to
the reckless acts of rogue States and to an unholy axis of
terrorists, drug traffickers and international criminals.
These twenty-first-century predators feed on the free
flow of information, ideas and people we cherish. They
abuse the vast power of technology to build black markets
for weapons, to compromise law enforcement with huge
bribes of illicit cash and to launder money with the
keystroke of a computer. These forces are our enemies. We
must face them together because no one can defeat them
alone.
To seize the opportunities and move against the threats
of this new global era, we need a new strategy of security.
Over the past five years, nations have begun to put that
strategy in place through a new network of institutions and
arrangements, with distinct missions, but a common
purpose: to secure and strengthen the gains of democracy
and free markets while turning back their enemies.
We see this strategy taking shape on every continent:
in expanded military alliances, such as the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO), its Partnership for Peace and
its partnerships with a democratic Russia and a democratic
Ukraine; in free trade arrangements, such as the World
Trade Organization and the global Information Technology
Agreement, and in the movement towards free-trade areas
by nations in the Americas, the Asia-Pacific region and
elsewhere around the world; in strong arms-control regimes,
such as the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons; in
multinational coalitions with zero tolerance for terrorism,
corruption, crime and drug trafficking; and in binding
international commitments to protect the environment and
safeguard human rights.
Through this web of institutions and arrangements,
nations are setting the international ground rules for the
twenty-first century, laying a foundation for security and
prosperity for those who live within them, while isolating
those who challenge them from the outside. This system
will develop and endure only if those who follow the rules
of peace and freedom fully reap their rewards. Only then
will our people believe that they have a stake in
supporting and shaping the emerging international system.
The United Nations must play a leading role in this
effort, filling in the fault lines of the new global era. The
core missions it has pursued during its first half century
will be just as relevant during the next half century: the
pursuit of peace and security, promoting human rights and
moving people from poverty to dignity and prosperity
through sustainable development.
Conceived in the cauldron of war, the United
Nations first task must remain the pursuit of peace and
security. For 50 years the United Nations has helped
prevent world war and nuclear holocaust. Unfortunately,
conflicts between nations, and within nations, have
endured. From 1945 until today, they have cost 20 million
lives. Just since the end of the cold war, each year there
have been more than 30 armed conflicts in which more
than 1,000 people have lost their lives - including, of
course, a quarter of a million killed in the former
Yugoslavia and more than half a million in Rwanda.
Millions of personal tragedies the world over are a
warning that we dare not be complacent or indifferent;
trouble in a far corner can become a plague on everyone's
house. People the world over cheer the hopeful
developments in Northern Ireland, grieve over the loss of
innocent lives and the stalling of the peace process in the
Middle East and long for a resolution of the differences
on the Korean peninsula, between Greece and Turkey or
between the great nations of India and Pakistan as they
celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of their birth.
The United Nations continues to keep many nations
away from bloodshed: in El Salvador and Mozambique;
in Haiti and Namibia; in Cyprus; and in Bosnia, where so
much remains to be done but can still be done because
the bloodshed has ended.
The United Nations record of service has left a
legacy of sacrifice. Just last week we lost some of our
finest sons and daughters in the crash of a United Nations
helicopter in Bosnia. Five were American, five German,
one Polish and one British - all citizens of the world we
are trying to make, each a selfless servant of peace. The
world is poorer for their passing.
At this very moment, the United Nations is keeping
the peace in 16 countries, often in partnership with
regional organizations such as NATO, the Organization of
American States, the Association of South-East Asian
8


Nations and the Economic Community of West African
States, avoiding wider conflicts and even greater suffering.
Our shared commitment to more realistic peacekeeping
training for United Nations troops, a stronger role for
civilian police and better integration between military and
civilian agencies - all these will help the United Nations
fulfil these missions in the years ahead.
At the same time, we must improve the United
Nations capabilities after a conflict ends to help peace
become self-sustaining. The United Nations cannot build
nations, but it can help nations build themselves by
fostering legitimate institutions of government, monitoring
elections and laying a strong foundation for economic
reconstruction.
This week the Security Council will hold an
unprecedented ministerial meeting on African security,
which our Secretary of State is proud to chair, and which
President Mugabe, Chairman of the Organization of African
Unity, will address. It will highlight the role the United
Nations can and should play in preventing conflict on a
continent where amazing progress towards democracy and
development is occurring alongside still too much discord,
disease and distress.
In the twenty-first century our security will be
challenged increasingly by interconnected groups that traffic
in terror, organized crime and drug smuggling. Already,
these international crime and drug syndicates drain up to
$750 billion a year from legitimate economies. That sum
that exceeds the combined gross national product of more
than half the nations in this Hall. These groups threaten to
undermine confidence in the fragile new democracies and
market economies that so many of you are working so hard
to see endure.
Two years ago I called upon all the members of this
Assembly to join in the fight against these forces. I applaud
the recent United Nations resolution calling on its Members
to join the major international anti-terrorism conventions,
making clear the emerging international consensus that
terrorism is always a crime and never a justifiable political
act. As more countries sign on, terrorists will have fewer
places to run or hide. I also applaud the steps that Members
are taking to implement the Declaration on Crime and
Public Security that the United States proposed two years
ago, calling for increased cooperation to strengthen every
citizen's right to basic safety, through cooperation on
extradition and asset forfeiture, shutting down grey markets
for guns and false documents, attacking corruption and
bringing higher standards to law enforcement in new
democracies.
The spread of these global criminal syndicates also
has made all the more urgent our common quest to
eliminate weapons of mass destruction. We cannot allow
them to fall into or remain in the wrong hands. Here too,
the United Nations must lead, and it has led - from the
United Nations Special Commission in Iraq to the
International Atomic Energy Agency, now the most
expansive global inspection system ever devised to police
arms-control agreements.
When we met here last year, I was honoured to be
the first of 146 leaders to sign the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT), our commitment to end
all nuclear tests for all time, the longest-sought, hardest-
fought prize in the history of arms control. It will help
prevent the nuclear Powers from developing more
advanced and more dangerous weapons. It will limit the
possibilities for other States to acquire such devices. I am
pleased to announce that today I am sending this crucial
Treaty to the United States Senate for ratification. Our
common goal should be for the CTBT to enter into force
as soon as possible. I ask for of you to support that goal.
The United Nations second core mission must be to
defend and extend universal human rights and to help
democracy's remarkable gains endure. Fifty years ago the
United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights
stated the international community's conviction that
people everywhere have the right to be treated with
dignity, to give voice to their opinions and to choose their
leaders; that these rights are universal - not American
rights, not Western rights, not rights for the developed
world only, but rights inherent in the humanity of people
everywhere.
Over the past decades these rights have become a
reality for more people than ever, from Asia to Africa,
from Europe to the Americas. In a world that links rich
and poor, North and South, city and countryside in an
electronic network of shared images in real time, the
more these universal rights take hold, the more people
who do not enjoy them will demand them. Armed with
photocopiers and fax machines, e-mail and the Internet;
supported by an increasingly important community of
non-governmental organizations, they will make their
demands known, spreading the spirit of freedom -
which, as the history of the last 10 years has shown us,
ultimately will prevail.
9


The United Nations must be prepared to respond -
not only by setting standards but by implementing them. To
deter abuses, we should strengthen the United Nations field
operations and early-warning systems. To strengthen
democratic institutions - the best guarantors of human
rights - we must pursue programmes to help new legal,
parliamentary and electoral institutions get off the ground.
To punish those responsible for crimes against humanity,
and to promote justice so that peace endures, we must
maintain our strong support for the United Nations war-
crime tribunals and truth commissions. And before the
century ends, we should establish a permanent international
court to prosecute the most serious violations of
humanitarian law.
The United States welcomes the Secretary General's
efforts to strengthen the role of human rights within the
United Nations system and his splendid choice of Mary
Robinson as the new High Commissioner for Human
Rights. We will work hard to make sure that she has the
support she needs to carry out her mandate.
Finally, the United Nations has a special responsibility
to make sure that as the global economy creates greater
wealth, it does not produce growing disparities between the
haves and have-nots or threaten the global environment, our
common home. Progress is not yet everyone's partner.
More than half the world's people are two days' walk from
a telephone, literally disconnected from the global economy.
Tens of millions lack the education, the training and the
skills they need to make the most of their God-given
abilities.
The men and women of the United Nations have
expertise across the entire range of humanitarian and
development activities. Every day they are making a
difference. We see it in nourished bodies of once-starving
children, in the full lives of those immunized against
disease, in the bright eyes of children exposed to education
through the rich storehouse of human knowledge, in
refugees cared for and returned to their homes and in the
health of rivers and lakes restored.
The United Nations must focus even more on shifting
resources from handouts to "hand ups", on giving people
the tools they need to make the most of their own destinies.
Spreading ideas and education and technology - the true
wealth of nations - is the best way to give the people the
chance to succeed.
The United Nations must continue to lead in ensuring
that today's progress does not come at tomorrow's expense.
When the nations of the world gather again next
December in Kyoto for the Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, all of us - developed and developing nations -
must seize the opportunity to turn back the clock on
greenhouse-gas emissions so that we can leave a healthy
planet to our children.
In these efforts, the United Nations no longer can,
and no longer need, go it alone. Innovative partnerships
with the private sector, non-governmental organizations
and the international financial institutions can leverage its
effectiveness many times over. Last week a truly
visionary American, Ted Turner, made a remarkable
donation to strengthen the United Nations development
and humanitarian programmes. His gesture highlights the
potential for partnership between the United Nations and
the private sector, in contributions of time, resources and
expertise. I hope more will follow his lead.
In this area and others, the Secretary-General is
aggressively pursuing the most far-reaching reform of the
United Nations in its history - not to make the United
Nations smaller as an end in itself, but to make it better.
The United States strongly supports his leadership. We
should pass the Secretary-General's reform agenda at this
session.
On every previous occasion I have addressed this
Assembly, the issue of our country's dues has brought the
commitment of the United States to the United Nations
into question. The United States was a founder of the
United Nations. We are proud to be its host. We believe
in its ideals. We continue to be, as we have been, its
largest contributor. We are committed to seeing the
United Nations succeed in the twenty-first century.
This year, for the first time since I have been
President, we have an opportunity to put the question of
debts and dues behind us once and for all and to put the
United Nations on a sounder financial footing for the
future. I have made it a priority to work with our
Congress on comprehensive legislation that would allow
us to pay off the bulk of our arrears and assure full
financing of America's assessment in the years ahead.
Our Congress's actions to solve this problem reflect a
strong bipartisan commitment to the United Nations and
to America's role within it. At the same time, we look to
Member States to adopt a more equitable scale of
assessments. Let me say that we also strongly support
expanding the Security Council to give more countries a
voice in the most important work of the United Nations.
10


In more equitably sharing responsibility for its successes,
we can make the United Nations stronger and more
democratic than it is today. I ask the General Assembly to
act on these proposals this year so that we can move
forward together.
At the dawn of a new century so full of hope but not
free of peril, more than ever we need a United Nations
where people of reason can work through shared problems
and take action to combat them, where nations of goodwill
can join in the struggle for freedom and prosperity and
where we can shape a future of peace, progress and the
preservation of our planet. We have the knowledge; we
have the intelligence; we have the energy; we have the
resources for the work before us. We are building the
necessary networks of cooperation. The great question
remaining is whether we have the vision and the heart
necessary to imagine a future that is different from the
past - necessary to free ourselves from destructive patterns
of relations with each other and within our own nations and
to live a future that is different.
A new century in a new millennium is upon us. We
are literally present at the future, and it is the great gift we
are obligated to leave to our children.




﻿South Africa welcomes your
election, Sir, as the President of the General Assembly at
its fifty-second session. We congratulate you having
experienced at first hand your skills and role as Vice-
Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid. We
also express our appreciation to Ambassador Razali Ismail
for his tireless work as President of the General Assembly
at its fifty-first session.
May I also congratulate His Excellency Mr. Kofi
Annan on his election as the seventh Secretary-General of
the United Nations. The zeal that the Secretary-General
has displayed in addressing, through his reform proposals,
the difficulties confronting this Organization is
impressive. The Secretary-General’s reform programme
is one that in many respects complements the
intergovernmental process regarding the revitalization of
the Organization.
The General Assembly is well aware of the need to
reform the United Nations. The process of reform should
produce a revitalized Organization capable of addressing
humanity’s vital issues of peace and security. Central to
the process of modernization of the United Nations is the
restructuring of the Security Council to redress existing
imbalances and transform it into a transparent organ
accountable to the broader membership of the
Organization.
South Africa fully supports the Non-Aligned
Movement’s position that there should be no partial or
selective expansion in the membership of the Security
Council to the detriment of developing countries.
The reaffirmation at the Organization of African
Unity’s Harare Summit of Africa’s claim to two
permanent and five non-permanent seats, with the same
powers and prerogatives enjoyed by the current permanent
members in an expanded Security Council, is consistent
with the Charter principle of equitable geographical
representation. If the Security Council is to fulfil the role
of custodian of international peace and security envisaged
for it in the Charter, it must be perceived to be fully
legitimate by States and peoples.
South Africa is therefore of the view that a limited
expansion of only five or six new Security Council seats
will not fulfil the crucial requirement of transforming the
Security Council into a representative organ.
Central to the Security Council reform process is the
question of the veto, which has been a focal point in our
deliberations for the last three and a half years. Indeed,
the democratization of the Council hinges on the veto
being either eliminated or extended to the new permanent
members. Accordingly, the issue of the status of the veto
must of necessity form an integral part of a
comprehensive reform package. Permanent membership
without the veto represents merely a symbolic gesture to
new permanent members which would serve to perpetuate
13


an unjust and discriminatory practice and accord them an
inferior status.
I wish to recall that last year in the General Assembly,
I registered South Africa’s disappointment with the slow
pace of the debate relating to the reform of the Security
Council. The time has come for us all to display the
necessary political will and determination in order to reach
agreement on a comprehensive set of measures which will
lead to the creation of a Security Council which is
transparent, democratic, accountable and thus credible and
legitimate.
The fifty-first session of the General Assembly also
witnessed the conclusion of the work of the Open-ended
High-level Working Group on the Strengthening of the
United Nations System. Its notable recommendations
regarding the strengthening of the role and functions of the
General Assembly attest to the importance which we as
Member States attach to this body as the supreme political
organ of the Organization.
It is, however, disappointing that on the issue relating
to the election of a Secretary-General, the Working Group
was unable to reach consensus on the recommendation to
the permanent members of the Security Council to refrain
from using the veto to block the outcome of the election.
As a result of Africa’s painful past experiences under
colonial domination, as well as the abhorrent system of
apartheid, my Government is committed to the final
eradication of colonialism and fully supports the effective
implementation of the Plan of Action for the International
Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism. We believe,
therefore, that the Committee of 24 should continue its
work in order to determine the interests of the peoples of
Non-Self-Governing Territories regarding their future
political status. We call on the administering Powers to lend
their full cooperation to the Committee.
South Africa is concerned that intra-State conflicts in
Africa continue to pose a threat to the continent’s stability.
These conflicts lead to loss of life and economic hardships
and are a major stumbling block on the road towards peace
and development. It is a matter of concern that conflicts in
Africa persist despite the commendable efforts of the
Organization of African Unity and of African leaders in
conflict resolution.
We therefore urge parties to the conflict in the
Republic of the Congo to observe the ceasefire agreement
and to make all efforts to ensure that the interim measures
for the holding of national elections in 1998 are instituted.
Similarly, we condemn the coup in Sierra Leone and
implore Member States of the United Nations to support
Africa’s efforts to restore constitutional order by
refraining from recognizing or giving support in any form
to the military Government.
South Africa is committed to the promotion of peace
in Angola, which we believe will contribute to the
consolidation and extension of stability to the whole of
our region of southern Africa. We are therefore concerned
about the failure of UNITA to fulfil its obligations under
the Lusaka Protocol. In this regard, my Government
welcomes the decision of the Security Council to impose
the punitive measures envisaged in its resolution 1127
(1997), as a means of ensuring UNITA’s compliance.
South Africa has followed the unfolding
developments in the Middle East with cautious optimism.
South Africa, and indeed the international community,
welcomed the signing of the Oslo accord by the Palestine
Liberation Organization and the Israeli Government and
applauded it as representing a positive step towards the
full realization of the long-awaited comprehensive and
just settlement in the region. But the decision of the
Government of Israel to construct new Jewish settlements
in Jebel Abu Ghneim has given rise to tensions and has
generated a crisis situation which has reignited conflict in
the region. We all know that this decision is a flagrant
violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and
of the relevant resolutions of this body. It is no doubt an
attempt to change the legal status of Jerusalem and to pre-
empt the final status negotiations.
The inalienable right of the Palestinian people to
self-determination is a prerequisite for achieving a durable
and comprehensive peace. For peace and stability to
prevail, the region requires the unconditional withdrawal
of Israel from all Palestinian and Arab territories occupied
since 1967.
South Africa welcomes the Secretary-General’s latest
initiatives currently under way to seek a lasting solution
to the question of Cyprus. We urge all parties to make
concerted efforts in working with the Secretary-General
and his good offices towards an overall comprehensive
settlement to this question, which has been on the agenda
of the United Nations for more than 30 years.
South Africa attaches great importance to preventive
diplomacy as a means of forestalling the possibility of
conflict. We commend the report of the Special
14


Committee on Peacekeeping Operations because it provides
us with measures aimed at strengthening the role of the
United Nations in peacekeeping. We also welcome the
Committee’s 1997 report on peacekeeping operations and
urge the Committee to address the question of the rapidly
deployable mission headquarters and the further
development of United Nations standby arrangements.
South Africa believes that progress on disarmament
issues will create a world free of war. The end of the cold
war heralded a period of progress in disarmament and non-
proliferation, as was evidenced by the entry into force of
the Chemical Weapons Convention and the conclusion of
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. However, the
re-emergence of maximalist positions in the disarmament
debate retards global disarmament, as demonstrated by the
disappointing progress made at the Conference on
Disarmament this year. Despite the consensual adoption of
a mandate for the negotiation of a fissile-material cut-off
treaty, one of the essential elements for complete nuclear
disarmament, little progress has been made. Nevertheless,
South Africa is encouraged by the large number of States
which have committed themselves to the complete
eradication of weapons of mass destruction by joining
various non-proliferation and disarmament treaties during
the past year. Universal adherence to important
disarmament treaties will pave the way towards a world
free of weapons of mass destruction.
Humanity is faced with the daily threat of harm from
the use of conventional weapons. High priority should be
placed on strategies and policies intended to prevent the
proliferation of conventional weapons and to reduce their
flow to conflict areas. The conclusions reached by the
United Nations Panel of Governmental Experts on Small
Arms lay the foundation for future action by the
international community.
On 18 September 1997, the Oslo Diplomatic
Conference adopted the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-
Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction. The Convention
is a clear and total ban on anti-personnel mines and
establishes a compelling new international norm against this
scourge which has for so long afflicted humanity, especially
innocent civilians, mostly women and children. South
Africa looks forward to the early entry into force of the
Convention and appeals to all States to heed the call of the
international community against these inhumane weapons.
South Africa has often expressed grave concern at the
involvement of its nationals in mercenary activities, because
these activities inhibit the achievement of peaceful
solutions to internal conflicts and destabilize regions.
Consequently, we have drafted legislation to regulate the
rendering of military assistance by private individuals and
companies to foreign Governments and agencies.
The South African Government puts a high premium
on the promotion and protection of human rights as a
cornerstone of its foreign policy. As we approach the
fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and the thirtieth of the International Year
for Human Rights, we reaffirm our commitment to the
preeminent values of basic human dignity, values for
which we have fought and for which we must continue to
fight. Our peoples deserve no less. In this context, my
delegation supports the recommendation to convene a
world conference on racism and racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance.
My Government remains committed to addressing
gender inequities. The worst manifestations of these
unequal gender relations are the acts of violence
committed against women and girls. My Government has
pledged itself to preventing and combating this violence
by, among other initiatives, aligning its legislation,
policies and strategies with international instruments such
as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women.
South Africa believes in the strengthening of the role
of the United Nations in the promotion of international
cooperation for economic and social development. To this
end, we welcome those measures in the Secretary-
General’s proposed reform package which seek to
strengthen the capacity of the United Nations and to
revitalize its role in the context of development.
The adoption of the Agenda for Development by the
General Assembly was a milestone in our collective
search for a meaningful global partnership for
development. That the membership could reach agreement
on so complex a matter is testimony to the seriousness
with which States view the issue, and to the dynamics of
consensus-building in fostering a global partnership.
Member States should act to implement the Agenda for
Development in a coordinated manner, by creating
dynamic structures susceptible of successful delivery.
South Africa remains committed to an action-
orientated Agenda for Development which gives priority
to international cooperation for development. Partnerships
15


for development, as envisaged also in the Midrand
Ministerial Declaration and Partnership for Growth and
Development, should be established to ensure effective
delivery of assistance to the developing world.
The problems of abject poverty and social deprivation
continue to afflict and haunt many countries, particularly in
the developing world. In order to address this scourge,
which affects least-developed countries in particular,
effective and consistent measures need to be undertaken
within the context of the United Nations Decade for the
Eradication of Poverty.
The issue of external indebtedness continues to
frustrate the ability of the least-developed countries to
promote economic and social development. It is therefore
incumbent upon the international community to address and
find a solution to this problem as a matter of urgency.
One year after the conclusion of the mid-term review
of the United Nations New Agenda for the Development of
Africa in the 1990s, we need to take stock and review
progress to see if the requisite resource mobilization levels
are anywhere near being met and whether the central
development goals are in place. As with the mid-term
review of the New Agenda, this would enable the
international community to take urgent and practical action
on behalf of the African continent to eradicate poverty and
underdevelopment.
We in southern Africa, as a region whose potential for
development was hamstrung by the repressive policies of
apartheid, cannot but seek the promotion of our people
through cooperation. It follows therefore that we should be
committed to the transformation of our Southern African
Development Community into an institution which provides
a framework for the promotion of the imperatives of
reconstruction and development. This would enhance the
degree to which, individually and collectively, the region
offers a basis to ensure a better life for all our peoples.
The global partnership for sustainable development
will be enhanced through the transfer of essential and
environmentally sound technologies to developing States on
preferential and concessional terms. The financial resources
and mechanisms necessary for the implementation of
Agenda 21 are still inadequate. Developed countries should
honour their commitment to raise official development
assistance flows to the United Nations target of 0.7 per cent
of gross domestic product. Those few countries which have
achieved this objective are commended.
We encourage the promotion and sustainable
management of the global environment to ensure a higher
quality of life for all. The objective of sustainable
development should be the integration of environmental,
economic and social policies in order to meet basic
human needs and to manage the environment on a
sustainable basis.
The disappointing lack of consensus at the special
session of the General Assembly on the environment held
in June 1997 leaves considerable follow-up action to be
undertaken in order to accelerate the implementation of
Agenda 21. In this respect, the role and importance of the
United Nations Environment Programme as one of the
leading United Nations bodies in the field of the
environment should be strengthened.
We commend the decision to convene a special
session on drugs to deal effectively with the illicit
production, sale, demand, trafficking and distribution of
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances. The special
session will offer Member States an opportunity to join
their efforts to combat drug abuse and illicit trafficking.
South Africa strongly favours the early establishment
of a permanent, independent and effective international
criminal court. An opportunity now exists to establish the
court before the turn of the century. We must therefore
redouble our efforts during the forthcoming sessions of
the Preparatory Committee to ensure that the diplomatic
conference in Rome can complete its work successfully.
It is imperative that all Member States continue fully
to support the international criminal tribunals for Rwanda
and the former Yugoslavia. To this end, my Government,
in collaboration with the Parliamentarians for Global
Action, recently hosted an international workshop on
securing State cooperation and compliance with the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. Its purpose
was to review cooperation with the Rwanda Tribunal and
encourage the enactment of domestic legislation by
Member States, thus ensuring that those accused of acts
of genocide are swiftly brought to trial.
My Government welcomes efforts to elaborate a
draft convention to define terrorism. It is our belief that
acts of terrorism must be clearly distinguished from
national liberation struggles in pursuit of the right to self-
determination by peoples subjected to foreign or colonial
domination.
16


I should like to take this opportunity to announce to
the Assembly that on 20 August 1997, the South African
Cabinet approved ratification of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea. South Africa, a country
with considerable maritime interests, will, for its part,
continue to play a meaningful and constructive role in the
governance of the world’s oceans.
The continuing financial crisis of the Organization is
of great concern to my delegation. We fully support the
Secretary-General’s commitment to ending the long and
persistent near-bankruptcy of the Organization. It behoves
Member States to discharge their Charter obligation by
paying their contributions in full, on time and without
conditions.
The lofty ideals that brought us together should
continue to serve as an inspiration for us to strengthen the
authority and capacity of the United Nations as we move
into the next millennium.





