Please allow me to warmly congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the General Assembly at
this session. I am confident that with your wisdom and
experience, you will be able to accomplish your lofty
mission successfully. At the same time, I would like to
express my appreciation to Mr. Opertti for the
contribution he made as President of the General
Assembly at its previous session. I also wish to take this
opportunity to extend my sincere congratulations to the
Republic of Kiribati, the Republic of Nauru and the
Kingdom of Tonga on their admission to the membership
of the United Nations.
The current session of the General Assembly is of
special significance, as it is the last one of this century. A
review of the past may help us predict the future. In
retrospect, during the past century humanity, on the one
hand, created unprecedented material wealth and culture
and, on the other, suffered from the scourge of two world
wars and the ordeal of the cold war, which lasted for
almost 50 years. Since the end of the cold war, the world
has been moving towards multipolarity and the overall
international situation has started to relax. The
maintenance of peace, the pursuit of stability and the
promotion of development have become the common
aspiration and demand of the people of all countries.
Nevertheless, the harsh reality suggests that the world is
far from tranquil. The cold-war mentality still lingers on.
Hegemonism and power politics have manifested
themselves in new expressions. Military blocs are being
expanded and reinforced, and there is an increasing
tendency towards military intervention. Triggered by
ethnic, religious and territorial issues, regional conflicts
and disputes continue to emerge one after another. The
conflict between the North and the South has become
ever more acute. The gap between the rich and the poor
continues to grow. World peace is still elusive, and
development faces even more serious challenges.
Hegemonism and power politics are the root causes
of the turmoil in today’s world. The outbreak of war in
Kosovo sounded a resounding alarm. A regional military
organization, in the name of humanitarianism and human
rights, bypassed the United Nations to take large-scale
15


military actions against a sovereign State, thus creating an
ominous precedent in international relations. This act was
a violation of the United Nations Charter and other
universally recognized norms governing international
relations. It has eroded the leading role of the United
Nations in safeguarding world peace and security and
gravely undermined the authority of the United Nations
Security Council. During that war, the Chinese Embassy in
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was bombed, which
caused heavy casualties and much loss of property. It was
an incident such as has rarely been seen in diplomatic
history, and naturally roused the utmost indignation of the
entire Chinese people and the strong condemnation of the
international community.
As a permanent member of the Security Council,
China has held a clear and consistent position on the issue
of Kosovo. We seek no selfish interests and are only
upholding justice. For the sake of peace, we maintain that
the Kosovo issue should be resolved through peaceful
negotiations on the basis of respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and with guarantees of the legitimate rights and interest of
all ethnic groups in Kosovo. We are opposed to the use of
force under any pretext.
Mankind is on the threshold of the twenty-first
century. Where should the world go? What kind of new
international political and economic order should be
established? These are urgent questions facing the
Governments and the peoples of all countries.
The world is undergoing significant and profound
changes. A changed world calls for a corresponding new
international political and economic order. World peace and
development demand the establishment of a just and
reasonable new international order, which is the common
aspiration of the international community. It should be
based on the five principles of peaceful coexistence, the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and
other universally recognized principles governing
international relations. In this connection, I wish to
highlight the following points.
The first relates to sovereign equality and non-
interference in the internal affairs of others. Such arguments
as human rights taking precedence over sovereignty and
humanitarian intervention seem to be in vogue these days.
Some countries have even put such arguments into practice.
We believe that it is the sacred duty of all Governments to
promote and protect human rights and fundamental
freedoms, and that all countries have an obligation to
promote and protect the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of their own peoples in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and
international human rights instruments, and in the light of
their respective national conditions and relevant laws. But
as political systems, levels of economic development,
history, cultural background and values vary from country
to country, it is only natural that countries should have
different interpretations and even diverging views on
human rights. Countries should engage in dialogue and
exchanges on the basis of equality and mutual respect so
as to better understand each other, expand common
ground and handle their differences properly, rather than
resort to confrontation or interference in the internal
affairs of others under the pretext of human rights.
The issue of human rights is, in essence, the internal
affair of a given country, and should be addressed mainly
by the Government of that country through its own
efforts. Ours is a diversified world. Each country has the
right to choose its own social system, approach to
development and values that are suited to its national
conditions. The history of China and other developing
countries shows that a country’s sovereignty is the
prerequisite for and the basis of the human rights that the
people of that country can enjoy. When the sovereignty
of a country is put in jeopardy, its human rights can
hardly be protected effectively. Sovereign equality, mutual
respect for State sovereignty and non-interference in the
internal affairs of others are the basic principles governing
international relations today. In spite of the major changes
in the post-cold-war international situation, these
principles are by no means out of date. Any deviation
from or violation of these principles would destroy the
universally recognized norms governing international
relations, and would lead to the rule of hegemonism; if
the notion of “might is right” should prevail, a new gun-
boat policy would wreak havoc, the sovereignty and
independence by virtue of which some small and weak
countries protect themselves would be jeopardized and
international peace and stability would be seriously
endangered.
The Kosovo crisis has proved that to engage in so-
called humanitarian intervention in a sovereign State with
neither a mandate from the Security Council nor the prior
consent of the country concerned will cause a greater
humanitarian catastrophe instead of resolving the problem.
In view of this, under the current circumstances, the
principles of respect for State sovereignty and non-
interference in the internal affairs of others must be
16


effectively strengthened rather than weakened in order to
maintain world peace and stability.
The second principle is the pacific settlement of
international disputes. This principle, initiated by the Hague
peace conference 100 years ago, is now an important
principle of the United Nations Charter and a basic
principle of contemporary international law. History shows
that deviation from this principle over the past century has
led to, “the scourge of war, which twice ... has brought
untold sorrow to mankind”, and to foreign aggression,
which has inflicted tremendous suffering on the peoples of
a number of countries. In the current international situation,
adherence to the principle of the pacific settlement of
international disputes is still highly relevant to the
contemporary world.
The pacific settlement of international disputes is
predicated on the non-use and non-threat of force in
international relations. We maintain that handling State-to-
State relations with the mentality and modalities of “hot”
wars, cold wars, power politics or bloc politics will get
nowhere. All international disputes and regional conflicts
should be resolved in a fair and reasonable manner through
peaceful negotiation and consultation on the basis of
equality, rather than through the arbitrary use or threat of
force based on the power of military superiority. Only in
this way can fundamental solutions to disputes or conflicts
be found without complicating or aggravating them or
leaving behind a hidden peril. And only in this way can
States coexist in harmony and achieve common
development. This is the only way to lasting peace and
stability in the world. Otherwise, the world will never be a
tranquil place.
The third principle relates to strengthening the role of
the United Nations and preserving the authority of the
Security Council. The role of the United Nations is
indispensable for the achievement of genuine peace and
development and for the establishment of a just and
reasonable new international order. Strengthening the role
of the United Nations is in line with the historical trend; it
meets the needs of the times and conforms to the shared
aspiration of all the world’s peoples. In order to strengthen
the role of the United Nations, efforts should first be made
to uphold the sanctity of the purposes and principles of the
Charter. The most important reason why the United Nations
has been able to grow from 51 founding Members to its
current size is that it has acted according to these purposes
and principles. Those purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations have already taken deep root in
international practice and form a legal basis on which
peaceful and friendly relations between countries are
guided. It is the view of the Chinese Government that
despite the great changes that have taken place in the
international situation, the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter are still relevant. We are opposed
to any irresponsible interpretation or revision of them,
with whatever excuse.
If the United Nations role is to be strengthened, the
authority of the Security Council must be preserved.
According to the provisions of the Charter, the Security
Council shoulders primary responsibility for safeguarding
international peace and security. It has been proved that
the role of the Security Council is irreplaceable. Given
the current circumstances, it is imperative to preserve its
authority and leading role. Any act to weaken this
authority or to impose the will of an individual country or
a group of countries on the Security Council is very
dangerous. Instead of contributing to the maintenance of
peace, it will further breed power politics and
hegemonism and will give rise to endless troubles.
If the United Nations role is to be strengthened, it is
essential to ensure that all Member States have the right
to equal participation in international affairs, so that their
reasonable propositions will be fully reflected and their
legitimate rights and interests protected by the United
Nations. Decisions adopted by the United Nations must
give expression to the common will of the majority of its
Member States. Any attempt by a few countries or a
group of countries to monopolize world affairs and decide
the destiny of the people of other countries goes against
the trend of the times and will never succeed.
Fourthly, we must foster a new security concept and
safeguard international security. The old security concept
is based on military alliance and arms build-up and does
not help safeguard international security, still less build a
lasting peace in the world. In today’s world it is
necessary to foster a new security concept that satisfies
the needs of the times and to explore new ways of
maintaining peace and security. The core of the new
security concept should be mutual trust, mutual benefit,
equality and cooperation. The Five Principles of Peaceful
Coexistence and the purposes of the United Nations
Charter are the political foundation for the maintenance of
international security, while mutually beneficial
cooperation and common development constitute its
economic guarantee. Dialogue on an equal footing, full
consultation and peaceful negotiations are the right way
to maintain international security.
17


Relaxation in the international situation and the
disarmament process are complementary to each other. It is
regrettable, however, that some recent negative
developments in the international situation have seriously
hindered the healthy development of the disarmament
process. How to promote the disarmament process, prevent
an arms race and safeguard international security have
become pressing concerns for the international community.
We are opposed to any attempt, on the basis of excuses that
are not genuine, to seek military strength that goes beyond
a country’s legitimate defence needs. We are also opposed
to any attempt to restrict and weaken other countries in the
name of disarmament and non-proliferation in order to seek
absolute, unilateral security supremacy for one country or
group of countries. We call on the international community
to take the new security concept as a guideline and
wholeheartedly promote the healthy development of the
disarmament process, in the interest of world peace and
security.
Fifthly, we must reform the international economic
system and promote the common development of all
countries. The old and irrational economic order has
seriously impeded the sound development of the world
economy, further widening the wealth gap between the
North and the South. The East Asian financial crisis that
broke out two years ago has affected many countries in the
world. To prevent financial risks and ensure economic
security has become an urgent task facing many countries,
especially the developing countries. The world economy is
an interrelated and indivisible whole. All members of the
international community should take a responsible approach
and, in a spirit of risk sharing, strengthen their cooperation
and jointly promote a steady growth of the world economy.
Therefore, it is necessary to reform the current
international economic and financial systems. The United
Nations and the international financial institutions should
earnestly construct a framework to prevent and overcome
financial and other economic risks. Accordingly, the
developed countries should take on more obligations. The
developing countries have the right to equal participation in
world economic decision-making and the formulation of
relevant rules. In the new round of negotiations that will
soon begin in the World Trade Organization, the reasonable
demands of developing countries should be fully reflected.
Cooperation should be strengthened on the basis of mutual
benefit. No country should prejudice other countries’
economic security and development by virtue of its
economic, technological and financial advantages. We
should all oppose trade discrimination, the rich bullying the
poor and the arbitrary resort to economic sanctions or the
threat of sanctions against other countries. The developed
and developing countries both have their own advantages
and should learn from each other to make up for their
deficiencies so as to achieve common sustainable
development.
Moreover, on such global issues as the environment,
population, poverty and debt the developed countries
should not shirk their responsibility and obligation; rather,
they should take the lead in providing technological and
financial assistance to the developing countries. We deem
it necessary for the United Nations to hold a special
conference at an appropriate time to discuss the
globalization of the world economy, in order to promote
international cooperation in this field and to achieve
common prosperity.
The People’s Republic of China will soon celebrate
its fiftieth anniversary. For half a century, especially in
the last 21 years of reform and opening-up, earth-shaking
changes have taken place in China, and the Chinese
people have scored tremendous achievements in socialist
economic, political and cultural development as well as in
diplomatic and other endeavours. Following Hong Kong’s
return to the motherland the year before last, the Chinese
Government will soon resume the exercise of sovereignty
over Macao. At present, China enjoys political stability,
sustained economic growth, national unity, social
tranquillity and progress. Although difficulties and serious
challenges still lie ahead, we are confident and capable of
overcoming the difficulties, rising to the challenges and
forging ahead with every aspect of the socialist cause of
building a strong, prosperous, democratic and culturally
advanced country.
In the face of international vicissitudes, the Chinese
Government will steadfastly take up economic
development as the central task, resolutely press ahead
with reform and opening up, consistently maintain social
stability and unswervingly pursue an independent foreign
policy of peace. We are willing to continue to develop
friendly relations and cooperation on the basis of the five
principles of peaceful coexistence with all other countries
in the world and to make our due contribution to
safeguarding world peace and promoting common
development.
The Chinese Government and people will, as always,
resolutely safeguard China's sovereignty and territorial
integrity and will continue to advance the great cause of
national reunification. It is a fact universally recognized
by the international community that there is only one
18


China in the world, that Taiwan is an inalienable part of
Chinese territory and that the Government of the People's
Republic of China is the sole legitimate government
representing the whole of China. China's territory and
sovereignty are absolutely indivisible. The ultimate
reunification of the motherland represents the common
aspiration and firm resolve of all the Chinese people,
including our compatriots on Taiwan. No force can hold us
back in this great cause.
The Chinese Government will continue to adhere to its
established policy for settling the question of Taiwan. We
are firmly opposed to any efforts to create “independence
for Taiwan”, “two Chinas”, or “one China, one Taiwan”.
All moves to divide the motherland are doomed to failure.
China's great cause of national reunification can and will be
accomplished.
A few days ago a powerful earthquake shook China's
province of Taiwan. This earthquake caused heavy loss of
life and property damage for our compatriots in Taiwan.
We are extremely concerned about this catastrophe and
express our sympathy to our compatriots on the island. We
also express our condolences to the families of the victims
of the earthquake. People on both sides of the strait are
brothers and sisters in one big family. The disaster that hit
Taiwan and the pains of our compatriots on the island are
shared by the entire Chinese people. We will provide every
possible support and assistance to alleviate the harm caused
by the earthquake.
I take this opportunity to thank the President of the
General Assembly and the international community as a
whole for their sympathy, condolences and assistance.
The twenty-first century is dawning. The future of the
world is bright, and the new century is bound to be a more
splendid one than this. The Chinese people stand ready to
work with the people of other countries for the
establishment of a just and rational new international order,
for peace and development in the new century, and for the
overall progress of human society.





First of all, I would like
to warmly congratulate you, Sir, on your election to the
presidency of the fifty-fourth session of the General
Assembly and to wish you every success in this difficult
office.
I should also like to thank Foreign Minister Opertti for
his tireless dedication in successfully presiding over the
fifty-third session of the General Assembly.
I welcome Kiribati, Nauru and Tonga, with which
Germany has long enjoyed friendly ties, as new Members
of the world Organization.
I endorse the statement of my Finnish colleague, Tarja
Halonen, on behalf of the European Union.
This session of the General Assembly is the last in
this “century of extremes”, as the British historian Eric
Hobsbawm called the century now drawing to a close. That
is reason enough to take stock. Since its foundation, the
United Nations has greatly enhanced relations between
peoples. The development of international law, protection
of human rights, decolonization, worldwide humanitarian
and disaster aid, arousing awareness of the great problems
facing mankind, such as population growth, poverty and the
global environmental crisis — all of this would be
inconceivable without the United Nations.
There is no alternative to the United Nations
objectives and values — peace, human rights, freedom,
justice and development — and they have gained
worldwide recognition, even if, unfortunately, they are not
always respected everywhere. Nevertheless, even after more
than 50 years, there is still a long way to go before they are
universally respected and implemented. Despite all its
efforts, the international community has not yet succeeded
in ridding our planet of war, oppression, tyranny, expulsion
and grave human rights violations, including genocide. At
the close of this century, the United Nations and its
Member States are unable to fully master their core task,
namely, safeguarding peace and security. The great hope
that following the end of the East-West conflict the era of
multilateral cooperation and worldwide rule of law would
dawn has not yet come to fruition.
Today the question of peacekeeping must be
considered under conditions very different to those during
the United Nations early years. First, most conflicts today
are internal rather than international, as in earlier times.
Secondly, the role of the nation State has been
considerably relativized by the increased importance of
human rights and the globalization of the economy and
society. Against this background, the question of
peacekeeping arises more and more in an area of tension
between traditional State sovereignty and protection of
human rights.
What is to be done when entire States collapse and
the civilian population is massacred in never-ending civil
wars from all sides? What if ethnic tensions in a State are
partly provoked by criminal Governments, which then
respond with pogroms, mass expulsions and mass
murders, even genocide? Should the United Nations then
regard State sovereignty as more important than
protection of individuals and their rights? Rwanda,
Kosovo and East Timor are dramatic examples of this.
In many ways, therefore, the Kosovo conflict
represents a turning point. The international community
could no longer tolerate a State waging war against its
own people and using terror and expulsion as a political
instrument. As Secretary-General Kofi Annan said in his
brilliant and trail-blazing speech to the fifty-fifth session
of the Commission on Human Rights, no Government has
the right to use the cover of the principle of State
sovereignty to violate human rights. Non-interference in
internal affairs must no longer be misused as a shield for
dictators and murderers. The World Conference on
Human Rights in Vienna reaffirmed this in 1993, with the
approval of all United Nations Members States, with the
words:
“the promotion and protection of all human rights is
a legitimate concern of the international
community”. (Vienna Declaration and Programme
of Action, I, para. 4)
However, the Kosovo conflict also marks a change
of direction in the development of international relations.
How will the international community decide in the
future — this question has just been raised once more in
East Timor — when it comes to preventing massive
human rights violations against an entire people? Two
developments are conceivable.



A practice of humanitarian interventions could evolve
outside the United Nations system. This would be a very
problematic development. The intervention in Kosovo,
which took place in a situation where the Security Council
had tied its own hands after all efforts to find a peaceful
solution had failed, was intended to provide emergency
assistance and, ultimately, to protect the displaced Kosovo
Albanians. The unity of the European States and the
Western Alliance, as well as various Security Council
resolutions, were of crucial significance here. However, this
step, which is only justified in this special situation, must
not set a precedent for weakening the United Nations
Security Council's monopoly on authorizing the use of legal
international force. Nor must it become a licence to use
external force under the pretext of humanitarian assistance.
This would open the door to the arbitrary use of power and
anarchy and throw the world back to the nineteenth century.
The only solution to this dilemma, therefore, is to
further develop the existing United Nations system in such
a way that in the future it is able to intervene in good time
in cases of very grave human rights violations, but not until
all means of settling conflicts peacefully have been
exhausted and — this is a crucial point — within a strictly
limited legal and controlled framework.
In the twenty-first century the individual and his rights
must take a more prominent place alongside the rights of
States in the concept of security as defined by the
international community. The reform of the Security
Council, the central body for safeguarding world peace,
must be oriented towards this principle. The Security
Council is, in fact, authorized to act, and able to do so,
where peace or security are at risk due to internal
developments. This has been demonstrated by a long chain
of decisions, from the apartheid resolution to the
interventions in Iraq, Bosnia and Haiti. However, in
Rwanda, Kosovo and the Congo, decision making in the
Security Council was blocked, thus rendering it unable to
live up to its responsibilities enshrined in the United
Nations Charter, with disastrous results for the peoples in
question.
These conflicts are a pressing reason, particularly in
view of the important Millennium General Assembly, to
finally carry out the long-overdue substantial reform of the
Security Council. The Security Council must be adapted to
the new realities of the global political situation. It must
have a more representative composition and, above all, it
must be equipped to react to the crises and conflicts of
today. Reform must involve enlargement to include both
more permanent and non-permanent members, as well as a
strengthening of its decision-making powers. As the
Assembly knows, Germany has for some time now
expressed its willingness to assume more and lasting
responsibility in this connection. We stand by this
unreservedly.
In the debate on reform we must not avoid the issue
of the permanent members' right of veto, a question of
key importance for the Security Council's capability to
act. The right of veto is regarded by many as outdated in
its current form. However, it is a situation with which we
have to reckon internationally for a long time to come.
How then can decision-making in the Security Council be
made more efficient?
According to the Charter, the Security Council acts
with the mandate, and on behalf, of all United Nations
Member States. But hitherto they have not been entitled
to learn why a State has exercised its right of veto. This
is not only neither democratic nor transparent, but also
makes it easier for States to veto a draft resolution
unilaterally for national rather than international interests.
The introduction of an obligation for a State to explain to
the General Assembly why it is vetoing a draft resolution
would make it more difficult to do so and thus bring
about substantial progress towards using the right of veto
more responsibly. Why should not the General Assembly
assume more responsibility in the future, too?
A second approach to making the international
peacekeeping system more efficient would be via Chapter
VIII of the United Nations Charter, namely by
strengthening the regional security systems and
redistributing tasks and areas of responsibility among
them and the United Nations. It is becoming clear that the
regional organizations could be allocated an even greater
implementation role. This would also foster the
capabilities of regional organizations to engage in security
cooperation, as well as their collaboration with the United
Nations. However, the primacy of the Security Council
remains absolutely essential.
Without reforms in the area of peacekeeping, the
Security Council will be circumvented more and more
frequently, resulting in the erosion of the Security Council
and, ultimately, of the entire United Nations system. The
United Nations, one of civilization's greatest achievements
this century, as well as the values and principles it
represents, would thus be at risk of subsiding into
insignificance. We must prevent that.
12


The disaster in East Timor is currently demonstrating
how necessary close cooperation is between a Security
Council capable of taking action and the countries in the
region. The Security Council's mandate to send a
multilateral peacekeeping force must be fully implemented.
Indonesia must now cooperate closely with the United
Nations Mission and do everything in its power to
guarantee its success. The bloodshed must end. The victims
must be helped. Those displaced must be able to return
home safely. Germany has already provided humanitarian
and food aid. We will send a medical corps to assist the
peacekeeping troops and make further contributions towards
rebuilding the destroyed country. I am confident that our
Parliament will lend this plan its full backing.
In Africa, the Great Lakes region, the Congo and
Sierra Leone have for many years been the scene of terrible
wars, mass murders, destruction and much suffering on the
part of refugees. The Organization of African Unity (OAU)
and the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and its Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) have
done much to contain and resolve these conflicts. However,
these organizations also need the support of the United
Nations, in Sierra Leone, in the Congo and, in particular, in
the conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Both parties to
the conflict must observe the agreements concluded and
work closely together with the United Nations and the OAU
so that the peace process now begun can be brought to a
successful conclusion.
The international community must focus on the causes
rather than merely the symptoms of wars and conflicts in
the context of multilateral peacekeeping. Secretary-General
Kofi Annan rightly called for a “culture of prevention” to
be developed in order to prevent the outbreak of wars and
avert natural disasters more effectively in future.
Everyone knows how difficult the transition from the
“culture of reaction” to the “culture of prevention” will be.
It takes a lot of persuading to summon up the political and
economic will for measures intended to prevent something
which we hope will never happen. However, on financial
grounds and, above all, on humanitarian grounds, it is our
duty and responsibility to revise our thinking here. Progress
is urgently required in four areas.
First, we must move on from early warning to early
response. The United Nations has considerable resources at
its disposal for preventive diplomacy, which must be used
even more. There is also a great potential for synergy in
cooperation with non-governmental organizations.
Secondly, peacekeeping operations must be carried
out before conflicts erupt. The United Nations mission in
Macedonia has set a standard in this respect.
Thirdly, disarmament and the non-proliferation of
means of mass destruction are in need of fresh political
impetus. It is essential that the Geneva negotiations gain
momentum, particularly in the fields of global nuclear
disarmament and the verification of biological weapons,
and in the implementation of the Chemical Weapons
Convention. Furthermore, Germany advocates the
adoption of a convention on preventing the illegal transfer
of small arms worldwide.
Fourthly, peace-building is a prevention task of
growing importance. With the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), the United
Nations is facing one of the most comprehensive tests in
its history. Building public order by creating an efficient
judicial system and quickly sending the pledged
international police units is now crucial. Since the United
Nations began incorporating national police units in the
international standby system, they have been able to act
more swiftly. We must continue along this path.
Protection of human rights and the growing
democratization of States form the basis for a preventive
peace policy and civil conflict management. It is a
historical fact that democracies with a well-developed
civil society hardly ever wage war against each other.
Lasting economic success cannot be achieved in the
globalized information society of tomorrow without good
governance founded on human rights, the separation of
powers and a functioning legal and constitutional
framework.
In the field of human rights, welcome progress has
been made towards broadening the legal basis for
international relations, particularly during the last year.
The detention of Pinochet and the indictment of Milosevic
by the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia are milestones along the path towards creating
a world in which the rule of law prevails. In future,
dictators and perpetrators of human rights violations will
no longer be able to rely on not being called to account
for their actions. This must also apply to the murderers of
Dili and those who issued the orders. Just like everywhere
else in the world, internal peace is contingent upon
justice.
The adoption of the Statute of the International
Criminal Court represented a quantum leap in the
13


development of international law. I call upon all States to
respect the integrity of the Rome Statute, to sign it and to
swiftly ratify it, so that the Court can commence work next
year.
Germany is doing all it can to bring about progress in
the following fields of human rights. The heinous crimes of
child trafficking and child prostitution must be banned
throughout the world, as must the use of child soldiers. In
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflicts,
the age limit must be raised to 18.
In many countries women are still largely without
rights and protection and subjected to discrimination and
violence. This is an unacceptable injustice. Unfortunately,
our world is still a long way from genuine equality, even
with regard to fundamental rights. We must therefore aim
to adopt the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women.
In our view, the death penalty cannot be justified
either ethically or legally. Together with its European
partners, Germany will therefore continue to vigorously
work towards ensuring the implementation of the joint
resolution on abolishing the death penalty.
Protection of press freedom must be improved. The
freedom to inform is a reliable gauge of respect for human
rights. Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights guarantees the right to freedom of opinion.
However, censorship, intimidation and reprisals are the
order of the day in many countries. It is particularly
shocking that year after year dozens of journalists are killed
while on assignment. The United Nations should take a
closer look at this issue and consider practical solutions as
well as enhance legal protection for journalists. To this end
we will shortly be extending invitations to a conference to
be held in Germany.
The United Nations third major task alongside
peacekeeping and promoting human rights in the coming
century will be to bring about a reconciliation between rich
and poor countries.
The tenth Human Development Report of the United
Nations Development Programme came to the sad
conclusion that globalization has further widened the gap
between rich and poor countries. The international
community must endeavour to counter this trend. The
development of the poorer and the poorest countries must
not be left to the invisible hand of the global market. The
individual, not the market, must be the focus of the
globalization debate. This will also require greater
steering at the political level.
The rich countries have a responsibility to help poor
countries take advantage of globalization and enable them
to have a fairer share of the world economy by assisting
them with internal reforms and by opening up markets.
Within the framework of its European Union and Group
of 8 presidencies, Germany launched substantial
initiatives, which must be further developed in the form
of the 1999 Köln Debt Initiative and the commencement
of negotiations on a follow-up arrangement for the Lomé
Convention.
Development cooperation in the broadest sense must
become one of the United Nations core tasks to a greater
degree than hitherto. Science and technology are geared
far too much to the problems of rich countries. Why do
we not make greater use of the United Nations framework
to build bridges here? The economist Jeffrey Sachs made
the interesting suggestion, for example, that a millennium
vaccine fund could be established, with guaranteed
markets in the future for vaccines against tropical viruses
such as tuberculosis, malaria and, above all, AIDS.
Furthermore, in the context of the emergence of a global
knowledge society, the international regime for the
protection of intellectual property must be revised in order
to ensure that the world’s poor do not lose a large part of
their rights and freedoms in the near future. Rich and
poor countries should get together with one another more
frequently to discuss such proposals. During its
presidency of the Group of Eight, Germany made a start
by meeting the non-aligned countries and the Group of
77.
The destruction of the environment has long since
ceased to be a soft issue, but, rather, has become a very
hard question which will have an increasingly strong
impact on international security. According to the new
study by the United Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP), global warming and water shortages will be the
biggest problems facing humanity in the coming century.
UNEP also rightly draws attention to the close connection
between environmental destruction, poverty and excessive
consumption. The deadlock in the climate protection
negotiations must finally be overcome and the Kyoto
Protocol implemented. The destruction of the rain forest
must be stopped and further desertification prevented, and
we must halt the squandering of our planet’s natural
resources and switch to renewable energy as quickly as
possible. The world does not have much time left to
14


remap a course towards sustainability. This will also require
a much more active population policy, including a
long-term strategy to deal with the ageing of our world’s
population. The International Plan of Action on Ageing,
adopted in 1982, is in need of urgent revision. We intend
to hold a ministerial conference in Germany on this issue
under the auspices of the Economic Commission for
Europe.
With the leap into the next millennium, the nation
State principle will continue to diminish in importance. It
will no longer be possible to find answers to major global
problems within the framework of the traditional nation
state. Rather, this will take place in a strengthened
international structure and with a transfer of power to
international organizations, with the United Nations at their
head. This will entail a transformation of traditional power
into justice, the reconciliation of interests and a greater role
for civil society in the international political system, with
the ever-greater involvement of representatives of civil
society and industry. Reaching agreement on minimum
standards with regard to social issues — on the issue of
child labour, for example — will be possible in many cases
only in a global context. I support the proposal put forward
by Secretary-General Kofi Annan that a global pact on
common values and principles be concluded within the
framework of a public/private partnership, between the
United Nations and major companies, in order to lend the
law of the market a human face.
The United Nations must become the core of effective
global governance. Strengthening the United Nations, which
must begin by guaranteeing its financial basis, is therefore
one of Germany’s most important foreign policy objectives.
During the past 50 years, and for the first time in its
history, Germany has been opting wholeheartedly for
integration into multilateral structures, thereby achieving
democracy, freedom and reunification. Today, out of a
sense of deep conviction and historical responsibility, our
country is committed to peaceful reconciliation of interests
and to multilateralism. We are taking this conviction with
us to our old and new capital, Berlin. In the international
State system of tomorrow the answer to the challenges of
globalization will come from multilateralism alone. Our
world will always be plural, and no form of unilateralism
can therefore work in the long run. For that reason, the
twenty-first century, with its more than 6 billion people and
their States, will need a United Nations that is capable of
taking action. The United Nations and its Members can
therefore be certain that we Germans will be their
staunchest allies in the efforts to strengthen the United
Nations.


I would like
first of all to congratulate you, Sir, on your election to the
presidency of the fifty-fourth session of the General
Assembly. It attests to the esteem in which the
international community holds you and your country. I
would like to include in this tribute the Secretary-
General, who bears the weighty responsibility of
promoting the universality of the Organization and the
effectiveness of its action. Lastly, I wish to congratulate
the three new Members of the United Nations. The great
and fine ideal that the United Nations embodies is very
much alive — of this I am firmly convinced.
The United Nations is undertaking a grand civilizing
endeavour, a task that is constantly being challenged but
ever necessary. To unite peoples to work together for
peace and development, to affirm a body of legal rules
framing relations among States and to achieve common
standards: that is the goal of the United Nations — a
civilizing goal.
That goal is achieved first of all through the peaceful
settlement of conflicts. The role of the Security Council
in this mission is more vital than ever, a pre-eminence it
derives from the Charter. France will recall this
fundamental rule as often as necessary. To be sure, there
have been circumstances when an urgent humanitarian
situation dictated we should act immediately, but such an
26


approach must remain an exception. We must take care, as
in the case of Kosovo, to reintegrate this action into the
context of the Charter. Our fundamental rule is that it is for
the Security Council to resolve crisis situations. For that
reason, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization’s new
strategic concept recalls that the Washington Treaty
recognizes the primary responsibility of the Security
Council in the maintenance of peace.
Indeed, the universal nature of the Organization is
intangible. The United Nations must strive to respond to
crises, wherever they may occur. While we have not
hesitated to do precisely that in recent years and on several
continents, I would like to express regret at the relative
timidity of the Organization where Africa is concerned. The
extent of the tragedies on that continent requires us to take
more resolute action.
Universality is compatible with complementarity in
action. In the interests of efficiency, the United Nations
must encourage, in every part of the world, regional
arrangements among States capable of handling crises in
the first instance. Such is the spirit of Chapter VIII of the
Charter. Tasks should be realistically shared between the
regional organizations and the Security Council without
weakening the latter’s authority. For instance, my country
has, through the RECAMP programme, along with others,
strengthened African peacekeeping capabilities through
assistance provided under United Nations auspices in
cooperation with the Organization of African Unity.
International security also demands continued
disarmament in the context of multilateral and verifiable
agreements. This is an ongoing objective for France, which
hopes that the work of the Conference on Disarmament will
be relaunched in the months prior to the Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. France would like to see
the prompt entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty, the start of negotiations on banning the
production of fissile materials for nuclear-weapon use, and
the conclusion of a verification protocol to the Biological
Weapons Convention. We would not support any
development that might bring the Anti-Ballistic Missile
Treaty into question and upset strategic balances.
The United Nations mission is not limited to the
settlement of conflicts between States. With humankind’s
growing aspirations for greater freedom and responsibility,
this mission extends to the safeguarding of human dignity,
within each State and, when necessary — as the Charter
allows — against States. State-instigated violence has
spawned serious humanitarian crises over the past few
years. Civilians have been targeted, whole populations
have been forcibly displaced, and refugee camps are not
longer secure. This is unacceptable. Consequently, we
must uphold the principle of international intervention,
under United Nations auspices, to assist the victims.
Every crisis recalls the need for the founding
principle of working for peace and for respect for the law
and the human person. A case in point is the conflict in
Kosovo. Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), which
laid down the foundations of the settlement, illustrates
these principles and this resolve.
We have set ourselves ambitious objectives: ensuring
security for all, organizing reconstruction, ensuring
coexistence between communities, transferring authority
to local leaders, and promoting democracy and pluralism.
The Secretary-General’s Special Representative and the
KFOR Commander have done remarkable work. Much,
however, remains to be done. The atrocities must be
stopped, the exodus stemmed and housing built before
winter. On the political front, preparations must be made
for the future, which will require establishing dialogue
between the communities. Elections will, I hope, be held
in the year 2000. France has made resolute efforts in this
respect, alongside its partners in the European Union,
which is providing half the international financing agreed
upon by the conference of donors for Kosovo.
In East Timor, another people is asking that its
rights be recognized. Overwhelmingly, it chose
independence through a referendum. Some have tried to
oppose that choice with violence. I therefore welcome the
adoption, on 15 September, of Security Council resolution
1264 (1999). It paves the way for the restoration of peace
and should enable the democratic process to be
successfully concluded. France is participating in the
international force established by decision of the Security
Council.
Our Organization therefore remains true to the
values we celebrated last year, on its fiftieth anniversary.
But much effort is still needed for these values to be
respected everywhere. To achieve this, it is essential to
strengthen international criminal law. France actively
supports the work of the international criminal tribunals
of The Hague and Arusha. The establishment of the
International Criminal Court will be a new and decisive
step in the progress of law. France hopes that it will be
set up quickly; to that end, it has already amended its
own Constitution.
27


To carry out its mission, the United Nations needs
assured means. In order to deal with financial difficulties
and prevent these from becoming a pretext for inaction, all
Member States must meet their financial obligations
vis-à-vis the Organization. France does so completely and
unreservedly. A responsible attitude on the part of
contributing States would advance the necessary reform of
the Organization, including that of its Security Council.
I should like to share with the Assembly my second
firm conviction: that the United Nations is admirably suited
to meeting the challenges of our new world. Indeed, its
mission is strengthened by globalization.
Initially, the idea of organizing relations between
States at the world level may have seemed utopian to some.
It was merely before its time. Indeed, I consider the United
Nations to be modern for the following reasons. Our global
and unstable world needs organization and the goal of the
United Nations has always been to seek a better
organization of the world. The United Nations is in step
with a networked world. It is itself a network, a rich and
unique panoply of specialized but independent and
coordinated agencies. In half a century, the United Nations
has made a tool for action which can be adapted to our
world. The United Nations has not aged; it has grown with
the world. It must allow us to face the new challenges
emerging in today’s world.
A contradictory state of affairs has replaced the
euphoric illusion which followed the end of the
confrontation between blocs 10 years ago. Globalization is
not monolithic. While it is unifying, it also divides. While
it generates remarkable progress, it also leads to
unacceptable inequalities. While it opens societies to one
another, it carries with it the threat of creating uniformity.
While it frees up energy, it also releases negative forces
that must be brought under control. The movement of
populations and the clash of cultures are therefore
accompanied by rising fears as to identity, by religious
intolerance and by xenophobia. France, which has a
presence on five continents and is itself a land of
immigration, has had experience of such confrontations in
its history. It knows the risks they entail and the wealth
they bring. We will give our full support to the world
conference on racism, to be held in 2001. Preventing the
emergence of prejudice, which too often has deadly
consequences, will prepare the way for peace for future
generations.
The fruits of globalization are not shared equally. The
opening of economies, the increase in trade and the
acceleration of technological progress all fuel growth. But
inequalities are growing between countries and within
each economy. Nearly one in four human beings lives in
great poverty. We cannot leave matters as they stand. The
rapid expansion of communications networks does not
benefit everyone. Yet the multiplication of sources of
information, the increased circulation of ideas and the
profusion of new inventions are full of promise. Lower
communications costs made possible by the Internet can
be an asset for businesses in countries in the South. But
inequalities in education hinder access to these
technologies. These impressive instruments for furthering
knowledge may become formidable factors in inequality.
Communication is also a right. It is essential that this
right not be threatened by the concentration in just a few
hands of sources of information and the means of
production and distribution. France will staunchly defend
cultural diversity.
Globalization must encourage all of us to take
account of the fragility of our world — our Earth and our
commonweal. Our environment is not a product, a simple
stock of raw materials on which we can draw without
giving thought to future generations. True development is
sustainable development. Since the Rio Summit in 1992
this realization has been behind the adoption of important
commitments with regard to the climate, biodiversity and
desertification. The Kyoto Protocol on climate change and
the current negotiations on a protocol on biosafety attest
to the importance of the achievements. But the uncertain
future of climates and the recurrence of natural
catastrophes urge us to make further efforts.
The Earth is fragile, but so, too, is the human
species. The spread of new epidemics endangers the
health of entire populations. Inequalities in development
exacerbate those scourges. Some 40 million people live
with the AIDS virus today, the majority of them in
developing countries. The spread of the pandemic in
Africa is a matter of major concern for us. I shall come
back to that issue.
Globalization is changing the nature of organized
crime, an area in which there has been a real explosion.
The much greater fluidity in movement allows criminal
networks to exploit the inconsistencies between one
national law and another and the weaknesses of some of
them so as to hide from justice. My country is ready to
make every effort to combat this scourge. The President
of the French Republic made that clear last year at the
special session of the General Assembly devoted to that
issue. The United Nations has long been engaged in the
28


fight against international drug-trafficking, building up
expertise, establishing specialized services and drafting a
body of doctrine and a legal framework. These must be
strengthened. But, above all, States must be more
committed to action. In January negotiations began in
Vienna on a convention against transnational organized
crime. We must bring this to a satisfactory conclusion in
the year 2000.
Faced with globalization, we have a choice to make.
We can either go along with the supposedly universal
economic laws, and in so doing abdicate our political
responsibilities, or we can seek to impose order on
globalization and thereby achieve control of our collective
future. For my part, I believe that global problems call for
global responses and that an unstable world needs to be
regulated, requiring what our Anglo-Saxon friends might
call “rules and regulations”. This world needs rules. It
needs the United Nations.
This choice is also a matter of sovereignty. As the
Secretary-General pointed out on 8 December last year in
Paris, the first words of our Charter, “We the Peoples of
the United Nations”, make it an expression of popular
sovereignty. But in order for the sovereignty of peoples to
be affirmed they must find the means to acquire the
mechanisms, the means of control and the benefits of
globalization. That is my third conviction. The more the
world becomes globalized, the more it needs rules. Faced
with the temptation of unilateralism, it is more necessary
than ever to base our action on multilateral rules respected
by all. First of all, these concern the economy. We must
define the rules of the game so that everyone can benefit
from globalization. We must define the rules of the game
between the industrial and developing countries and
between the major economic actors, small and medium-
sized business and the citizens of our countries who work
and produce.
In the financial sphere, we have to strengthen the
stability of the monetary and financial system by ensuring
the political legitimacy of the International Monetary Fund
(IMF), involving the developing countries more closely in
the adoption of common rules and making private financial
operators liable for the consequences of their decisions for
countries in crisis. Real progress has been made since the
crises of 1997 and 1998. France contributed to this by its
proposals, especially in regard to hedge funds and fiscal
havens. It will continue to work to this end, as much
remains to be done.
These rules of the game have to be based on better
coordination among international institutions. Since 1945,
international cooperation has respected the principle of
specialization of institutions. In the future, the task is to
make them more complementary. Economic and trade
rules cannot disregard the most elementary social and
environmental norms. Accordingly, France supported the
adoption by the International Labour Conference a year
ago of a declaration on the fundamental principles and
rights involved in labour. The International Labour
Organization (ILO) is an irreplaceable forum for dialogue
between government and social partners and for the
formulation of minimal standards. It is desirable that it
establish close relations with other organizations, such as
the World Trade Organization (WTO) and the World
Bank.
For these rules of the game to be better respected,
appropriate cooperation has to be established with the
poorest countries. Their debt burden continues to be the
primary obstacle to development. At their meeting in
Cologne, the G-7 countries pledged to grant further debt
relief. France contributed to this. Three principles will be
applied: solidarity, which calls for us to grant the poorest
countries the most favourable debt treatment; fairness,
which requires the rich countries to share the financial
effort in a balanced way; and responsibility, whereby the
countries benefiting from this aid undertake policies
directed towards sustainable development and the fight
against poverty. For these countries, official development
assistance remains indispensable. France will continue to
advocate greater effort on the part of the richest countries.
Our action should be increasingly inspired by the
affirmation of common values and rules. Human rights
are central to this approach. I am referring in particular to
the weakest children. The ILO Convention which outlaws
the worst forms of child labour is a new case in point.
The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the
Child must be supplemented as soon as possible by the
two protocols now being negotiated, one against the
recruitment of children in armed conflicts, the other
against the sale of children and child prostitution and
pornography.
To affirm the rights of women is to recognize their
decisive role in education, in the production of wealth and
in development. But it is also to combat the
discrimination and violence which they suffer. France has
made equality between women and men one of the
cornerstones in the renewal of its public life. The
additional protocol to the Convention on the Elimination
29


of All Forms Discrimination against Women, submitted to
the General Assembly for approval, offers women the
possibility to assert their rights in an individual capacity.
That is a major step forward. The special session of the
General Assembly in June 2000 will highlight the progress
that has been achieved since the 1995 Conference in
Beijing.
Reaffirming the right of all human beings to health
means combating pandemics everywhere. In December
1997, in Abidjan, France proposed the establishment of a
“therapeutic solidarity fund” to mobilize the international
community to care for and treat AIDS sufferers. The
countries of the South and associations involved in
combating the disease welcomed the proposal warmly. But
the impact of AIDS on development remains dramatic. We
must intensify our efforts to reduce this plague. Only the
United Nations can give these efforts the necessary breadth.
The principle of precaution has to be the basis for our
action regarding the environment and health safety. The
Montreal Protocol for the protection of the ozone layer,
based on the principle of differentiated commitments
between the North and South, is an example of well-
conceived international action. These efforts must be
continued. We will do so by advocating, with our European
Union partners, a world convention on forests and by
redoubling efforts to reduce carbon dioxide emissions in the
atmosphere. Precaution must also be the guiding principle
in monitoring food safety. The combination of concern for
sustainable agriculture, the quality of products and the
preservation of food traditions in each country explain the
intensity of recent reactions. France therefore intends to see
these demands taken into account at the forthcoming WTO
negotiations.
In order to address and overcome the world’s
problems, to derive the best from globalization, we need
nations to be aware of their responsibilities, and we need
also to have “more” of the United Nations. Through an
Organization strengthened by a renewed sense of mission,
supported by sovereign States and regional organizations,
we will be able to further respect for human rights, promote
democracy, work for sustainable development and help all
to achieve their potential.



It is just over half a
century since the then British Prime Minister, Clement
Attlee, presented the Charter of the United Nations to our
Parliament. He told our Parliament:
“We are seeking not merely good relations
between nations but between the human beings
within nations”.
The concept he saw expressed in the Charter of the United
Nations was revolutionary. That responsibility for the
security, freedom and development of people does not
belong solely to each State acting individually, but to all
nations of the world acting as a united body.
Over the past 50 years, the United Nations has done
much to discharge that responsibility. The United Nations
and its agencies have led programmes around the world that
have released the potential of individual human beings on
every continent. We have helped double the literacy rate
among women in developing countries. We have helped
immunize 80 per cent of the world's children against some
of the most lethal diseases. We have established the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights as the benchmark
for freedom for individuals. And this General Assembly
played a leading role in insisting on equal democratic
rights, regardless of race, and in forcing an end to
apartheid. Today the United Nations provides shelter and
sanctuary to refugees in every corner of the world.
As we meet this week, United Nations agencies
provide homes, food, welfare, health and education to 19
million refugees — more than the population of most
Member States. We should take pride in these
achievements, because it will help give us the confidence
to tackle the challenges that remain.
But we must also be frank about where we have
failed. We have failed to deliver peace to many of the
peoples of the world. We have not realized the vision of
our founders, of nations and peoples within them living
in peace with each other. We have averted world war. But
we have not averted a world with too much war.
That is why I want to support the excellent opening
address by our Secretary-General by focusing my remarks
also on what we must do if we are to replace failure to
halt war with success in preventing conflict. The
harrowing scenes we have witnessed this past year from
Kosovo, from Sierra Leone, from East Timor and too
many other places underline the urgency of improving our
performance in preventing conflicts and also in stopping
them once they have started.
I propose five priority areas for action. First, we
must tackle the root causes of conflict, starting with the
poverty that breeds it. War is becoming a poor man's
burden. In the modern world, wealthy nations no longer
experience the trauma of conflict on their soil. The
soundest basis for peace is prosperity, and the best way
we can prevent conflict is by promoting sustainable
development. The forthcoming Millennium Assembly
must make a reality of the commitment to halving the
proportion of people in extreme poverty and reducing the
number of nations in heavy debt.
Secondly, we must promote human rights and good
governance. Development of a nation will be more rapid
where people have the right to develop their full potential.
Conflict is more likely where governments rule without
the consent of their people.
Thirdly, we must curb the supply of weapons that
fuel conflict. For decades, the United Nations, rightly, has
focused on halting the spread of weapons of mass
destruction. Yet in truth, in those same decades, the
weapons that have killed masses in conflicts have been
the most common of small arms. In Friday's debate in the
Security Council, we will have the opportunity to take
forward action to halt the illegal trade in small arms, to
promote regional moratoriums on small arms and to limit
arsenals of military firearms to legitimate Government
agencies.
34


Fourthly, we must stop the illegal trade in diamonds
and other precious commodities which pay for the small
arms — and all too often the mercenaries — which sustain
conflict. The markets for these commodities, especially the
market in diamonds, are small and tightly located in a few
centres. We must encourage cooperation with those who
manage those markets to cut off the supply of funds to
those who are promoting conflict.
Lastly, I strongly endorse the view expressed by our
Secretary-General this morning that we must counter the
culture of impunity. Those who break international
humanitarian law, from Kosovo to East Timor, must know
that they will be held to account by the international
community.
The international criminal tribunals have shown what
can be done. We must build on their work by getting a
permanent international criminal court up and running with
all speed.
But we will not always succeed in preventing conflict.
We need, therefore, to be better equipped to restore peace
when war breaks out. As my Prime Minister, Tony Blair,
said in Chicago earlier this year, working out the conditions
and identifying the circumstances when it is right in the
modern world to intervene is the most pressing problem in
foreign policy today. His speech demonstrated that Britain
is anxious to play its full part in that debate. Our starting
point is that our common interest in preserving the world
from major conflict is greater than our individual interests
as nations.
Globalization is the long and rather ugly term which
is used to describe how in today’s world we are
interdependent with each other rather than independent of
each other. We are bound together by our strengthening
links in trade and investment, in travel and communication.
What happens in one country can have a direct impact on
the prosperity and the security — even the climate — of
countries on the other side of the world.
And we are also bound together by the consequences
of conflict. In Britain 90 per cent of the heroin on the
streets of our big cities is grown in Afghanistan under
cover of the generation-long conflict in that land. In central
Africa, the upheavals of population sparked by the mass
genocide in Rwanda have destabilized the region and
caught up half a dozen countries in the conflicts that have
ensued. Across the countries of Europe there are now
several hundred thousands of citizens of the former
Yugoslavia who have fled to seek sanctuary from the
repeated conflicts there. Just as few nations can stand
alone in the modern world, there are now few major
conflicts which remain only an internal matter with no
impact on the rest of the world.
If we are to respond adequately when conflict
breaks out, then the United Nations needs to develop
three strengths — credibility, consensus and capacity.
If the United Nations is to have the credibility to
press the parties to a conflict to a solution, it must be
more representative of the modern world. A small
increase in the size of the Security Council would be a
modest price to pay for the big increase in its credibility
which would come from a more representative permanent
membership.
But greater credibility would be pointless without
consensus on when the authority of the United Nations
should be invoked. Intervention must always be a last
resort. We can all agree that the first responsibility for
reconciling internal conflict rests with the State in which
that conflict arises. But we also have a shared
responsibility to act when we are confronted with
genocide, mass displacement of people or major breaches
of humanitarian law. To know that such atrocities are
being committed and not to act against them is to make
us complicit in them. And to be passive in the face of
such events is to make it more likely that they will be
repeated.
Credibility, though, also requires us to demonstrate
not just the consensus, but also the capacity, to act. We
often hear demands that the United Nations should do
something. Let us be honest — the United Nations is
nothing more than the aggregate of its Member States.
The United Nations cannot do something except when we,
its Member States, are prepared to provide the means.
We need to ensure that the United Nations has a
sound financial base, which requires all of us to meet our
assessed contributions in full, on time. But we must also
ensure that when peacekeeping forces are required, they
are made available. Britain has signed a standby
agreement earmarking forces we are prepared in principle
to provide for emergency peacekeeping work. Such
agreements enable the United Nations to plan for
emergencies with greater confidence that we can rapidly
put in the field the right skills, with the necessary
equipment. A score of other Member States have signed
similar agreements. The more of us that do so, the greater
35


will be the capacity of the United Nations in brokering a
basis for peacekeeping deployment.
But in Kosovo we discovered that it was less difficult
to put together an armed force to end the military violence
than to assemble a United Nations police force to keep civil
order. Today, therefore, I can announce that Britain will
follow up our standby agreement with the United Nations
on troops with a similar agreement increasing the number
of United Kingdom police officers available for United
Nations troops. This will include a commitment to a rapid
response squad, ready for deployment at short notice when
it is urgently needed. We shall also be establishing with the
United Nations a flagship training course in Britain to train
police from around the world to play their part in our joint
missions.
I am conscious that the agenda I have set out is an
ambitious one. But, in all humility, I have to say that it is
less ambitious than the visionary programme set out half a
century ago by the founders of the United Nations. As our
Secretary-General said earlier this year, unless we can unite
around the aim of confronting massive human rights
violations, against crimes against humanity, then we will
betray the very ideals of our founders.
In the modern world in which we live — the modern
world of satellite communications — we know instantly
when such violations are taking place. We have the
resources and the mobility to move our assets quickly in an
emergency. Modern technology has made all of us each
other’s neighbours. We now need to match that technology
with an international doctrine that also reflects the modern
world. And it must be founded on the clear principle that
the only war we agree to wage is one in which our nations
are united in combating conflict.





It is a particular pleasure to see
Mr. Gurirab presiding over the last session of the General
Assembly of the twentieth century. I consider myself
singularly fortunate and greatly honoured to be representing
my country, India, on this occasion. I do believe that, in the
many years that he spent here pursuing the dream of
independence for his people — which, happily, is now a
reality — he, more perhaps than others, has seen the United
Nations at its best. That is why the perspective that he
brings to the office of the President, enriched as it is by
living through the very articles of faith of the United
Nations, is near unique. I am sure we will all profit from it.
I take this opportunity also to warmly welcome three
new Members to the United Nations: Kiribati, Nauru and
Tonga. I have no doubt their presence shall enrich our
deliberations.
Even as I address this Assembly, the century draws to
a close and the world prepares to meet the year 2000. It is
only appropriate and instructive, therefore, to look back and
to reflect upon the journey that humanity set out upon 100
years ago. Where did we think we were then headed and
where have we actually reached? Could any then foresee
what 1999 would bring? Thus, are there, in the passage of
the years that have gone by, any landmarks that could
indicate a path for our future? For that, we need to assess
the twentieth century, and there is but one yardstick by
which we can judge: the criteria of the stated objectives
of the United Nations.
Indisputably, the twentieth has been the bloodiest of
all centuries. But, in contradistinction, it has also been a
century of the most profound transformations and of the
most significant social, political and technological
advancements. This, above all, has been the century of
the ascendancy of the individual and of democracy. It is
that period in which dynasties vanished and revolutions
swept empires off the face of ancient lands. Centuries-old
colonialism became history against the irresistible heave
of the colonized to reclaim their lands, their souls, so that
oppressed humanity could regain a voice, a say in its own
political and economic destiny. It is the century in which
we plumbed the depths of the oceans and soared into the
infinities of space; when man first set foot on the moon,
reached Mars and even deeper into the recesses of the
unknown. In a wired-up world, the computer has today
become what the fountain pen was in the early years of
the twentieth century. The revolution of the digital has
arrived.
Humanity today is healthier, better fed and more
sheltered than our forefathers were. But want and hunger,
disease and deprivation are still widespread, including in
developed societies. We have at our command more
information than ever before, but are we that much wiser?
Literacy has spread, but is mankind better educated? We
are more connected globally, but are we as humankind?
Have this linkage and interconnection reduced conflict
and animosity? And thus, the tabulation of our assets and
liabilities of this century flows.
As we have improved upon and added to almost
everything that we inherited in 1900, so most sadly have
we to violence, too. This century has been the most
bloodthirsty, perhaps because it is in these last 100 years
that humanity has employed science to perfect means of
killing as never before. Our passage has seen us move
from the Gatling gun to a world menaced today by
MIRVs. That early machine gun, the then-great mower
down of the early 1900s, seems today almost a toy by
comparison. We have split the atom, but employ the
released energy less for peace and more for weapons of
unimaginable destruction. Chemical defoliants and
sophisticated biological weapons are also this century's
contribution.
The century that passes experienced not two, but
three great wars. Each was a cataclysm, fought globally
and at enormous cost. When the first ended, the survivors
39


emerged from the trenches, searching for a better world so
that war would not recur. In response, we created the
League of Nations. But war, regrettably, was not avoided.
The League failed because we failed the League. And thus
followed the second great war, at the end of which the
world emerged armed with weapons that could destroy all
that human genius and ingenuity had created and every
vestige of life. But, from the ruins and devastation of the
second also emerged the United Nations, with mandates of
broader powers and responsibilities. The third great conflict
was the cold war. This deeply affected, shaped and
influenced the development of the United Nations. This
war, too, extracted a heavy price, directly and through
proxy conflicts, as well as political and social upheavals,
but then these became its epilogue. What significance lies
in the observation that no global peace conference has taken
place to mark the end of this last war?
The United Nations could have been cast anew, made
contemporary and democratized, drawing upon our
collective experience to tackle new challenges with greater
responsiveness. Can we, even now, do something at this
last session of the General Assembly of this millennium to
correct this? Can we pledge afresh to invest this institution
with faith, commitment, political will and the resources that
it needs to make it the vehicle capable of realizing the
aspirations of all humanity, an instrument that will steer
planet Earth into the next century?
We do not enjoy an abundance of options. The
sapping of the vitality or the diminishing of the centrality
of the United Nations must not be permitted. We have but
one Earth, and there is but one United Nations.
Another development of this century, of crucial
significance, is the transformation that we have experienced
in the role of the State. From an agency that controlled and
regulated all spheres of human activity, we move into a
phase wherein the State must become more supportive,
caring and encouraging of the citizen's individual and
collective endeavours; it must release, not contain, the
energies and genius of its people.
It would be an error, however, to assume that the days
of the State are over. The State continues to have a crucial
role and relevance; also, therefore, do national
sovereignties. The United Nations was not conceived as a
super-State. It will not ever become so, principally because
there is no viable substitute for the sovereign State. Even
globalization can work only through State intermediaries.
To diminish, marginalize or ignore the State would also be
bad practice, because the weaker the State is rendered, the
less it shall be able to promote the interests of its citizens.
The State needs to be strengthened functionally, not
weakened. Besides, it is axiomatic that a United Nations
of weak nations can only be a weak United Nations.
Globalization is an idea that has re-emerged, but also
its reverse: fragmentation. The first is politico-economic,
the second entirely political. Let us dwell a bit on this.
Obviously, the technology that is driving this process can
now scarcely be unlearned; the speed of travel and of
communications will only increase; the age of the digital,
as I said, has dawned. However, though globalization may
apparently be driven by impersonal market forces, it is in
reality impelled by power seeking political and financial
advantage. It is, in essence, a political process, and if
history teaches us anything, it is that such processes are
not linear. Simply in terms of economic indicators, the
world was as globalized at the turn of the century as it is
now. A backlash followed: barriers went up, confrontation
replaced cooperation and the world jostled into the
tensions that led to the first great war. Are we, for the
sake of temporary gain, perhaps even unwittingly,
repeating yesterday's mistakes? Political hindsight tells us
that globalization has to be politically directed for
creating equal economic opportunity, both within States
and among States.
In India, we cherish the creative genius of the
people. We believe that Indian excellence lies in the
freedom of the individual. We do not subscribe to
constricting choice through State impositions. But can free
markets offer true freedom of choice to those that are not
even a part of the market? That is why the State
continues to have the responsibility to protect the needy,
to strengthen the weak. That is a part of our democratic
creed, too.
We note that human rights have been made a cross-
cutting theme of the work of the United Nations. That is
important. The flowering, however, of human rights
requires economic development and growth because many
of the deprivations faced by individuals, whether in the
developed or in the developing world, are rooted in
marginalization created by poverty. We believe, therefore,
that development should be the cross-cutting theme of the
United Nations and that the multilateral development
system, which has been one of its successes, must be
strengthened, its focus narrowed to the core challenges of
economic growth with social justice, and it must be given
the resources it requires to respond to the needs of the
developing countries. The international community will
find that no investment yields better returns.
40


I have the honour to address the Assembly as a
representative of the largest democracy in the world. Even
now, as I share these thoughts, an electorate of about 600
million, matching the combined populations of the United
States, Canada and Western Europe, is going through the
exciting process of democratically electing its next
Government in my country. It is an awe-inspiring spectacle,
this unstoppable flow of the great Ganga of Indian
democracy. It is a democracy whose economy grew by
more than 6 per cent last year, even in the aftermath of the
major shocks to the international economy brought about by
what was described as the East Asian meltdown of the mid-
1990s.
We move with the challenges posed by globalization,
without either retreating into a “fortress India” or
abandoning our social objectives. We have worked out our
own answers and devised our own policies to meet these
new challenges because we hold that the sheer diversity of
mankind dictates differences in approach, in human beings'
respective search for relevant alternatives. This is a truth
borne out by the fact that the twentieth century has been
witness to the detritus of many false certainties.
Today, when capital moves without almost any
constraint, it is virtually impossible for developing countries
to resist either its demands or manage the consequences of
its sudden departure. Let us reflect upon the absence of
order, system or any global oversight of currency flows,
particularly short-term flows, even as we attempt to bring
order and equity to trade in goods, services and
commodities. But how are we to address the problem when
currency, instead of being a vehicle of trade, has in itself
become a commodity of trade, when the volume of trade in
currency daily has outstripped global trade in goods and
services or even global gross national product manifold?
If globalization is to benefit all, and as we simply
cannot accept that wheels of progress should grind down
the common man, then surely some new international
regulation, some order, is needed here. Let the United
Nations take the initiative to hold an urgent international
conference on financing for development.
In the political domain, too, managing change
demands openness and reasoned discourse, an essential
ingredient of which is abjuring violence. That is why
terrorism is the very antithesis of all that the United
Nations represents and stands for. Terrorism is the great
global menace of our age. In this age of democracy, it is a
violation of the very basic precepts of it. Because its
principal targets become the innocent, it is a crime against
humanity, a violation of basic human rights. It is also
now a grave threat to international peace and security.
That is why I urge that we strengthen the international
consensus against terrorism. India has called for a
comprehensive international convention against terrorism.
We hope to make progress on the issue in this session of
the General Assembly.
We also know how terrorism uses the international
financial system, how it exploits the breakdown of
countries and societies, and how it has preyed on the
nexus between drugs and the proliferation of small arms.
Thus, today, we witness a scimitar of narco-terrorism
cutting across the Caucasus to the South Asian
subcontinent. Two of the world’s largest sources of illicit
drugs flank us. Terrorism financed by drugs has for years
been the deadly export of our neighbours.
Here the crippling intermixing of cause and effect is
cruelly exemplified in Afghanistan. The world has been
witness to the decades-old distress of the innocent men,
women and children of that country. The disorders of
Afghanistan, and the near anarchy into which that country
has been pushed, are a consequence, chiefly, of the play
of external forces and of a reversion to medieval
fundamentalism of the most obscurantist variety. This
disorder now overspills; it is also exported. It is not that
human rights, particularly of women and children, are
routinely violated there; they simply do not exist.
Our relationships with this neighbour are ancient and
rooted in a past that we share. That is why we urge this
Assembly to be seized of the enormous human suffering
of the Afghans, and to encourage and support the early
formation of a Government truly representative of all
sections of that society and country.
Terrorism is a menace to which open societies are
vulnerable; it becomes particularly difficult for
democracies to counter when terrorists are armed,
financed and backed by Governments or their agencies,
and benefit from the protection of State power. Cross-
border terrorism, sponsored from across our borders, has
taken the lives of thousands of our citizens and ruined
those of countless others. We will counter it, as we have
done over the past decades, using the methods available
to a democracy. India will defeat such forces. That is both
our duty and our obligation to our citizens.
Earlier this year India was subjected, yet again, to an
act of premeditated aggression. In February this year,
hoping yet again to set aside the sterility of relations of
41


the past half century to set the South Asian subcontinent on
the path of development, with a view to addressing the real
adversaries of our region — poverty, want and hunger —
Prime Minister Vajpayee extended a hand of peace, amity
and cooperation to neighbouring Pakistan. The pathbreaking
bus journey from Delhi to Lahore followed. In Lahore we
concluded a triad of agreements, among which was the
Lahore Declaration. It was the route chart of moving
towards lasting amity and peace.
This act of faith was betrayed. Premeditated
aggression by regular forces was committed against India.
Not simply was the Lahore Declaration violated, but so was
the Simla Agreement, which had prevented conflict for
more than a quarter of a century. In self-defence, yet with
the utmost restraint, India took all necessary and
appropriate steps to evict the aggressor forces from its
territory. Most regrettably, this aggression has set back the
Lahore process of peace that we had initiated. For whereas
aggression over territory can more easily be vacated, that
territory of trust which has been transgressed is infinitely
more difficult to restore.
Permit me, Sir, to draw attention to the fact that this
aggression upon India in Kargil was a demonstration of
wanting to hold to ransom the world, through an act of
aggression. It was also a manifestation of the larger
disorders that the world has been witnessing in Afghanistan.
There is an aspect that I stress. It was a gross violation
of the Geneva Conventions when Indian soldiers taken
prisoner were tortured, subjected to inhuman treatment and
killed in captivity. These violations took place at a time
when the international community has repeatedly been
trying to establish the rule of law, stripping away the layers
of impunity that have protected those who give the orders
that lead to violations of international humanitarian law.
And it is thus that I find it necessary to reiterate some
essential verities of Indian nationhood. From the earliest
days of our struggle against imperialism and colonial rule
it has been an unquestionable article of faith with us that
India is one nation: a nation of many faiths, a diversity of
beliefs, a cultural harmony arranged through the interplay
of myriad forms and manifestations, but a unity,
strengthened by its pluralism, that is beyond question. And
of this is born India’s democratic vitality, too. Also of this
oneness and unity, the Indian State of Jammu and Kashmir
is an integral part, and shall remain so. Because this is not
any territorial dispute; it is the assertion of two antipodal
approaches to national identity. India has never represented
denominational nationhood; it is civic nationalism to which
we subscribe. That is why Jammu and Kashmir is not a
so-called core issue. It is at the very core of Indian
nationhood.
Yet the path of the India-Pakistan composite
dialogue process is open. No preconditions attend it. The
only essential ingredient that remains is an abjuring of
violence and cross-border terrorism, principles that are
integral to both the Simla Agreement and the Lahore
Declaration — indeed, the very process of peace itself.
This process needs to be resumed.
We have been greatly disappointed by this
compulsive hostility of Pakistan, because it is an
aberration in our region today, where all the other South
Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC)
countries are at peace with each other, and are trying,
bilaterally and through the SAARC mechanisms, to tackle
together the great challenge of development. But we
remain unshaken in our vision of cooperation and shared
prosperity of the South Asian region, as embedded in the
Charter of SAARC, as well as in our faith in the ability,
talent and will of the people of the region to take their
rightful place in the world community. The destiny of all
our peoples is linked. It is a region with a collective
history reaching back to the beginnings of human history
and of the highest civilizational accomplishments. In
striving to attain the promise of the future in our region,
we also see the recovery of a great past.
This is perhaps the right juncture at which to say a
few words about pluralism in an age of globalization.
Though we find sterile the debate over universal and
regional values, extreme positions are still taken on both
sides. In a spirit of engagement, we would urge our
partners in the West to be a bit more tolerant, and a bit
more introspective. While all democratic Governments try
to promote good governance, human rights and social
responsibility, the perspective they approach them from,
and their ability to implement them, vary. Rigidly
applying, as a universal paradigm, value systems that
reflect the state of western economies and societies in the
late twentieth century, produces an inevitable reaction,
which does not make either for dialogue or constructive
decisions.
Globalization has also influenced our thinking on
security issues by generating a greater awareness about
new security concerns. Equally important, with the end of
the cold war there is a growing realization that peace
cannot be maintained through balance of power or
hegemonic order. To maintain global peace and security,
42


to deal with threats of a global nature, the international
community has to accept the concept of collective security.
The United Nations provides a framework for such a
contract among nations. With the cold war behind us, the
General Assembly should reactivate this framework.
Global nuclear disarmament was the objective set out
by the 1946 General Assembly in the first resolution that it
adopted. That objective still beckons us.
I say this as the representative of a country that has
been obliged to acquire nuclear weapons because of the
failure of the existing non-proliferation regime to address
our primary security concerns. Yet let me also state with
full conviction that India’s commitment to global nuclear
disarmament stands undiluted. India is the only nuclear-
weapon State ready to negotiate a nuclear weapons
convention that will prohibit for ever the development,
production, stockpiling, use and threat of use of nuclear
weapons and provide for the elimination of all existing
weapons under international verification.
If this can only be a step-by-step process, the first step
at a technical level is for all countries possessing nuclear
weapons to take measures that will reduce the dangers of,
and provide added safeguards against, any unintended or
accidental use. Coupled with this is the political step of
reorienting nuclear doctrines, towards no-first-use, and then
non-use, thus delegitimizing nuclear weapons globally.
Independent expert opinion across the globe has spoken
strongly in favour of such measures. In fact, every single
study that has been published since the end of the cold war
on the measures to achieve a nuclear-weapon-free world
has highlighted the need for shifting to doctrines based on
no-first-use and non-use, and technical measures towards
de-alerting, as the inevitable first steps in the process. We
have taken initiatives to urge the international community
forward on both counts, and hope that in this General
Assembly session the Indian initiatives will receive the
unanimous support that they merit.
Last year my Prime Minister declared in this
Assembly that India was engaged in discussions on a range
of issues, including the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty (CTBT). These discussions are in process and will
be resumed by the newly- elected Government of my
country. Our position remains consistent. We remain ready
to bring these discussions to a successful conclusion.
Naturally, this requires the creation of a positive
environment as we work towards creating the widest
possible consensus domestically. We also expect that other
countries will adhere to this Treaty without any conditions.
Notwithstanding India’s readiness to engage in
constructive negotiations on a treaty to prohibit the future
production of fissile materials for nuclear weapons and
nuclear explosive devices, the Conference on
Disarmament in Geneva has so far, sadly, been unable to
register any forward movement. This, too, is something to
ponder over, for we all know that a fissile material cut-off
treaty (FMCT) can only contribute to our shared objective
as part of a step-by-step process. Let us then overcome
this reluctance and agree to look beyond the FMCT.
So, at the end of this centennial audit, what is it that
we would want the United Nations to do in the first few
years? It is clear that there are two major problems facing
the United Nations as an institution: Security Council
reform and the United Nations financial crisis. These need
to be addressed. The Security Council must be made
more representative, with developing countries inducted
as permanent members, to reflect the changes in the
United Nations membership and today’s political realities.
As we said earlier, on any objective criteria, India’s
credentials for permanent membership are persuasive.
Sustainable and environmentally sound development
is a goal to which India continues to attach the utmost
importance. In 2002 we will complete a decade of
Agenda 21, adopted at the Rio Earth Summit in 1992. I
trust that the current session of the General Assembly will
put in place a preparatory process for the “Rio + 10”
review. This will enable the Member States to take stock
of the implementation of the commitments undertaken by
the Member States in Agenda 21 over the past decade.
Such a process is vital for attaining our common goal of
sustainable and environmentally sound development.
This century has shown us that our challenges are
common; they are intertwined. Problems flow across
boundaries, they batten on each other. Political, security,
economic and social challenges are braided around each
other; when they form a knot, that has to be cut by all of
us together. Here, and nowhere else, can we do this. It is
convenient to look at security issues in the First
Committee, at economic issues in the Second, at human
rights and social issues in the Third, and so on, but we
often do not see them together, and so fail to use the
United Nations as we should.
May I, in conclusion, therefore, propose that in the
next decade the United Nations endeavour to address the
most urgent problems that face us today. We have to do
this as a unity of nations, as also of issues, for it is
evident that solutions in one field will depend on, or be
43


facilitated by, progress in another. Without tackling them
together we will fail to address them at all. Therefore, may
I urge the Assembly to consider the following areas for
action in the opening years of the next decade: an
international conference on financing for development;
binding, irreversible steps to reduce the dangers of use of
nuclear weapons; reform and expansion of the Security
Council; a comprehensive convention against terrorism; and
strengthening of the United Nations development system in
this era of globalization.
I leave you with a sloka from the Rigveda. Though
written 5,000 years ago, it reaches across time to us as at
this session of the General Assembly, in the last year of the
twentieth century. In translation, it reads,
“Be of one heart, one mind and free of hate.
Let your aim be common, your assembly common,
United your mind and thoughts;
May you make your resolutions with one mind,
Perform your duties righteously.
Let our hearts be together”.








The fifty-fourth session of
the General Assembly of the United Nations takes place
at a time marking humanity's crossing into the next
millennium. It emerges as a link in the long chain of
tumultuous events that have reshaped the map of the
family of nations.
12


The United Nations was born against the backdrop of
the destruction and desolation of the Second World War,
the most bitter, deadly and inhumane war known to
mankind. The descent of the Nazi regime to the depths of
evil was like an eclipse in the history of civilization and
will be recalled in history as a nightmare in which man
created the devil, who wreaked devastation, destruction,
terror and annihilation upon the world. The stand taken by
the Allied forces against the Nazi monster, and the creation
of the United Nations in April 1945, on the verge of the
defeat of the forces of destruction, was an act that marked
the return of humanity to its senses, to salvage the future of
mankind.
In this month when we mark 60 years since the
outbreak of the most horrible of wars, we are strengthened
more than ever in our sense of hope and confidence in the
necessity of the United Nations and of its activities
throughout the world. The various agencies of the United
Nations work to enhance world health and tend the sick; to
supply the needy with food and nourishment; to build
bridges between cultures; to promote education and
overcome ignorance; to instil hope into the lives of refugees
and displaced persons; and to assist the victims of disasters,
whether natural or man-made.
The soldiers of the United Nations forces are the true
peacekeepers of our age. In its corps are soldiers from all
the nations of the world. At times they risk their lives in
areas riddled with conflict and violence around the world,
whether their United Nations mandate is to make peace or
to be observers that safeguard the peace. These distinctions,
important as they may be to the policy makers and shapers
of international relations, have no meaning to the individual
United Nations soldier, posted far from his country, who
brings hope and tranquillity to places fraught with tragedy,
suffering and violence.
After many centuries of violence and war, of
enslavement and destructiveness in the name of murderous
ideologies, after decades of cold war and polarized world
alliances of the East and the West, the human race is now
making great strides down the paths of peace and
reconciliation. Before our very eyes, a process is
enveloping the world, signalling hope for the future.
Mankind is adopting a new path, the path of the prophet
Isaiah, who as far back as 2,600 years ago prophesied that
the day would come when
“they shall beat their swords into ploughshares, and
their spears into pruning-hooks: nation shall not lift up
sword against nation, neither shall they learn war
any more.” (The Holy Bible, Isaiah 2:4)
This prophecy — which has been adopted by the
United Nations as a source of hope, as the symbol of the
victory of the good in human beings over evil — should
serve today more than ever as a beacon and a path for all
who cherish peace around the world and for their
representatives gathered here today.
The world has become more open. Satellites, the
Internet and telecommunications networks shorten
geographical and cultural distances. The political and
ideological blocs of the past have disintegrated, and the
walls of animosity have fallen along with the tyrants and
dictators who built them. They are being replaced by new
blocs, some of which are in the process of being created
where development and prosperity reign. I hope and
believe that these beneficial transformations will also
occur in the Middle East.
In our region, too, the light of hope has been
rekindled. We are now in the midst of a political process,
the objective of which is to reach peace between States
and reconciliation between peoples. Israel aspires to reach
a comprehensive peace with its neighbours, a peace of
harmony. Israel will not be satisfied with a merely
political or strategic peace. In our eyes, the absence of
war is not the peace we aspire to achieve.
May I be allowed to emphasize once again that
peace means a culture of peace; peace means no more
threats of violence, whether implied or categorical; peace
entails the end of boycotts, the end of contempt and
defamation, the end of incitement and confrontation...
peace is also a language of peace: it is the way leaders
address their nations, teachers teach their students and
religious leaders inspire their followers.
At a time when various kinds of religious extremism
are rearing their heads and eroding human wisdom and
human freedom, it is essential that inter-faith dialogue be
strengthened and that the religions be manifested in their
enlightened forms, which sanctify tolerance and
coexistence.
On the way to achieving peace in our region, we
often find ourselves confronted with contradictory
realities. Parallel to the political process, our negotiating
partners are conducting a constant political war against
Israel in various international forums, including from the
podium of this Assembly. This dualism is inconsistent
13


with the peace process and is intolerable, as are the extreme
decisions taken by the Arab League against Israel. These
decisions are not in keeping with the spirit of peace, as
expressed in the Sharm el-Sheikh Memorandum.
We hoped for and expected a different atmosphere,
one that would complement the impetus initiated by the
new Government in Israel. We have been saddened to
witness events that undermine the essence of peace. These
events can be defined only as anti-peace resolutions.
Engaging in a peace process, on the one hand, and
maintaining anti-Israel declarations and resolutions, on the
other, raises some serious concerns about our negotiating
partners and their concept of peace. Is it a peace of
normalization with open borders, or is it only one of
temporary initial recognition? Will our relations with the
Gulf and Maghreb countries, such as Morocco, Tunisia,
Mauritania, Qatar and Oman, be allowed to expand and
develop? Or will these relations remain hostage to mood
swings after each and every difficulty in the negotiations or
whenever there is disagreement? Continued doubts about
these cardinal questions cannot be tolerated in the light of
the heavy price and grave risks that Israel is taking upon
itself in this process.
Three weeks ago, on 4 September, Israel and the
Palestinian Authority signed the Sharm el-Sheikh
Memorandum, which for the first time creates a direct,
chronological, political and conceptual link between the
Interim Agreements and the final status agreement. On 13
September, the final status talks were renewed between
Israelis and Palestinians.
We are determined to reach a framework agreement
that will form the basis of the final status agreement by
February 2000, as stated and agreed upon in the Sharm
el-Sheikh Memorandum. In this framework we will select
the issues and set an agenda for the final status agreement.
The topics at hand are known, as are the differing vantage
points and positions of each side. The differences can be
resolved only by direct negotiations.
Regarding the final status, I wish to affirm from this
podium that when we refer to political separation as one of
the prime concepts of the permanent settlement, we are also
saying that, for the benefit of both sides, we should not
necessarily sever ties that are vital to coexistence in the
various spheres of living.
From Israel’s perspective, there is no competition and
never has been any between the different negotiating tracks.
Israel also aspires to reach peace with Syria, our
neighbour to the north. This is, after all, in the higher
common interests of both Israel and Syria. H o w e v e r ,
along with these common interests, the following point
must be made clear: A democratic country like Israel
cannot accept a precondition to beginning the talks that
requires a prior acceptance of the final outcome as
dictated by the extreme and dogged formulas of the
opposing side.
We must maintain the momentum of good will so
that we can face our children, Syrian and Israeli alike,
with a clear conscience and say to them in all honesty:
We tried everything and did our utmost. I call upon the
leaders of Syria, in view of what we have gone through
together, to cease hesitating. It is time to talk. Meetings
and discussion are not political sacrifices — they are
basic necessities.
On the road to a comprehensive peace, we wish to
see Lebanon join the camp of peacemakers. The anomaly
which has developed in its territory must come to an end.
We have never had nor do we have now any territorial
claims or disputes with Lebanon. Our one and only
interest is to guarantee the safety and security of our
citizens. I must say that, regrettably, the Government of
Lebanon has for many years failed to enforce its
sovereignty in the southern part of Lebanon and to disarm
Hezbollah. I hope that this situation will improve and that
Israel, within the framework of an agreement, will be able
to leave the southern part of Lebanon.
Nevertheless, with that as our ambition, I wish to
emphasize that we will not be held hostage much longer
on this track to a stubborn and defiant attitude. We will
make our own independent decisions, as we see fit, in
order to ensure our protection and our vital interests,
taking all options under consideration.
A reconciliation between Israel and its neighbours
must extend the promise that all the peoples of the region
may reap the benefits of peace. Normalization must not
be viewed as a one-sided gesture. As a natural outcome
of peaceful coexistence, normalization is not in the
service of one particular party. It is in the interests of all
the nations of the region.
We hope to renew the multilateral tracks as early as
this year. There is a need for close cooperation in
regional multilateral projects. Our region has tremendous
potential. In order to fully realize this potential, we must
establish a mechanism of true cooperation among the
14


States of the region. This cooperation would clearly be to
the benefit of all of us in the region.
The scarcity of water in our region, which will only
get worse, may impose a new way of life on the inhabitants
of the Middle East in the coming years. Israel is
anticipating this problem and preparing for it, but in this
case, as in others, cooperation in the region is essential and
will benefit all sides.
The working groups of the multilateral tracks
undertook various assignments of primary importance.
Unfortunately, their activities have been frozen for
irrelevant reasons. This is the time to resurrect them. Any
delay or imposed condition is liable to undermine the peace
process and delay the aid packages so essential to the
peoples of the region. Throughout this important process,
on the bilateral and the multilateral tracks alike, we are
accompanied by the international community. First and
foremost was the United States of America, along with the
Russian Federation, the European Union, Canada, Norway,
Japan, China and other countries and organizations that
have assisted and continue to do so. Their key contributions
earn them special commendation from this rostrum.
Egypt and Jordan were our first partners in breaking
down the walls of enmity and in thawing relations in our
region. Improving our relations with Egypt, as well as
renewing the multilateral tracks, are essential to furthering
the common objectives of the nations in our region. T h e
relations between Israel and Jordan are an example of
appropriate and favourable relations between neighbouring
countries. We intend to strengthen and broaden the relations
between the two nations in the economic, social and
political realms.
As we march further along the difficult path of
making peace, we look back with sorrow and sadness as we
remember the pioneers who broke new ground and are no
longer with us today: the late Menachem Begin, Anwar
Saddat, Yitzhak Rabin, King Hussein and King Hassan II
of Morocco. Their vision and their work inspire us to
continue to work towards completing their enterprise of
peacemaking.
We cannot afford to be disillusioned. Our region is
neither North America nor Benelux. Even as we negotiate
the peace process, we remain aware of the threats and
dangers directed against us, threatening the stability of the
entire region. The mix of extreme fundamentalism, on the
one hand, and of the potential use of weapons of mass
destruction, on the other, threatens the peace, stability and
future of the entire region. This threat is not just an
element of academic debates in the study of international
relations, but a harsh reality which we must all face.
From this international platform, I call for a halt to
all technological, scientific and other kinds of assistance
to countries looking to obtain unconventional weapons,
while threatening the existence of the State of Israel and
the region as a whole.
The Persian Gulf War demonstrated that leadership
lacking reason and stability poses a threat to all the
countries in the region and to the world at large. The
monitoring groups and machinery in Iraq must be
immediately resumed. That is the obligation of the
international community so long as the Iraqi regime seeks
non-conventional weapons and threatens the region. The
United Nations is the largest, most authoritative and most
recognized international body. It should therefore be the
one to take the initiative and the responsibility in curbing
this danger.
Terrorism is an additional strategic enemy and we
cannot come to terms with its existence. It is a threat not
only to Israel, but to many other nations across the world
as well. Terror knows no borders or civilized rules. There
can be no coexistence with terror, either in the context of
the negotiations conducted by Israel with its neighbours,
or in the broader regional context. Anyone who believes
that terror is a nuisance which can be tolerated is
mistaken. Terror is in essence a strategic threat. A
synthesized, coordinated and unrelenting approach must
be adopted against it.
Here, in this building of stone and glass, reflecting
the current image of our world today with its points of
light and shadows of darkness, counterparts and enemies
meet as friends and allies in the creation of a forum for
discussion and coexistence. Discussion is the way to
resolve conflict. It is also the way of tomorrow. Dialogue
and common language are the tools of diplomacy, the raw
material for the creation of a new reality and the
foundation for a stable and safer society.
It was here in the General Assembly, at the
beginning of the decade, that I first met with my Chinese
counterpart. After 40 years of total dissociation between
our two countries, we endeavoured to re-establish
diplomatic relations between Israel and China. It was also
here that we laid the groundwork for establishing ties
with the former Soviet Union, as well as with India,
Nigeria and other States. These are only a few examples
15


demonstrating the possibility in this arena for building a
bridge between nations and States.
As a nation that experienced great difficulties,
overcome only by accelerated development efforts, the State
of Israel takes part in the international effort to aid others
and share knowledge, experience and technology,
experience which it has accumulated in various fields. The
nation of Israel is proud of its ancient tradition of sharing
and identifying with the world at large.
Through the Division for International Cooperation
within the Israeli Foreign Ministry, Israel maintains ongoing
projects and a broad range of training courses in Israel. We
have demonstration units and we are conducting research.
For example, a special medical centre was recently
established in Mauritania and serves the many citizens of
that State who suffer from chronic eye problems. Similarly,
Israel invests great efforts and resources in training
professionals to acquire the skills and abilities necessary for
meeting the various challenges that engage many parts of
the world.
In the more than 40 years since its inception, the
Division for International Cooperation has trained more
than 70,000 trainees from more than 120 countries, who
have come to Israel and attended its training courses in the
areas of agriculture, water resources, health and medicine,
science, education and others.
In 1998 alone, some 155 courses were held in Israel
on a variety of topics, with the participation of more than
4,000 trainees. Gladly, I can report that many of the
trainees were from Middle Eastern countries. Fully 820
Palestinians participated in these courses over the past year,
thereby helping to strengthen the bridges of peace which
have been built between Israelis and Palestinians. In the
same year, Israel ran more than 150 courses in over 60
different countries, with the participation of over 7,000
trainees. I am proud to point out that in many of the
countries to which we sent Israeli experts, the local
personnel managed to translate our goodwill into positive
results on the ground, to the benefit of their people and
their land.
Because of the reputation it has acquired, the Division
for International Cooperation is also one of the central
addresses in Israel to which people can turn in times of
disaster around the world. We have recently witnessed just
how essential such assistance can be in times of natural
disasters. Israel has always responded favourably to
requests for aid and relief, regardless of the political
context or the state of diplomatic relations.
We wish to support and commend the United States
of America, our friend and ally, an inspiration to us all in
its efforts to promote the values of cooperation among
nations. This is also the time to express our appreciation
to the United States for its intensive efforts to bring true
peace to the Middle East.
Even today in the United States we have witnessed
again a new resort to the threat of boycott. The case at
hand is the threat to declare a boycott against the
American company Disney, because the company dared
to allow Jerusalem to be portrayed in an exhibition
celebrating the millennium. We condemn these threats and
the use by certain Arab States of this anachronistic
device. It has no place here or anywhere else in the
world.
Over thousands of years, since the time of biblical
King David, the builder of Jerusalem, until the present
day, Jerusalem has not served as the capital of any other
nation in the world besides the nation of Israel, the
Jewish people. Even after our forced exile from the land
of Israel, we continued, generation after generation, to
stay faithful to Jerusalem. The flame of Jerusalem was
carried in our hearts as a hidden source of faith and hope.
In our wanderings, in the East and in the West, in
the African deserts and on the outskirts of Siberia, from
the golden age of Spain through the dark Inquisition,
during the prosperous Europe of the romantic era to the
charred ashes of the Holocaust, throughout all the above
the eyes of the Jews and their prayers have been directed
toward Jerusalem. Year after year, from father to son, the
anthem of the Jewish nation has constantly been “Next
Year in Jerusalem”.
With the passing of those previous generations and
exiles, we have had the privilege of being deemed worthy
to return to Jerusalem, to rebuild the ruins, to rededicate
the city as a centre radiating with beauty, open to all
followers of all religions, as the poet has said, where
freedom of all religions is a fact of life.
It is so upsetting then that even today, 51 years since
the independence of the State of Israel, there are still
those who would deny our natural right to decide the
location of our capital, a natural right given to every
nation in the world. From Jerusalem, the city of David, I
will quote from the original song of David on Jerusalem,
16


in words which transcends the limits of time and retains
their meaning in every generation:
“Our feet shall stand within thy gates, oh Jerusalem.
Jerusalem is built as a city that is bound firmly
together.” (The Holy Bible, Psalm 122:2-3)
Today, as before, from this podium we declare to the
entire world, to our friends and people and those who are
distant from us: Jerusalem, unified under Israeli
sovereignty, is and will remain forever the capital of Israel.


First let me
congratulate you, Sir, the Foreign Minister of Namibia, on
your election as President of the General Assembly this
session. I certainly recall my meetings with you and your
President in your country last year.
I also wish to welcome three new Members to the
United Nations — Kiribati, Nauru and Tonga — all very
close friends and neighbours of New Zealand. I trust that
the faith they have shown in the United Nations will be
fulfilled in the years ahead, and we certainly look forward
to working closely with them.
When addressing this Assembly, especially as a
representative of a smaller Member State, one is reminded
10


that the United Nations must remain the fundamental point
of reference in international relations. Indeed, that is a truth
that all Member States have an obligation to acknowledge.
Furthermore, it is of course sound policy for all who need
and rely on the rule of international law in place of
lawlessness. And it is particularly important to restate it at
this time. The United Nations collective security
framework, which is one of the fundamental elements of
the Charter together with cooperation on economic and
social problems and promoting respect for human rights,
has perhaps never been more severely tested than in this
last year of the twentieth century.
Armed conflicts, many of them internal and ethnically
based, have continued to present a serious moral challenge
to the international community, and they are likely to do so
for the foreseeable future. The Security Council's response
to these problems does not always increase our confidence
in the Organization.
The Secretary-General's remarks in his statement at the
beginning of this debate about the need to reconcile
universal legitimacy with effectiveness in defence of human
rights were most timely. New Zealanders place a very good
deal of faith in the United Nations: when we see on our
television screens evidence of violence and inhumanity
against the vulnerable, and we are told that the Security
Council cannot reach an agreement on collective action, we
are left worried, and wondering whether our trust in the
Security Council is well placed. A Council which loses the
trust of the people is a Council which will become
irrelevant.
I want to talk to the Assembly about two extremely
serious challenges the Council faced this year: Kosovo and
East Timor. Both highlight the importance of the actions of
the Security Council.
In East Timor, following President Habibie's
courageous offer to the East Timorese people, prompt and
effective action was taken by the Security Council to set in
train the popular consultation process. The ballot —
undertaken in extremely difficult circumstances by highly
committed United Nations workers, international and local,
all of whom deserve acclaim — produced a resounding and
incontrovertible expression of the will of the East Timorese
people. This was the essential basis for the international
community's response since the ballot.
Post-ballot events were appallingly tragic and have
rightly provoked a strong reaction around the world. The
dispatch to Jakarta and Dili of the Security Council mission
led by Ambassador Andjaba of Namibia was a key step
in addressing this grievous situation. The efforts made by
representatives of all countries present at the time of the
meeting of Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Council
leaders in Auckland, joined by the British Foreign
Secretary representing the European Union, reinforced the
Secretary-General's urging that Indonesia accept the offer
of international help. The assistance could not have come
too early.
New Zealand is proud to be a contributor, alongside
the forces of other nations from the region and from
further afield, and under the leadership of Australia, to the
United-Nations-authorized multinational force that is now
operating in East Timor. Our soldiers from New Zealand
are on the ground in East Timor right now. We are
prepared also to take part in the United Nations
peacekeeping operation foreshadowed in Security Council
resolution 1264 (1999), and we urge the Council to take
prompt action — next week would not be too soon — to
establish this operation, which would be part of the
United Nations transitional administration in East Timor.
We are contributing to the efforts of humanitarian
agencies to provide support to the hundreds of thousands
of ordinary people who have been displaced in East
Timor; those currently in West Timor should be speedily
repatriated. New Zealand has added its voice to those who
believe that the people responsible for crimes against
humanity in East Timor should be brought to account.
The overriding objective must now be to ensure the
realization of the 30 August ballot outcome and East
Timor's transition to independence. It is clear that in
laying the basis for East Timor's future, the United
Nations will be the indispensable organization.
It is inevitable that comparison will be made
between East Timor and Kosovo. In Kosovo the world
saw a grave humanitarian crisis with the Security Council
unable to act. In New Zealand's view, collective action to
try to put a stop to a humanitarian disaster involving
genocide and the most serious crimes against humanity
should never be held hostage to the veto. When it is, the
Security Council loses its credibility and its relevance. I
need hardly reiterate New Zealand's continuing opposition
to the veto, voiced since San Francisco in 1945. While it
is understandable that national interests will influence
how members vote in the Security Council, we have
never accepted that some narrow interests of any one of
five countries should be able to override the will of a
clear majority of members.



The adoption by the Security Council of its resolution
1244 (1999) of 10 June, which provided the international
community's endorsement of a political solution to the
Kosovo conflict, was certainly greeted with much relief in
most quarters, including in New Zealand. The resolution
was proof, if any were needed, that the United Nations
remains, as in East Timor, the indispensable organization.
And as the Secretary-General observed at the time, it also
gave strong legal underpinning to the task ahead, a task
which, he noted, is daunting. The contribution of the
dedicated United Nations and specialized agency staff who
are now working with little fanfare in Kosovo certainly
deserves our recognition.
Both Kosovo and East Timor have put the Security
Council to the test. In their own ways they have challenged
this Organization's capacity to take effective action in the
face of severe difficulties. The world must never again
witness horrors such as those in Kosovo whilst the Security
Council remains impotent. The case of East Timor shows
that the Security Council can react swiftly and effectively
when the will exists. For this to be possible, the fullest
commitment to support those humanitarian ideals that are
the basis of the United Nations Charter remains essential.
The adoption of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court shows such a commitment. The
international community must now deliver on its promise,
with signature and early ratification of that Statute.
As we know, the United Nations also has before it the
pressing demands of the various and sometimes interrelated
conflicts throughout Africa with, of course, their appalling
humanitarian consequences. Who can put out of their minds
the images of atrocities we have seen from Sierra Leone,
for instance? Yet the Council's response has until very
recently been low-level. Once again, the credibility of the
Security Council depends in large part on its being seen as
even-handed in its attention to crises, wherever they may
occur, and whether the Cable News Network (CNN) is
there or not.
For much of the past year we have seen the Council
virtually paralysed on the important question of
disarmaming Iraq of its weapons of mass destruction. In the
meantime, this potentially very serious threat to the security
of the region remains unresolved. The reason again has
been the very sharp divisions among the permanent
members, which by virtue of the veto power can block any
action. This situation remains unacceptable.
New Zealand's awareness of the importance of the
role of collective action has also been heightened by
recent events in our own immediate region. Here, the
United Nations demonstrated its ability to respond to the
different demands of supporting the regionally inspired
peace process on the island of Bougainville, part of Papua
New Guinea, and of assessing the needs created by
disruptions to the population on Guadalcanal in the
Solomon Islands.
The United Nations must be capable of responding
effectively. Small and vulnerable nations in particular
need confidence in the United Nations, as it may be their
only hope in times of trouble. I am very concerned
therefore by the apparent trend away from financing new
peacekeeping operations by means of assessed
contributions and an increasing reliance instead on
voluntary funding. This, of course, poses a threat to the
collective responsibility that is at the heart of this
Organization. In practical terms it is likely to mean that
those regions which fail to attract donor support will not
receive the response they are entitled to as Members of
the United Nations. This trend must be urgently reversed;
all operations must be put on an equal financial footing
by means of assessed contributions.
In addition, as I noted here last year, the largest
contributor's arrears to the peacekeeping and regular
budgets continue to cast a long shadow over the
Organization. Outstanding dues and very slow payments
to troop contributors affect us all, and can severely
constrain the ability of countries to contribute to pressing
peacekeeping needs. We call again on those Member
States who are in dereliction of their obligations to make
payment on time, in full and, of course, without
conditions.
Reform of the Security Council remains one of the
most important items on our agenda. Further useful
progress has been made this year. While the issue of
enlargement continues to be complex, we believe there
has existed for some time wide agreement on the equally
important areas of reforming the Council's working
methods and the curtailing of the veto. The linkage
between the veto and enlargement was also explicitly
recognized in this year's report to the General Assembly
of the Open-ended Working Group on the Question of
Equitable Representation on and Increase in the
Membership of the Security Council and Other Matters
Related to the Security Council.
12


As for the task of providing more equitable
representation, I am not convinced that we will be able to
achieve this while the regional groups in the United Nations
continue to reflect the political geography of the 1960s.
Quite different and far more sensible arrangements have
been adopted in other multilateral forums, as, for example,
in the context of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty (CTBT). The present system here in New York
locks in very great disparities in representation. Small
countries that can make an excellent contribution are often
severely disadvantaged, especially where a political bloc
inside a regional group may coordinate closely on electoral
matters.
I would, therefore, wish to add my voice to those of
the Prime Ministers of Fiji and Samoa and the Foreign
Ministers of Papua New Guinea and Australia, who spoke
earlier in this debate on the need for reconfiguration.
Reconfiguration of the regional groups may well hold one
of the keys to an overall package on Security Council
reform.
New Zealand still looks forward to the day when we
can join a regional group here in New York which includes
our Asia-Pacific neighbours. In the meantime, we will
continue to build linkages in our region and developing the
many areas of our common understanding.
One of the great strengths of the General Assembly is
the equal status ascribed to each Member. All Members,
large or small, rich or poor, have a right to be heard here.
Each has a single vote. While we must all from time to
time temper our own national ambitions in the interests of
reaching a common understanding, we respect the point of
view of each individual member. The special session on
small island developing States over the last few days was
a very good opportunity to do just that. New Zealand is
firmly committed to assisting the small island developing
States SIDS in the spirit of common purpose and
partnership envisaged at Barbados five years ago. We are
very pleased that all participants in the special session have
reaffirmed their commitment to implement fully the
Barbados Programme of Action.
In April New Zealand, represented by my colleague,
the Honourable Simon Upton, had the privilege of chairing
the seventh session of the Commission on Sustainable
Development. We were pleased to be able to help
reinvigorate debate and build consensus around the need for
a more coordinated approach to stewardship of the world's
oceans and the need to recognise, in an ongoing way, the
special characteristics and needs of small island
developing States.
The Commission faces the great challenge of
pursuing the implementation of Agenda 21. Two other
great challenges we as a world face on the environmental
front are the threat of global climate change, caused at
least in part by human-induced emissions of greenhouse
gases, and the need to maintain an approach to
international trade and environmental issues which is
based on sound scientific analysis and agreed rules and
procedures. It is vitally important that we should continue
to act in concert to face these international challenges.
International cooperation in addressing economic,
social and humanitarian problems is, and always will be,
one of the cornerstones of the United Nations Charter.
The substantial decline in official development assistance
flows over the last decade is of great concern to many
Member States. In this connection, I am concerned to
note that the core resources of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) have been greatly
reduced over the past five years, to the point where its
universality is seriously threatened. I applaud the efforts
the new administrator is making to turn this situation
around and to put UNDP on a more secure footing, with
more clearly defined priorities.
Private capital flows to developing countries have
shown major increases. There is a tendency, however, for
such investment to be heavily concentrated on a few
countries where investment prospects seem brightest.
Many developing countries remain vulnerable and can be
all too easily marginalized. Official development
assistance continues to be an essential tool to help build
the capacity of countries in sectors such as education so
that they can benefit from the unstoppable phenomenon
of globalization. It is certainly a matter of particular pride
for me, as New Zealand's Foreign Minister, to have
overseen increases in New Zealand's official development
assistance funding effort — up by some 40 per cent since
the time of the Rio Summit in 1992.
I welcome, also, the positive steps that are being
taken on the financing for development and debt-relief
initiatives. It is vital that we continue the dialogue among
Member States and with the international financial
institutions to ensure a sounder basis for meeting the
challenges of international development.
Last year I referred to the important role the United
Nations has to play in shaping the moves towards
13


globalization and the opening up of opportunities for world
trade. Later this year, in Seattle, we expect to launch a new
round of multilateral trade negotiations. This will clearly
provide a forum in which to advance trade liberalization
and the rules-based trading system. The role of these
negotiations in promoting the development prospects of all
countries and in fostering the integration of least developed
countries into the global system will be a particular focus.
Deliberations in this Organization at many levels will help
to advance our people's understanding of the value and
purpose of the global trade agenda and their ability to
benefit from it. However, I would emphasise the
importance of major trading partners in continuing to play
a leadership role. The adoption of trade restrictions and
distortions by wealthy economies does much to erode their
moral authority in the broader debate.
New Zealand continues to attach the utmost
importance to seeing all countries work together to bring
about a world free of nuclear weapons. For this reason we
were a cosponsor last year of the so-called New Agenda
resolution, which called for faster progress towards the
elimination of nuclear weapons. The cosponsors will be
presenting this moderate resolution again this year, and we
urge all countries to look carefully at it.
The Conference on Facilitating the Entry into Force of
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty will meet in
Vienna in a week's time. I would urge all those countries
which have not ratified the Treaty to do so, so that it can
enter into force without further delay.
Strengthening the United Nations remains an important
goal for New Zealand. I take this opportunity to commend
the forward-looking management reforms introduced by the
Secretary-General. They have greatly improved policy
coordination among senior management and have produced
positive, tangible effects throughout the Secretariat.
Improving the way the Organization plans its programmes
and expenditures is a critical next step, where work is
already under way. There must be a greater focus on results
when budgets are prepared in order to promote the best use
of the resources of the Organization, and in turn the best
return for Member States.
This year marks the fiftieth anniversary of the Geneva
Conventions, and last year we commemorated the fiftieth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Events over the past 12 months have shown that challenges
to the values and principles embodied in the Universal
Declaration remain as daunting as ever. In this
interdependent world in which we live, New Zealand
continues to see the United Nations as central to
international efforts to work together to protect and
promote, for all our people, those fundamental human
rights and freedoms to which we are committed under the
Universal Declaration.
Next year the United Nations will host the
millennium summit. This symbolic event will provide an
excellent opportunity for Member States to reaffirm their
commitment to the ideals of this great Organization.
Recognizing the frailties of our collective performance to
date, and the critical importance of finding workable
solutions for the future, I call on all Member States to
take the opportunities offered by the millennium summit
to enter into open and constructive dialogue and step into
the next millennium with an unequivocal recommitment
to the visionary principles enshrined in the Charter.
It is nine years since I first addressed this body in
1991 as the Foreign Minister of New Zealand. For the
United Nations, and particularly the Security Council, it
has been a tumultuous period. After the cold war the
number of problems multiplied; the world's expectations
of what the United Nations could deliver were raised
above the possible; and the solutions demanded required
determination, resolve, tact, understanding and
imagination. The demands on the United Nations will not
lessen, but each year must see a better performance than
in the past. However, as this may well be the last
statement I make to this body, I want to thank all United
Nations officials and peacekeepers everywhere: those I
have met here in New York; in Cambodia and in
Somalia; in Mozambique; in Bosnia, Croatia and Albania;
in Papua New Guinea and, of course, now in East Timor.
I thank them for their continuing, often unsung and heroic
efforts. They are much appreciated.




There is no doubt that the twentieth century, which is now
coming to a close, will leave a deep imprint on the history
of the world. This has been an epoch of global
transformation and social change, scientific discoveries and
achievements. The realization of the idea of a universal
world Organization, which has become the foundation
uniting the entire international community, has indeed been
one of the positive things about this century.
However, the twentieth century has witnessed the most
severe upheavals. Millions of people have perished in the
flames of world wars, revolutions and civil and ethnic
conflicts. On a few occasions, humanity teetered on the
brink of self-destruction, and the burden of outstanding
problems it has left for the new era is a heavy one. We
cannot resolve all these problems before the advent of the
third millennium, but we are indeed duty bound to lay
down the foundations for resolving them in the long-term
and to start moving in that direction.
The most important thing we should do is to define
the parameters of the world in which we are going to live.
This lies at the core of the initiative put forward by the
President of the Russian Federation, President Yeltsin, to
develop a world concept for the twenty-first century. As a
world Power and permanent member of the Security
Council, Russia is fully conscious of its special role in and
responsibility for world developments and stands for the
establishment of a multipolar world built on a solid
foundation of international law. Our country is pursuing in
practice a multifaceted foreign policy with a view to
establishing equitable and mutually beneficial bilateral and
multilateral relations with all the countries of the world and
to strengthening international security and stability.
The world concept for the twenty-first century
involves establishing a new culture which would aim to
form a common system of values and models of
behaviour. A world without wars and conflict, a world of
democracy and prosperity must be the highest priority for
all peoples and States. Every nation is entitled to its
rightful place among other nations and to security on an
equal footing in all its aspects, including in the political,
military, economic and social areas.
How and through what mechanisms can this be
achieved? Is there a body which can reflect the interests
of all States in a balanced manner? The answer is
obvious: it is the United Nations. From the outset, the
United Nations Charter put the Organization at the service
of all humankind. There is simply no other universal
mechanism to regulate international relations.
We are fully aware of the danger posed by the
threats and challenges facing our world today: the various
manifestations of militant nationalism, separatism,
terrorism and extremism, which know no borders. This is
a common challenge which is claiming countless victims
and wreaking destruction in various parts of the globe.
Aggressive separatism, which has become a growth
medium for various extremist forces, has become one of
the main sources of domestic conflict and regional
instability. No one is immune to it. The international
community and, above all, the United Nations, must
decisively clamp down on any manifestations of
separatism and strictly and consistently defend the
principles of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
States and the inviolability of their borders. Outside
encouragement and support for separatist forces must be
totally eradicated.
Recently, separatism has been increasingly merging
with the monster of terrorism. We could even now, during
this session, take a number of specific steps to stimulate
practical international cooperation in combating terrorism.
We must finalize the draft international convention on the
suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism. I therefore
suggest that we should develop and adopt a declaration of
principles for cooperation between States on combating
terrorism more vigorously. It is the States’ bounden duty
to protect their citizens against terrorist attacks and to
prevent activities from taking place in their territory that
are aimed at organizing such acts against the citizens of
other countries. Russia therefore supports the initiative to
convene, under United Nations auspices, a conference or
a special session of the General Assembly next year on
13


combating terrorism. Such an event would give a powerful
political impetus to the struggle against terrorism at a global
level.
The capabilities of the United Nations should also be
used more efficiently in the fight against drug-related
threats and organized crime. Only through joint efforts that
are also in strict compliance with the rules of international
law can we defeat this evil.
The founding fathers of the United Nations made
provision for a law-based response to violations of peace
and security. The international community can take also
coercive measures, but this should be done in accordance
with the Charter and following a decision by the Security
Council. Unlawful means can only undermine rightful ends.
It is from this very perspective that we assess such
doctrines as that of humanitarian intervention. In general,
we should take an extremely careful approach to coercive
measures; what is more, we must not allow them to turn
into a repressive mechanism for influencing States and
peoples that are not to the liking of some.
Of course, evolution of the international situation
means that it is appropriate for existing rules of
international law to be developed and adapted to prevailing
conditions, but this should be done through collective
discussion and the adoption of appropriate decisions, not as
a fait accompli and not working from scratch: it should be
based on valid rules of international law. This is precisely
what Russia had in mind with its initiative to consider at
the Millennium Summit legal aspects of the use of force in
international relations in the era of globalization. We invite
all countries to a broad and open dialogue on this issue.
Much has been said in recent years about the reform
of the United Nations, which is only natural. Life is an
evolving process and, as times change, any system will
need to be updated. What objectives future reform should
pursue is another matter. In our view, reform means, first
and foremost, the adoption of a package of measures to
enhance the role of the United Nations in the world arena.
The Organization should be ready to respond in a timely
and appropriate way to the challenges that globalization
presents to mankind. We must give serious thought to how
to enhance the efficiency of the Security Council and how
to make that principal organ of the United Nations more
representative through the inclusion of influential new
members, including — and this is absolutely
indispensable — developing countries. This would help
maintain the overall balance in the system of international
relations, especially when the use of force, bypassing the
Security Council, continues. It is also beyond doubt that
preservation of the right of veto of permanent members
is indispensable for meaningful and efficient work in the
Council.
Generally speaking, the entire system of international
organizations needs sensible and responsible reform. At
the same time, the United Nations must remain a focal
point of the international community’s efforts to settle the
most burning problems of the day. The issue of
strengthening the authority of the United Nations after it
has been seriously and painfully tested by the Balkan and
Iraq crises is at the very top of the agenda at the current
session of the General Assembly. First of all, we must
continue strenuous efforts to restore the role of the
Security Council in world affairs.
We have managed through joint efforts to bring the
settlement of the Kosovo problem back within the legal
and political framework of the United Nations. Now we
need jointly to strive for strict and consistent
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999). We cannot afford to let the re-emerging political
process be undermined again, since that could become a
tragedy for all of Europe and could once again bring the
world to the brink of catastrophe. Equally urgent is the
issue of post-conflict rehabilitation in the Balkans. The
United Nations has an important role to play in meeting
these challenges as well.
We all should draw serious lessons from recent
crises. Non-legitimate methods of exerting power only
exacerbate problems and result in even greater deadlock.
Developments in the Middle East, where the peace
process has of late acquired a new positive impetus,
clearly exemplify the optimal alternative, that of
negotiated settlement.
Also on the agenda is the issue of improving
sanctions regimes, to which the international community
has frequently resorted over the past decade. Sanctions
are an extreme measure. They must be applied only when
other means of political influence have been exhausted
and when the Security Council has established the
existence of a threat to peace. The Council, for its part,
should be guided by clear criteria for the imposition and
the lifting of sanctions, and should not permit any free
interpretation of the decisions it has adopted, much less
permit the use of its decisions by anyone for selfish
political or economic ends. It is necessary to take very
serious account of the humanitarian implications of
sanctions both for the population of the States subject to
14


such sanctions and for third countries. The punishment of
entire nations, especially for an indefinite time and
indiscriminately, is inadmissible.
Peacemaking is one of the key areas of United Nations
activities. During the past 50 years the Organization has
acquired vast practical experience in this field. Having
successfully survived intense disputes and ideological
battles, peacemaking has proved its vital power and
importance for securing world and regional stability. The
evolution of the theory and practice of present-day
peacemaking confirms that there is no alternative to
maintaining the central role of the United Nations in this
sphere. The encouragement of peacemaking and the
strengthening of its legal basis in strict conformity with the
fundamental principles of the Charter should become an
important component of the concept of the world in the
twenty-first century. Building up and modernizing the anti-
crisis capability of the United Nations is a key prerequisite
for tackling these tasks successfully. The top priority here
is to begin truly using the system of stand-by agreements
with the United Nations.
Taking into account the limited resources of the world
Organization, and given the high demand for peacekeeping
operations, cooperation and division of labour between the
United Nations and regional structures has become a
priority. It is of fundamental importance that such
cooperation should be in strict accordance with Chapter
VIII of the Charter and should be fully consistent with the
prerogatives of the Security Council.
For Russia, the question of peacemaking cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations is
far from theoretical. For many years, Russian peacemakers
within the peacekeeping forces of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) have contributed to stabilizing the
situations in Abkhazia, Georgia, in Tajikistan, and in Trans-
Dniestria, Moldova. This testifies to the fact that the
settlement of conflicts within the framework of the CIS is
a priority for Russia. As before, we do not see any
reasonable alternative to political settlement of these crisis
situations, for which political will, patience and
commitment to one’s obligations are needed. We consider
it important for the United Nations to continue to play a
prominent role in finding solutions in Tajikistan and in
Abkhazia, Georgia.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), which is called upon to play a central role
in ensuring European security and stability, can and should
be the main United Nations peacemaking partner in Europe.
When this arrangement fails to work, not only do specific
European countries suffer, but providing for global and
continental security becomes complicated. In a broad
sense, OSCE peacemaking parameters, ranging from
conflict prevention to peacekeeping operations and post-
conflict rehabilitation, should be defined in a charter on
European security. Russia proposes too that the charter
should also reflect such principles important for the future
of Europeans as ensuring the security and the foundations
of the relations between European and Euro-Atlantic
organizations in this area. Then the charter will indeed
become a kind of political constitution for the Europe of
the twenty-first century. As the Istanbul summit of the
OSCE, which is expected to adopt the charter, is
approaching fast, we should press ahead with the
formulation of a substantive document.
The Conference on Interaction and Confidence-
building Measures in Asia may become an important
factor for stability on the Asian continent after the new
positive impetus it received at the recent Almaty Foreign
Affairs Ministers’ Meeting of the founding States. The
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN)
Regional Forum, a venue for active dialogue on a broad
spectrum of urgent international issues, is yet another
example of the focus of the Asian countries on the
formation of solid structures for security and cooperation
on the continent.
It is necessary to enhance the potential of African
regional and subregional organizations, which are acting
in close cooperation with the United Nations to curb and
cope with conflicts and humanitarian catastrophes
emerging in Africa. It is the duty of the international
community to render every possible support to the
African peoples.
While strengthening the legal and practical basis of
peacemaking activities, special attention should be paid to
what is commonly called the human rights dimension.
This relates not only to measures to minimize human
sufferings caused by armed conflicts, but also to efforts
aimed at preventing humanitarian crises.
In this connection, I cannot fail to mention the
unacceptable situation of countless thousands of people in
the centre of Europe who, due to arbitrary actions by
authorities, have found themselves deprived of their
citizenship and of the right to use their native language
and enjoy full rights in their State of residence. Civilized
integration, rather than latent assimilation — this is the
way out of the prevailing humanitarian situation in these
15


countries. We welcome the efforts of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the Council
of Europe and the Council of Baltic Sea States (CBSS)
aimed at eliminating violations of human rights and
freedoms of the non-indigenous population of Latvia and
Estonia. We hope that the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights will make her contribution
to these efforts.
The risk of losing positive dynamics in the sphere of
disarmament as a result of attempts to rely on unilateral
power methods cannot but cause concern. If the political
and legal fabric regulating international relations continues
to disintegrate further, then trends to ensure national
security through an arms race will become even stronger.
Russia has consistently advocated the reduction and
limitation of nuclear arsenals and strict compliance with the
non-proliferation regime. For without this, ensuring
strategic stability would prove impossible.
We realize the importance of early ratification of the
START II Treaty and of the initiation of START III
negotiations, under which Russia would be prepared, on a
reciprocal basis, to agree to considerable further reduction
of strategic offensive armaments. Naturally, this process
will be feasible only if the existing agreements in this field,
first of all the ABM Treaty, are strictly observed. We
believe that the General Assembly should come out clearly
in support of the preservation and observance of the ABM
Treaty, which is a cornerstone of strategic stability, because
unilateral actions aimed at undermining the time-tested
regime established by this Treaty are fraught with
extremely dangerous consequences. A collective search for
political and diplomatic solutions is the alternative to
military responses to the problems of proliferation. This is
precisely the target of Russia’s initiative concerning the
global system of control over proliferation of missiles and
missile technologies.
Substantive discussions on threats to international
information security must also be continued within the
framework and under the auspices of the United Nations.
The time has come to reach, through joint efforts, a
common understanding of such threats and of measures to
reduce them.
The twentieth century has brought about economic
globalization. All economies have become open and closely
linked as a result of advances in science and technology.
All these factors have provided a powerful impetus to
social and economic development while creating their own
specific problems. The gap between the industrial and the
formerly colonial worlds has not only persisted but has
begun to widen. Development assistance should remain a
principal focus of future United Nations activities. Crises,
primarily financial ones, have assumed an international
character. We must draw the appropriate lessons and
modernize the architecture of the world financial system.
The United Nations and its specialized agencies should
play a role here.
The expansion of human economic activities has
brought about a globalization of both natural and
man-made disasters, and this has become a major
destabilizing global factor. The challenges related to the
prevention of such disasters and the elimination of their
consequences require that the most advanced technologies
be used for the benefit of the world community as a
whole. Why not consider, therefore, the establishment,
under the auspices of the United Nations, of a specialized
international emergency agency which would assume
relevant functions?
A widely known saying reads: "It is much easier to
win a war than a peace." The United Nations founders
won the war and laid the foundations for peace. It is our
duty to win this peace and to make it comprehensive and
irreversible.













Today, we look ahead to the
new millennium. And at this last General Assembly of the
twentieth century, we look back on a century that taught
us much of what we need to know about the promise of
tomorrow. We have learned a great deal over the last one
hundred years: how to produce enough food for a
growing world population; how human activity affects the
environment; the mysteries of the human gene. An
information revolution now holds the promise of universal
access to knowledge. We have learned that open markets
create more wealth, that open societies are more just. We
have learned how to come together, through the United
Nations and other institutions, to advance common
interests and values.
Yet for all our intellectual and material advances, the
twentieth century has been deeply scarred by enduring
human failures: by greed and lust for power, by
hot-blooded hatreds and stone-cold hearts. At century’s
end, modern developments magnify greatly the dangers of
these timeless flaws. Powerful forces still resist
reasonable efforts to put a human face on the global
economy, to lift the poor, or to heal the earth’s
environment. Primitive claims of racial, ethnic or religious
superiority, when married to advanced weaponry and
2


terrorism, threaten to destroy the greatest potential for
human development in history, even as they make a
wasteland of the soul.
Therefore, we look to the future with hope, but with
unanswered questions. In the new millennium, will nations
be divided by ethnic and religious conflicts? Will the
nation-state itself be imperiled by them, or by terrorism? Or
will we keep coming closer together instead, while enjoying
the normal differences that make life more interesting? In
the new century, how will patriotism be defined — as faith
in a dream worth living, or as fear and loathing of other
people’s dreams? Will we be free of the fear of weapons of
mass destruction, or forced to teach our grandchildren how
to survive a nuclear, chemical or biological attack? Will
globalism bring shared prosperity, or will it make the
desperate of the world even more desperate? Will we use
science and technology to grow the economy and protect
the environment, or put it all at risk in a world dominated
by a struggle over natural resources?
The truth is that the twentieth century’s amazing
progress has not resolved these questions. But it has given
us the tools to make the answers come out right — the
knowledge, the resources, the institutions. Now, we must
use them. If we do, we can make the millennium not just
a changing of the digits, but a true changing of the times —
a gateway to greater peace, prosperity and freedom. With
that in mind, I offer three resolutions for the new
millennium.
First, let us resolve to wage an unrelenting battle
against poverty and for shared prosperity so that no part of
humanity is left behind in the global economy.
Globalization is not inherently divisive. While infant
mortality in developing countries has been cut nearly in half
since 1970, life expectancy has increased by 10 years.
According to the United Nations Human Development
Index, which measures a decent standard of living, a good
education, a long and healthy life, the gap between rich and
poor countries on this measure has actually declined.
Open trade and new technologies have been engines
of this progress; they have helped hundreds of millions to
see their prospects rise by marketing the fruits of their labor
and creativity abroad. With proper investments in education,
developing countries should be able to keep their best and
brightest talent at home and to gain access to global
markets for goods and services and capital.
But this promising future is far from inevitable. We
are still squandering the potential of far too many. As many
as 1.3 billion people still live on less than a dollar a day.
More than half the population of many countries has no
access to safe water. A person in South Asia is 700 times
less likely to use the Internet than someone in the United
States. Forty million people a year still die of hunger,
almost as many as the total number killed in World
War II. We must refuse to accept a future in which one
part of humanity lives on the cutting edge of a new
economy, while the other lives at the knife edge of
survival.
What must we do? We can start by remembering
that open markets advance the blessings and
breakthroughs we want to spread. That is why we in the
United States have worked to keep our markets open
during the recent global financial crisis, though it has
brought us record trade deficits. It is why we want to
launch a new global trade round when the World Trade
Organization meets in Seattle this fall. It is why we are
working to build a trading system that strengthens the
well-being of workers and consumers, protects the
environment and makes competition a race to the top, not
the bottom. It is why I am proud we have come together
at the International Labour Organization to ban abusive
child labour everywhere in the world.
We do not face a choice between trade and aid, but
instead the challenge to make both work for people who
need them. Aid should focus on what is known to work:
credit for poor people starting businesses, keeping girls in
school, meeting the needs of mothers and children.
Development aid should be used for development, not to
buy influence or finance donors’ exports. It should go
where Governments invest in their people and answer to
their concerns.
We should also come to the aid of countries
struggling to rise but held down by the burden of debt.
The G-7 nations have adopted a plan to reduce by up to
70 per cent the outstanding debt of the world’s poorest
countries, freeing resources for education, health and
growth.
All of us, developed and developing countries alike,
should take action now to halt global climate change.
What has that to do with fighting poverty? A great deal.
The most vulnerable members of the human family will
be hurt first and hurt most if rising temperatures devastate
agriculture, accelerate the spread of disease in tropical
countries and flood island nations.
3


Does this mean developing countries must sacrifice
growth to protect the environment? Absolutely not.
Throughout history, a key to human progress has been
willingness to abandon big ideas that are no longer true.
One big idea that is no longer true is that the only way to
build a modern economy is to use energy as we did in the
industrial age. The challenge and opportunity for
developing countries today is to skip the costs of the
industrial age by using technologies that improve the
economy and the environment at the same time.
Finally, to win the fight against poverty, we must
improve health care for all people. Over the next 10 years
in Africa, AIDS is expected to kill more people and orphan
more children than all the wars of the twentieth century
combined. Each year diseases such as malaria, tuberculosis
and pneumonia leave millions of children without parents
and millions of parents without children. Yet for all these
diseases, vaccine research is advancing too slowly, in part
because the potential customers are too poor. Only 2 per
cent of all global biomedical research is devoted to the
major killers in the developing world.
No country can break poverty’s bonds if its people are
disabled by disease and its Government overwhelmed by
the needs of the ill. With United Nations leadership, we
have come close to eradicating polio, once the scourge of
children everywhere. We are down to 5,000 reported cases
worldwide. I have asked our Congress to fund a major
increase to finish the job, and I ask other nations to follow
suit. We have begun a comprehensive battle against the
global AIDS epidemic. This year I am seeking another
$100 million for prevention, counselling and care in Africa.
I want to do more to get to those who need them most new
drugs that prevent transmission from mothers to newborns.
And today I commit the United States to a concerted effort
to accelerate the development and delivery of vaccines for
malaria, tuberculosis, AIDS and other diseases that
disproportionately affect the developing world. Many
approaches have been proposed, from tax credits to special
funds for the purchase of these vaccines.
To tackle these issues, I will ask public-health experts,
the chief executive officers of our pharmaceutical
companies, foundation representatives and members of
Congress to join me at a special White House meeting and
to strengthen incentives for research and development,
working with, not against, the private sector to meet our
common goal.
The second resolution I hope we will make today is to
strengthen the capacity of the international community to
prevent and whenever possible to stop outbreaks of mass
killing and displacement. This requires, as we all know,
shared responsibility, like the one West African nations
accepted when they acted to restore peace in Sierra
Leone; the one 19 democracies in the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) embraced to stop ethnic
cleansing in Bosnia and in Kosovo; the one that Asian
and Pacific nations have now assumed in East Timor,
with the strong support of the entire United Nations,
including the United States.
Secretary-General Annan spoke for all of us during
the Kosovo conflict, and more recently in regard to East
Timor, when he said that ethnic cleansers and mass
murderers can find no refuge in the United Nations, no
source of comfort or justification in its Charter. We must
do more to make these words real. Of course, we must
approach this challenge with some considerable degree of
humility. It is easy to say “never again”, but much harder
to make it so. Promising too much can be as cruel as
caring too little.
But difficulties, dangers and costs are not an
argument for doing nothing. When we are faced with
deliberate, organized campaigns to murder whole peoples
or expel them from their land, the care of victims is
important but not enough. We should work to end the
violence. Our response in every case cannot and should
not be the same. Sometimes collective military force is
both appropriate and feasible. Sometimes concerted
economic and political pressure combined with diplomacy
is a better answer, as it was in making possible the
introduction of forces to East Timor. Of course, the way
the international community responds will depend on the
capacity of countries to act and on their perception of
their national interests. NATO acted in Kosovo, for
example, to stop a vicious campaign of ethnic cleansing
in a place where we had important interests at stake and
the ability to act collectively.
The same considerations brought Nigerian troops and
their partners to Sierra Leone and Australians and others
to East Timor. That is proper — so long as we work
together, support each other and do not abdicate our
collective responsibility. I know that some are troubled
that the United States and others cannot respond to every
humanitarian catastrophe in the world. We cannot do
everything, everywhere. But simply because we have
different interests in different parts of the world does not
mean we can be indifferent to the destruction of innocents
in any part of the world. That is why we have supported
the efforts of Africans to resolve the deadly conflicts that
4


have raged through parts of their continent. It is why we
are working with friends in Africa to build the African
Crisis Response Initiative, which has trained more than
4,000 peacekeepers from six countries. It is why we are
helping establish an international coalition against genocide
to bring nations together to stop the flow of money and
arms to those who commit crimes against humanity.
There is also a critical need for countries emerging
from conflict to build police institutions accountable to
people and the law, often with the help of civilian police
from other nations. We need international forces with the
training to fill the gap between local police and military
peacekeepers, as French, Argentine, Italian and other
military police have done in Haiti and Bosnia. We will
work with our partners and the United Nations to continue
to ensure that such forces can deploy when they are needed.
What is the role of the United Nations of in preventing
mass slaughter and dislocation? Very large. Even in
Kosovo, NATO’s actions followed a clear consensus,
expressed in several Security Council resolutions, that the
atrocities committed by Serb forces were unacceptable and
that the international community had a compelling interest
in seeing them end. Had we chosen to do nothing in the
face of this brutality, I do not believe we would have
strengthened the United Nations. Instead we would have
risked discrediting everything it stands for.
By acting as we did, we helped to vindicate the
principles and purposes of the United Nations Charter to
give the United Nations the opportunity it now has to play
the central role in shaping Kosovo’s future. In the real
world, principles often collide and tough choices must be
made. The outcome in Kosovo is hopeful.
Finally, as we enter this new era, let our third
resolution be to protect our children against the possibility
that nuclear, chemical and biological weapons will ever be
used again. The last millennium has seen constant advances
in the destructive power of weaponry. In the coming
millennium, this trend can continue or, if we choose, we
can reverse it with global standards universally respected.
We have made more progress than many realize. After
the collapse of the Soviet Union, Belarus, Kazakhstan and
Ukraine courageously chose to give up their nuclear
weapons. America and Russia have moved forward with
substantial arms reductions. President Yeltsin and I agreed
in June, even as we await Russian ratification of START II,
to begin talks on a START III treaty that will cut our cold-
war arsenals by 80 per cent from their height. Brazil has
joined the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), capping a process that has almost totally
eliminated the threat of nuclear proliferation in Latin
America. We have banned chemical weapons from the
Earth, though we must implement that commitment fully
and gain universal coverage. One hundred and fifty-two
nations have signed the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty and, while India and Pakistan did test nuclear
weapons last year, the international reaction proved that
the global consensus against proliferation is very strong.
We need to bolster the standards to reinforce that
consensus. We must reaffirm our commitment to the
NPT, strengthen the Biological Weapons Convention and
make fast progress on a treaty to ban production of fissile
materials. To keep existing stocks from the wrong hands,
we should strengthen the Convention on Physical
Protection of Nuclear Materials. And today, again I ask
our Congress to approve the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty.
We must stop the spread of nuclear weapons,
materials and expertise at the source. Since 1992, we have
worked with Russia and the other nations of the former
Soviet Union to do that. We are expanding that effort
because challenges remain, but thus far we can say that
the nightmare scenario of deadly weapons flowing
unchecked across borders and of scientists selling their
services en masse to the highest bidder has been avoided.
Now, we must work to deny weapons of mass
destruction to those who would use them. For almost a
decade, nations have stood together to keep the Iraqi
regime from threatening its people and the world with
such weapons. Despite all the obstacles Saddam Hussein
has placed in our path, we must continue to ease the
suffering of the people of Iraq. At the same time, we
cannot allow the Government of Iraq to flout 40 — and
I say 40 — successive United Nations Security Council
resolutions and to rebuild his arsenal.
Just as important is the challenge of keeping deadly
weapons away from terrorist groups. They may have
weaker capabilities than States, but they have fewer
compunctions about using such weapons. The possibility
that terrorists will threaten us with weapons of mass
destruction can be met with neither panic nor
complacency. It requires serious, deliberate, disciplined
concern and effective cooperation from all of us.
There are many other challenges. Today I have
spoken about just three: the need to do something about
5


the world’s poor and to put a human face on the global
economy; the need to do more to prevent killing and
dislocation of innocents; the need to do more to ensure that
weapons of mass destruction will never be used on our
children. I believe they are the most important. In meeting
them, the United Nations is indispensable.
It is precisely because we are committed to the United
Nations that we have worked hard to support the effective
management of this body. But the United States also has a
responsibility to equip the United Nations with the
resources it needs to be effective. As I think most Members
know, I have strongly supported the United States meeting
all its financial obligations to the United Nations and I will
continue to do so. We will do our very best to succeed this
year.
When the cold war ended, the United States could
have chosen to turn away from the opportunities and
dangers of the world. Instead, we have tried to be engaged,
involved and active. We know this moment of unique
prosperity and power for the United States is a source of
concern to many. I can only answer by saying this: In the
seven years that I have been privileged to come here to
speak to this body, America has tried to be a force for
peace. We believe we are better off when nations resolve
their differences by force of argument rather than force of
arms. We have sought to help former adversaries like
Russia and China become prosperous, stable members of
the world community because we feel far more threatened
by the potential weakness of the world’s leading nations
than by their strength. Instead of imposing our values on
others, we have sought to promote a system of
government — democracy — that empowers people to
choose their own destinies according to their own values
and aspirations. We have sought to keep our markets open
because we believe a strong world economy benefits our
own workers and businesses, as well as the people of the
world who are selling to us. I hope that we have been and
will continue to be good partners with the rest in the new
millennium.
Not long ago, I went to a refugee camp in Macedonia.
The people I met there, children and adults alike, had
suffered horrible, horrible abuses, but they had never given
up hope because they believed that there is an international
community that stands for their dignity and their freedom.
I want to make sure that, 20 or 50 or 100 years from now,
people everywhere will still believe that about our United
Nations. So let us resolve, in the bright dawn of the new
millennium, to bring in an era in which our desire to create
will overwhelm our capacity to destroy. If we do that, then,
through the United Nations and far-sighted leaders,
humanity finally can live up to its name.








On behalf of our Government and
in my capacity as Chair of the Non-Aligned Movement, I
wish to extend our sincere congratulations to you,
Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab, on your election as President of the
General Assembly. I would also like to thank you for the
kind remarks you made about my country as you assumed
your high position.
We have worked together for many decades. Thanks
in good measure to your statespersonship, as neighbours we
live together in peace and have joined hands as equals to
ensure the all-round fulfilment of both our peoples. These
experiences convince us that you will discharge your
responsibilities as President of the General Assembly in a
manner that will help humanity make our common world a
better place for all. We are pleased that you will be
working with the Secretary-General, Kofi Annan, who has
demonstrated unquestionable commitment to the realization
of the attainment of the goals of the Organization.
The Charter of this Organization and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights provide all of us with the
vision towards which we should strive. At the time these
documents were adopted, they reflected the international
determination to ensure that the catastrophe occasioned by
the rise of fascism and Nazism should never recur. We
recall them today because we believe that the time has
come for determined measures to be taken to ensure that
they inform what happens in the common world we all
share. The central message they contain is expressed in the
words of the preamble to the Declaration:
“the peoples of the United Nations have in the Charter
reaffirmed their faith in fundamental human rights, in
the dignity and worth of the human person and in the
equal rights of men and women and have determined
to promote social progress and better standards of
life in larger freedom”.
We believe that the time has come for all of us to
ensure that we work together to reconstruct human society
in a manner consistent with this perspective. We further
believe that what we have said constitutes a particular and
historic challenge to those who occupy positions of
political leadership in the modern era, those who, like us,
will have the privilege of addressing this General
Assembly. Only time will tell whether we have the moral
and intellectual courage to rise to this challenge.
But this we feel we can say: that conditions exist in
the world today for us successfully to pursue the vision
contained in the United Nations documents to which I
have referred. What may be in short supply is the courage
of the politicians, as opposed to an abundance of good-
sounding rhetoric. What are these conditions of which we
speak? The cold war has come to an end. There is no
sign anywhere of an ideology-driven contest among
super-Powers which dictates that each should seek to
destroy the other in order to protect itself. It is true that
a number of countries still possess weapons of mass
destruction, especially nuclear weapons, which constitute
a threat. The only logical way to address this is
vigorously to sue for universal disarmament and the
destruction of such weapons.
Secondly, I believe it would be correct to say that
the overwhelming majority of countries in the world have
opted for democratic forms of government. Having
learned from their own experiences, the nations have
turned their backs on dictatorship. Of course, we cannot
say that such dictatorships do not exist or that no attempt
will be made in the future to establish them. But we can
make bold to say that these exceptions prove the rule,
rather than disprove the proposition we are trying to
advance.
The combination of these two factors should lead to
three conclusions, at least. The first is that there should be
no need on the part of any country to seek to establish
spheres of influence as a supposed necessary condition for
the advancement of its national interests.
Secondly, the very sustenance of democracy across
the globe requires that in every democratic country the
ordinary people should feel that they actually do enjoy the
right to determine their destiny. In other words, no
country should be required to restrict its exercise of this
8


right simply because some other more powerful country
dictates that this should be so.
Thirdly, these circumstances create the possibility for
a more democratic system of international governance, as
would be reflected by a correct restructuring of this very
Organization. In any case, the process of globalization
necessarily redefines the concept and the practice of
national sovereignty. The frontiers of that sovereignty are
being pushed back, especially as regards the smaller
countries of the world, such as our own. As this happens,
inevitably, so does it become necessary that a compensatory
movement take place towards the reinforcement of the
impact of these countries on the system of global
governance through the democratization of the system of
international relations.
The developments we have spoken of also suggest that
perhaps, and depending on what we all do, humanity has
never had as bright a prospect for durable world peace and
security as it does today. The mere spread of democracy
throughout the world speaks of a greater commitment
among the nations to the resolution of national and
international conflicts by peaceful means.
I am certain that when President Abdelaziz Bouteflika,
the current Chairperson of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), addresses the Assembly, he will report on the
important decision recently taken at the Algiers summit of
the OAU to exclude from its ranks, with effect from the
next summit, all military regimes that may still exist on the
African continent. A further decision was taken to assist
such countries resolutely to move towards a democratic
system of government.
The developments on which we have commented
would suggest that the Organization has a responsibility to
focus especially on the objective contained in Article I,
paragraph 1, of its Charter, which says,
“to take effective collective measures for the
prevention and removal of threats to the peace ... and
to bring about by peaceful means, and in conformity
with the principles of justice and international law,
adjustment or settlement of international disputes or
situations which might lead to a breach of the peace”.
This, we believe, imposes a solemn and supreme
responsibility on the United Nations to work for the
prevention of conflicts and to endeavour to resolve them so
that a durable peace can be established. Sometimes, our
response to conflicts has been to wait for them to develop
into violence, and even wars, and subsequently to
intervene through costly peacekeeping operations. These,
at times, serve to freeze those conflicts, perpetuate
polarization and make their timely resolution more
difficult.
Moreover, the requirement on the United Nations to
make such interventions to prevent the outbreak of
hostilities imposes an obligation on the United Nations
that it should be seen by Governments and peoples as a
truly even-handed interlocutor and peacemaker. It can
attain this only if it works genuinely to
“develop friendly relations among nations based on
respect for the principle of equal rights and self-
determination of peoples”,
as stated in Article I, paragraph 2, of its Charter.
If indeed we are seriously committed to these critical
objectives of peace and democracy in the world, then we
have no excuse to permit the further postponement of the
meaningful restructuring of the United Nations. If we
were honest with ourselves, we would admit that what is
blocking progress is the desire to accommodate what are
perceived as new power relations, to reinstitutionalize
relations of inequality within the United Nations in an
amended form. This is based on the thesis that the
institutionalization of such relations has precedence over
the Organization’s founding principle of respect for the
principle of equal rights among the nations.
In the situation of the cold war and the prevalence
of dictatorship in many countries, the politics of power
might have been seen as the only path to survival. The
management of the world today through the exercise of
such power, however modified, will itself subvert the
objectives of democracy and peace, spawning pretenders
to the throne at global, continental and regional levels.
Simultaneously as the United Nations focuses on the
critical question of the prevention of conflict, so must it
attend to such issues as the elimination of weapons of
mass destruction, the implementation of the ban on anti-
personnel mines, the removal of mines in those countries
which face this problem and the control of the
proliferation of small arms. Of course, none of these
proposals gainsay the need for the United Nations to act
with all necessary vigour to help end all existing conflicts
of which it is seized, including those in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Angola, Western Sahara, East
Timor, Eritrea and Ethiopia, Kosovo and others.
9


We started off with a quotation from the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, which speaks of affirming
the dignity and worth of the human person, the promotion
of social progress and securing a better life for all. We
argued that conditions exist for movement towards the
realization of the objectives spelt out in the Declaration. It
is a matter of common cause among all of us that the levels
of poverty, ignorance and disease that continue to afflict
billions around the globe constitute a direct denial of the
dignity and worth of the human person to which we have
committed ourselves. I am certain that we would also agree
that the process of globalization has also been accompanied
by growing inequality within and among countries. We
have also seen how movements of short-term capital have
produced disastrous economic consequences in some
countries.
As with the challenges of peace and democracy, it is
our firm belief that sufficient resources exist within the
world economy actually to address the social progress and
the better life for all for which the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights calls. Further to this, science and technology
continue to develop in such a way that it is difficult to
believe that, taken together with the large concentrations of
capital that characterize the world economy, the means do
not exist within human society to make the required impact
on poverty, ignorance and disease. Indeed, it can be argued
quite rationally that international peace, democracy and
prosperity are a necessary condition for the further rapid
growth of the world economy, and with it the further
expansion of the corporations, both small and big, which
require global markets.
Similarly, the revolution in information and
communication technology, a critical driver of the process
of globalization, both enables and calls for higher levels of
education and standards of living among the billions who
constitute the human population. However, it is clear that
there is no automatic or inherent mechanism within the
operation of the markets to enable both capital and
technology to make the sort of impact we are talking about
on all countries of the globe. When we say this we should
not be taken to mean that we are contemptuous of all that
has been said about what each country needs to do to create
the conditions conducive to investment and technology
transfers. Nor should it be taken to mean that we are
reopening the debate about the role of markets in the
allocation of resources. What we are saying is that the
functioning of the markets does not and cannot exclude
conscious interventions being made, both to increase
economic opportunities and to raise the standards of living
and the life possibilities of many in the world denied their
human dignity by the scourge of poverty.
In his interesting book Living on Thin Air, the
British author Charles Leadbeater, writes:
“The new (knowledge driven) economy needs a
mobilizing vision and institutions fashioned to make
it real. Bit by bit, our institutions are changing
through reform, reorganisation and restructuring —
but the process is much too slow, haphazard and
piecemeal — it must become more conscious,
imaginative and radical.”
Once more, the matter turns on the will of the
political leaders actually to discover among themselves
the moral and intellectual courage to do what is correct
and necessary. What is correct and necessary also requires
that in this field as well, which affects socio-economic
matters, we should review the functioning of all
multilateral institutions, including those that belong within
the United Nations family. This should be done to ensure
that these too reflect the very necessary imperative of the
democratization of the international system of governance.
The United Nations documents to which we referred
earlier give us a starting point. Accordingly, we believe
that there is no need for anyone among us to rediscover
a new vision that would inform our actions to build a new
world which affirms the dignity and worth of the human
person. What is necessary is that we match the beliefs we
profess with the necessary action.
We speak of action that will practically address the
related issues of peace, democracy and development.
I am certain that such a practical programme of
action would meet the aspirations not only of the
members of the Organization of African Unity and the
Non-Aligned Movement, of which we are a member. It
would also respond to the most deep-seated feelings of
the peoples of the developed North, who can have no
interest in conflict, oppression and poverty, even if these
occur beyond the borders of their own countries.
It also goes without saying that the democratic
systems in which we operate would also require that,
through committed advocacy, we should secure the
support of the electors for what should be a programme
of action of the United Nations for the twenty-first
century.
10


The evolution of human society has presented the
world leaders who will stand at this rostrum with new
possibilities to move our globe a giant step forward towards
a new actuality, of which the poor and the powerless dream
every day. We will be betraying those millions if we do not
act to turn their dream into reality. Let future generations
not say that because of the force of inertia we failed to act.




Please allow me to warmly congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the General Assembly at
this session. I am confident that with your wisdom and
experience, you will be able to accomplish your lofty
mission successfully. At the same time, I would like to
express my appreciation to Mr. Opertti for the
contribution he made as President of the General
Assembly at its previous session. I also wish to take this
opportunity to extend my sincere congratulations to the
Republic of Kiribati, the Republic of Nauru and the
Kingdom of Tonga on their admission to the membership
of the United Nations.
The current session of the General Assembly is of
special significance, as it is the last one of this century. A
review of the past may help us predict the future. In
retrospect, during the past century humanity, on the one
hand, created unprecedented material wealth and culture
and, on the other, suffered from the scourge of two world
wars and the ordeal of the cold war, which lasted for
almost 50 years. Since the end of the cold war, the world
has been moving towards multipolarity and the overall
international situation has started to relax. The
maintenance of peace, the pursuit of stability and the
promotion of development have become the common
aspiration and demand of the people of all countries.
Nevertheless, the harsh reality suggests that the world is
far from tranquil. The cold-war mentality still lingers on.
Hegemonism and power politics have manifested
themselves in new expressions. Military blocs are being
expanded and reinforced, and there is an increasing
tendency towards military intervention. Triggered by
ethnic, religious and territorial issues, regional conflicts
and disputes continue to emerge one after another. The
conflict between the North and the South has become
ever more acute. The gap between the rich and the poor
continues to grow. World peace is still elusive, and
development faces even more serious challenges.
Hegemonism and power politics are the root causes
of the turmoil in today’s world. The outbreak of war in
Kosovo sounded a resounding alarm. A regional military
organization, in the name of humanitarianism and human
rights, bypassed the United Nations to take large-scale
15


military actions against a sovereign State, thus creating an
ominous precedent in international relations. This act was
a violation of the United Nations Charter and other
universally recognized norms governing international
relations. It has eroded the leading role of the United
Nations in safeguarding world peace and security and
gravely undermined the authority of the United Nations
Security Council. During that war, the Chinese Embassy in
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was bombed, which
caused heavy casualties and much loss of property. It was
an incident such as has rarely been seen in diplomatic
history, and naturally roused the utmost indignation of the
entire Chinese people and the strong condemnation of the
international community.
As a permanent member of the Security Council,
China has held a clear and consistent position on the issue
of Kosovo. We seek no selfish interests and are only
upholding justice. For the sake of peace, we maintain that
the Kosovo issue should be resolved through peaceful
negotiations on the basis of respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and with guarantees of the legitimate rights and interest of
all ethnic groups in Kosovo. We are opposed to the use of
force under any pretext.
Mankind is on the threshold of the twenty-first
century. Where should the world go? What kind of new
international political and economic order should be
established? These are urgent questions facing the
Governments and the peoples of all countries.
The world is undergoing significant and profound
changes. A changed world calls for a corresponding new
international political and economic order. World peace and
development demand the establishment of a just and
reasonable new international order, which is the common
aspiration of the international community. It should be
based on the five principles of peaceful coexistence, the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and
other universally recognized principles governing
international relations. In this connection, I wish to
highlight the following points.
The first relates to sovereign equality and non-
interference in the internal affairs of others. Such arguments
as human rights taking precedence over sovereignty and
humanitarian intervention seem to be in vogue these days.
Some countries have even put such arguments into practice.
We believe that it is the sacred duty of all Governments to
promote and protect human rights and fundamental
freedoms, and that all countries have an obligation to
promote and protect the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of their own peoples in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and
international human rights instruments, and in the light of
their respective national conditions and relevant laws. But
as political systems, levels of economic development,
history, cultural background and values vary from country
to country, it is only natural that countries should have
different interpretations and even diverging views on
human rights. Countries should engage in dialogue and
exchanges on the basis of equality and mutual respect so
as to better understand each other, expand common
ground and handle their differences properly, rather than
resort to confrontation or interference in the internal
affairs of others under the pretext of human rights.
The issue of human rights is, in essence, the internal
affair of a given country, and should be addressed mainly
by the Government of that country through its own
efforts. Ours is a diversified world. Each country has the
right to choose its own social system, approach to
development and values that are suited to its national
conditions. The history of China and other developing
countries shows that a country’s sovereignty is the
prerequisite for and the basis of the human rights that the
people of that country can enjoy. When the sovereignty
of a country is put in jeopardy, its human rights can
hardly be protected effectively. Sovereign equality, mutual
respect for State sovereignty and non-interference in the
internal affairs of others are the basic principles governing
international relations today. In spite of the major changes
in the post-cold-war international situation, these
principles are by no means out of date. Any deviation
from or violation of these principles would destroy the
universally recognized norms governing international
relations, and would lead to the rule of hegemonism; if
the notion of “might is right” should prevail, a new gun-
boat policy would wreak havoc, the sovereignty and
independence by virtue of which some small and weak
countries protect themselves would be jeopardized and
international peace and stability would be seriously
endangered.
The Kosovo crisis has proved that to engage in so-
called humanitarian intervention in a sovereign State with
neither a mandate from the Security Council nor the prior
consent of the country concerned will cause a greater
humanitarian catastrophe instead of resolving the problem.
In view of this, under the current circumstances, the
principles of respect for State sovereignty and non-
interference in the internal affairs of others must be
16


effectively strengthened rather than weakened in order to
maintain world peace and stability.
The second principle is the pacific settlement of
international disputes. This principle, initiated by the Hague
peace conference 100 years ago, is now an important
principle of the United Nations Charter and a basic
principle of contemporary international law. History shows
that deviation from this principle over the past century has
led to, “the scourge of war, which twice ... has brought
untold sorrow to mankind”, and to foreign aggression,
which has inflicted tremendous suffering on the peoples of
a number of countries. In the current international situation,
adherence to the principle of the pacific settlement of
international disputes is still highly relevant to the
contemporary world.
The pacific settlement of international disputes is
predicated on the non-use and non-threat of force in
international relations. We maintain that handling State-to-
State relations with the mentality and modalities of “hot”
wars, cold wars, power politics or bloc politics will get
nowhere. All international disputes and regional conflicts
should be resolved in a fair and reasonable manner through
peaceful negotiation and consultation on the basis of
equality, rather than through the arbitrary use or threat of
force based on the power of military superiority. Only in
this way can fundamental solutions to disputes or conflicts
be found without complicating or aggravating them or
leaving behind a hidden peril. And only in this way can
States coexist in harmony and achieve common
development. This is the only way to lasting peace and
stability in the world. Otherwise, the world will never be a
tranquil place.
The third principle relates to strengthening the role of
the United Nations and preserving the authority of the
Security Council. The role of the United Nations is
indispensable for the achievement of genuine peace and
development and for the establishment of a just and
reasonable new international order. Strengthening the role
of the United Nations is in line with the historical trend; it
meets the needs of the times and conforms to the shared
aspiration of all the world’s peoples. In order to strengthen
the role of the United Nations, efforts should first be made
to uphold the sanctity of the purposes and principles of the
Charter. The most important reason why the United Nations
has been able to grow from 51 founding Members to its
current size is that it has acted according to these purposes
and principles. Those purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations have already taken deep root in
international practice and form a legal basis on which
peaceful and friendly relations between countries are
guided. It is the view of the Chinese Government that
despite the great changes that have taken place in the
international situation, the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter are still relevant. We are opposed
to any irresponsible interpretation or revision of them,
with whatever excuse.
If the United Nations role is to be strengthened, the
authority of the Security Council must be preserved.
According to the provisions of the Charter, the Security
Council shoulders primary responsibility for safeguarding
international peace and security. It has been proved that
the role of the Security Council is irreplaceable. Given
the current circumstances, it is imperative to preserve its
authority and leading role. Any act to weaken this
authority or to impose the will of an individual country or
a group of countries on the Security Council is very
dangerous. Instead of contributing to the maintenance of
peace, it will further breed power politics and
hegemonism and will give rise to endless troubles.
If the United Nations role is to be strengthened, it is
essential to ensure that all Member States have the right
to equal participation in international affairs, so that their
reasonable propositions will be fully reflected and their
legitimate rights and interests protected by the United
Nations. Decisions adopted by the United Nations must
give expression to the common will of the majority of its
Member States. Any attempt by a few countries or a
group of countries to monopolize world affairs and decide
the destiny of the people of other countries goes against
the trend of the times and will never succeed.
Fourthly, we must foster a new security concept and
safeguard international security. The old security concept
is based on military alliance and arms build-up and does
not help safeguard international security, still less build a
lasting peace in the world. In today’s world it is
necessary to foster a new security concept that satisfies
the needs of the times and to explore new ways of
maintaining peace and security. The core of the new
security concept should be mutual trust, mutual benefit,
equality and cooperation. The Five Principles of Peaceful
Coexistence and the purposes of the United Nations
Charter are the political foundation for the maintenance of
international security, while mutually beneficial
cooperation and common development constitute its
economic guarantee. Dialogue on an equal footing, full
consultation and peaceful negotiations are the right way
to maintain international security.
17


Relaxation in the international situation and the
disarmament process are complementary to each other. It is
regrettable, however, that some recent negative
developments in the international situation have seriously
hindered the healthy development of the disarmament
process. How to promote the disarmament process, prevent
an arms race and safeguard international security have
become pressing concerns for the international community.
We are opposed to any attempt, on the basis of excuses that
are not genuine, to seek military strength that goes beyond
a country’s legitimate defence needs. We are also opposed
to any attempt to restrict and weaken other countries in the
name of disarmament and non-proliferation in order to seek
absolute, unilateral security supremacy for one country or
group of countries. We call on the international community
to take the new security concept as a guideline and
wholeheartedly promote the healthy development of the
disarmament process, in the interest of world peace and
security.
Fifthly, we must reform the international economic
system and promote the common development of all
countries. The old and irrational economic order has
seriously impeded the sound development of the world
economy, further widening the wealth gap between the
North and the South. The East Asian financial crisis that
broke out two years ago has affected many countries in the
world. To prevent financial risks and ensure economic
security has become an urgent task facing many countries,
especially the developing countries. The world economy is
an interrelated and indivisible whole. All members of the
international community should take a responsible approach
and, in a spirit of risk sharing, strengthen their cooperation
and jointly promote a steady growth of the world economy.
Therefore, it is necessary to reform the current
international economic and financial systems. The United
Nations and the international financial institutions should
earnestly construct a framework to prevent and overcome
financial and other economic risks. Accordingly, the
developed countries should take on more obligations. The
developing countries have the right to equal participation in
world economic decision-making and the formulation of
relevant rules. In the new round of negotiations that will
soon begin in the World Trade Organization, the reasonable
demands of developing countries should be fully reflected.
Cooperation should be strengthened on the basis of mutual
benefit. No country should prejudice other countries’
economic security and development by virtue of its
economic, technological and financial advantages. We
should all oppose trade discrimination, the rich bullying the
poor and the arbitrary resort to economic sanctions or the
threat of sanctions against other countries. The developed
and developing countries both have their own advantages
and should learn from each other to make up for their
deficiencies so as to achieve common sustainable
development.
Moreover, on such global issues as the environment,
population, poverty and debt the developed countries
should not shirk their responsibility and obligation; rather,
they should take the lead in providing technological and
financial assistance to the developing countries. We deem
it necessary for the United Nations to hold a special
conference at an appropriate time to discuss the
globalization of the world economy, in order to promote
international cooperation in this field and to achieve
common prosperity.
The People’s Republic of China will soon celebrate
its fiftieth anniversary. For half a century, especially in
the last 21 years of reform and opening-up, earth-shaking
changes have taken place in China, and the Chinese
people have scored tremendous achievements in socialist
economic, political and cultural development as well as in
diplomatic and other endeavours. Following Hong Kong’s
return to the motherland the year before last, the Chinese
Government will soon resume the exercise of sovereignty
over Macao. At present, China enjoys political stability,
sustained economic growth, national unity, social
tranquillity and progress. Although difficulties and serious
challenges still lie ahead, we are confident and capable of
overcoming the difficulties, rising to the challenges and
forging ahead with every aspect of the socialist cause of
building a strong, prosperous, democratic and culturally
advanced country.
In the face of international vicissitudes, the Chinese
Government will steadfastly take up economic
development as the central task, resolutely press ahead
with reform and opening up, consistently maintain social
stability and unswervingly pursue an independent foreign
policy of peace. We are willing to continue to develop
friendly relations and cooperation on the basis of the five
principles of peaceful coexistence with all other countries
in the world and to make our due contribution to
safeguarding world peace and promoting common
development.
The Chinese Government and people will, as always,
resolutely safeguard China's sovereignty and territorial
integrity and will continue to advance the great cause of
national reunification. It is a fact universally recognized
by the international community that there is only one
18


China in the world, that Taiwan is an inalienable part of
Chinese territory and that the Government of the People's
Republic of China is the sole legitimate government
representing the whole of China. China's territory and
sovereignty are absolutely indivisible. The ultimate
reunification of the motherland represents the common
aspiration and firm resolve of all the Chinese people,
including our compatriots on Taiwan. No force can hold us
back in this great cause.
The Chinese Government will continue to adhere to its
established policy for settling the question of Taiwan. We
are firmly opposed to any efforts to create “independence
for Taiwan”, “two Chinas”, or “one China, one Taiwan”.
All moves to divide the motherland are doomed to failure.
China's great cause of national reunification can and will be
accomplished.
A few days ago a powerful earthquake shook China's
province of Taiwan. This earthquake caused heavy loss of
life and property damage for our compatriots in Taiwan.
We are extremely concerned about this catastrophe and
express our sympathy to our compatriots on the island. We
also express our condolences to the families of the victims
of the earthquake. People on both sides of the strait are
brothers and sisters in one big family. The disaster that hit
Taiwan and the pains of our compatriots on the island are
shared by the entire Chinese people. We will provide every
possible support and assistance to alleviate the harm caused
by the earthquake.
I take this opportunity to thank the President of the
General Assembly and the international community as a
whole for their sympathy, condolences and assistance.
The twenty-first century is dawning. The future of the
world is bright, and the new century is bound to be a more
splendid one than this. The Chinese people stand ready to
work with the people of other countries for the
establishment of a just and rational new international order,
for peace and development in the new century, and for the
overall progress of human society.





First of all, I would like
to warmly congratulate you, Sir, on your election to the
presidency of the fifty-fourth session of the General
Assembly and to wish you every success in this difficult
office.
I should also like to thank Foreign Minister Opertti for
his tireless dedication in successfully presiding over the
fifty-third session of the General Assembly.
I welcome Kiribati, Nauru and Tonga, with which
Germany has long enjoyed friendly ties, as new Members
of the world Organization.
I endorse the statement of my Finnish colleague, Tarja
Halonen, on behalf of the European Union.
This session of the General Assembly is the last in
this “century of extremes”, as the British historian Eric
Hobsbawm called the century now drawing to a close. That
is reason enough to take stock. Since its foundation, the
United Nations has greatly enhanced relations between
peoples. The development of international law, protection
of human rights, decolonization, worldwide humanitarian
and disaster aid, arousing awareness of the great problems
facing mankind, such as population growth, poverty and the
global environmental crisis — all of this would be
inconceivable without the United Nations.
There is no alternative to the United Nations
objectives and values — peace, human rights, freedom,
justice and development — and they have gained
worldwide recognition, even if, unfortunately, they are not
always respected everywhere. Nevertheless, even after more
than 50 years, there is still a long way to go before they are
universally respected and implemented. Despite all its
efforts, the international community has not yet succeeded
in ridding our planet of war, oppression, tyranny, expulsion
and grave human rights violations, including genocide. At
the close of this century, the United Nations and its
Member States are unable to fully master their core task,
namely, safeguarding peace and security. The great hope
that following the end of the East-West conflict the era of
multilateral cooperation and worldwide rule of law would
dawn has not yet come to fruition.
Today the question of peacekeeping must be
considered under conditions very different to those during
the United Nations early years. First, most conflicts today
are internal rather than international, as in earlier times.
Secondly, the role of the nation State has been
considerably relativized by the increased importance of
human rights and the globalization of the economy and
society. Against this background, the question of
peacekeeping arises more and more in an area of tension
between traditional State sovereignty and protection of
human rights.
What is to be done when entire States collapse and
the civilian population is massacred in never-ending civil
wars from all sides? What if ethnic tensions in a State are
partly provoked by criminal Governments, which then
respond with pogroms, mass expulsions and mass
murders, even genocide? Should the United Nations then
regard State sovereignty as more important than
protection of individuals and their rights? Rwanda,
Kosovo and East Timor are dramatic examples of this.
In many ways, therefore, the Kosovo conflict
represents a turning point. The international community
could no longer tolerate a State waging war against its
own people and using terror and expulsion as a political
instrument. As Secretary-General Kofi Annan said in his
brilliant and trail-blazing speech to the fifty-fifth session
of the Commission on Human Rights, no Government has
the right to use the cover of the principle of State
sovereignty to violate human rights. Non-interference in
internal affairs must no longer be misused as a shield for
dictators and murderers. The World Conference on
Human Rights in Vienna reaffirmed this in 1993, with the
approval of all United Nations Members States, with the
words:
“the promotion and protection of all human rights is
a legitimate concern of the international
community”. (Vienna Declaration and Programme
of Action, I, para. 4)
However, the Kosovo conflict also marks a change
of direction in the development of international relations.
How will the international community decide in the
future — this question has just been raised once more in
East Timor — when it comes to preventing massive
human rights violations against an entire people? Two
developments are conceivable.



A practice of humanitarian interventions could evolve
outside the United Nations system. This would be a very
problematic development. The intervention in Kosovo,
which took place in a situation where the Security Council
had tied its own hands after all efforts to find a peaceful
solution had failed, was intended to provide emergency
assistance and, ultimately, to protect the displaced Kosovo
Albanians. The unity of the European States and the
Western Alliance, as well as various Security Council
resolutions, were of crucial significance here. However, this
step, which is only justified in this special situation, must
not set a precedent for weakening the United Nations
Security Council's monopoly on authorizing the use of legal
international force. Nor must it become a licence to use
external force under the pretext of humanitarian assistance.
This would open the door to the arbitrary use of power and
anarchy and throw the world back to the nineteenth century.
The only solution to this dilemma, therefore, is to
further develop the existing United Nations system in such
a way that in the future it is able to intervene in good time
in cases of very grave human rights violations, but not until
all means of settling conflicts peacefully have been
exhausted and — this is a crucial point — within a strictly
limited legal and controlled framework.
In the twenty-first century the individual and his rights
must take a more prominent place alongside the rights of
States in the concept of security as defined by the
international community. The reform of the Security
Council, the central body for safeguarding world peace,
must be oriented towards this principle. The Security
Council is, in fact, authorized to act, and able to do so,
where peace or security are at risk due to internal
developments. This has been demonstrated by a long chain
of decisions, from the apartheid resolution to the
interventions in Iraq, Bosnia and Haiti. However, in
Rwanda, Kosovo and the Congo, decision making in the
Security Council was blocked, thus rendering it unable to
live up to its responsibilities enshrined in the United
Nations Charter, with disastrous results for the peoples in
question.
These conflicts are a pressing reason, particularly in
view of the important Millennium General Assembly, to
finally carry out the long-overdue substantial reform of the
Security Council. The Security Council must be adapted to
the new realities of the global political situation. It must
have a more representative composition and, above all, it
must be equipped to react to the crises and conflicts of
today. Reform must involve enlargement to include both
more permanent and non-permanent members, as well as a
strengthening of its decision-making powers. As the
Assembly knows, Germany has for some time now
expressed its willingness to assume more and lasting
responsibility in this connection. We stand by this
unreservedly.
In the debate on reform we must not avoid the issue
of the permanent members' right of veto, a question of
key importance for the Security Council's capability to
act. The right of veto is regarded by many as outdated in
its current form. However, it is a situation with which we
have to reckon internationally for a long time to come.
How then can decision-making in the Security Council be
made more efficient?
According to the Charter, the Security Council acts
with the mandate, and on behalf, of all United Nations
Member States. But hitherto they have not been entitled
to learn why a State has exercised its right of veto. This
is not only neither democratic nor transparent, but also
makes it easier for States to veto a draft resolution
unilaterally for national rather than international interests.
The introduction of an obligation for a State to explain to
the General Assembly why it is vetoing a draft resolution
would make it more difficult to do so and thus bring
about substantial progress towards using the right of veto
more responsibly. Why should not the General Assembly
assume more responsibility in the future, too?
A second approach to making the international
peacekeeping system more efficient would be via Chapter
VIII of the United Nations Charter, namely by
strengthening the regional security systems and
redistributing tasks and areas of responsibility among
them and the United Nations. It is becoming clear that the
regional organizations could be allocated an even greater
implementation role. This would also foster the
capabilities of regional organizations to engage in security
cooperation, as well as their collaboration with the United
Nations. However, the primacy of the Security Council
remains absolutely essential.
Without reforms in the area of peacekeeping, the
Security Council will be circumvented more and more
frequently, resulting in the erosion of the Security Council
and, ultimately, of the entire United Nations system. The
United Nations, one of civilization's greatest achievements
this century, as well as the values and principles it
represents, would thus be at risk of subsiding into
insignificance. We must prevent that.
12


The disaster in East Timor is currently demonstrating
how necessary close cooperation is between a Security
Council capable of taking action and the countries in the
region. The Security Council's mandate to send a
multilateral peacekeeping force must be fully implemented.
Indonesia must now cooperate closely with the United
Nations Mission and do everything in its power to
guarantee its success. The bloodshed must end. The victims
must be helped. Those displaced must be able to return
home safely. Germany has already provided humanitarian
and food aid. We will send a medical corps to assist the
peacekeeping troops and make further contributions towards
rebuilding the destroyed country. I am confident that our
Parliament will lend this plan its full backing.
In Africa, the Great Lakes region, the Congo and
Sierra Leone have for many years been the scene of terrible
wars, mass murders, destruction and much suffering on the
part of refugees. The Organization of African Unity (OAU)
and the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and its Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) have
done much to contain and resolve these conflicts. However,
these organizations also need the support of the United
Nations, in Sierra Leone, in the Congo and, in particular, in
the conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Both parties to
the conflict must observe the agreements concluded and
work closely together with the United Nations and the OAU
so that the peace process now begun can be brought to a
successful conclusion.
The international community must focus on the causes
rather than merely the symptoms of wars and conflicts in
the context of multilateral peacekeeping. Secretary-General
Kofi Annan rightly called for a “culture of prevention” to
be developed in order to prevent the outbreak of wars and
avert natural disasters more effectively in future.
Everyone knows how difficult the transition from the
“culture of reaction” to the “culture of prevention” will be.
It takes a lot of persuading to summon up the political and
economic will for measures intended to prevent something
which we hope will never happen. However, on financial
grounds and, above all, on humanitarian grounds, it is our
duty and responsibility to revise our thinking here. Progress
is urgently required in four areas.
First, we must move on from early warning to early
response. The United Nations has considerable resources at
its disposal for preventive diplomacy, which must be used
even more. There is also a great potential for synergy in
cooperation with non-governmental organizations.
Secondly, peacekeeping operations must be carried
out before conflicts erupt. The United Nations mission in
Macedonia has set a standard in this respect.
Thirdly, disarmament and the non-proliferation of
means of mass destruction are in need of fresh political
impetus. It is essential that the Geneva negotiations gain
momentum, particularly in the fields of global nuclear
disarmament and the verification of biological weapons,
and in the implementation of the Chemical Weapons
Convention. Furthermore, Germany advocates the
adoption of a convention on preventing the illegal transfer
of small arms worldwide.
Fourthly, peace-building is a prevention task of
growing importance. With the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), the United
Nations is facing one of the most comprehensive tests in
its history. Building public order by creating an efficient
judicial system and quickly sending the pledged
international police units is now crucial. Since the United
Nations began incorporating national police units in the
international standby system, they have been able to act
more swiftly. We must continue along this path.
Protection of human rights and the growing
democratization of States form the basis for a preventive
peace policy and civil conflict management. It is a
historical fact that democracies with a well-developed
civil society hardly ever wage war against each other.
Lasting economic success cannot be achieved in the
globalized information society of tomorrow without good
governance founded on human rights, the separation of
powers and a functioning legal and constitutional
framework.
In the field of human rights, welcome progress has
been made towards broadening the legal basis for
international relations, particularly during the last year.
The detention of Pinochet and the indictment of Milosevic
by the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia are milestones along the path towards creating
a world in which the rule of law prevails. In future,
dictators and perpetrators of human rights violations will
no longer be able to rely on not being called to account
for their actions. This must also apply to the murderers of
Dili and those who issued the orders. Just like everywhere
else in the world, internal peace is contingent upon
justice.
The adoption of the Statute of the International
Criminal Court represented a quantum leap in the
13


development of international law. I call upon all States to
respect the integrity of the Rome Statute, to sign it and to
swiftly ratify it, so that the Court can commence work next
year.
Germany is doing all it can to bring about progress in
the following fields of human rights. The heinous crimes of
child trafficking and child prostitution must be banned
throughout the world, as must the use of child soldiers. In
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflicts,
the age limit must be raised to 18.
In many countries women are still largely without
rights and protection and subjected to discrimination and
violence. This is an unacceptable injustice. Unfortunately,
our world is still a long way from genuine equality, even
with regard to fundamental rights. We must therefore aim
to adopt the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women.
In our view, the death penalty cannot be justified
either ethically or legally. Together with its European
partners, Germany will therefore continue to vigorously
work towards ensuring the implementation of the joint
resolution on abolishing the death penalty.
Protection of press freedom must be improved. The
freedom to inform is a reliable gauge of respect for human
rights. Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights guarantees the right to freedom of opinion.
However, censorship, intimidation and reprisals are the
order of the day in many countries. It is particularly
shocking that year after year dozens of journalists are killed
while on assignment. The United Nations should take a
closer look at this issue and consider practical solutions as
well as enhance legal protection for journalists. To this end
we will shortly be extending invitations to a conference to
be held in Germany.
The United Nations third major task alongside
peacekeeping and promoting human rights in the coming
century will be to bring about a reconciliation between rich
and poor countries.
The tenth Human Development Report of the United
Nations Development Programme came to the sad
conclusion that globalization has further widened the gap
between rich and poor countries. The international
community must endeavour to counter this trend. The
development of the poorer and the poorest countries must
not be left to the invisible hand of the global market. The
individual, not the market, must be the focus of the
globalization debate. This will also require greater
steering at the political level.
The rich countries have a responsibility to help poor
countries take advantage of globalization and enable them
to have a fairer share of the world economy by assisting
them with internal reforms and by opening up markets.
Within the framework of its European Union and Group
of 8 presidencies, Germany launched substantial
initiatives, which must be further developed in the form
of the 1999 Köln Debt Initiative and the commencement
of negotiations on a follow-up arrangement for the Lomé
Convention.
Development cooperation in the broadest sense must
become one of the United Nations core tasks to a greater
degree than hitherto. Science and technology are geared
far too much to the problems of rich countries. Why do
we not make greater use of the United Nations framework
to build bridges here? The economist Jeffrey Sachs made
the interesting suggestion, for example, that a millennium
vaccine fund could be established, with guaranteed
markets in the future for vaccines against tropical viruses
such as tuberculosis, malaria and, above all, AIDS.
Furthermore, in the context of the emergence of a global
knowledge society, the international regime for the
protection of intellectual property must be revised in order
to ensure that the world’s poor do not lose a large part of
their rights and freedoms in the near future. Rich and
poor countries should get together with one another more
frequently to discuss such proposals. During its
presidency of the Group of Eight, Germany made a start
by meeting the non-aligned countries and the Group of
77.
The destruction of the environment has long since
ceased to be a soft issue, but, rather, has become a very
hard question which will have an increasingly strong
impact on international security. According to the new
study by the United Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP), global warming and water shortages will be the
biggest problems facing humanity in the coming century.
UNEP also rightly draws attention to the close connection
between environmental destruction, poverty and excessive
consumption. The deadlock in the climate protection
negotiations must finally be overcome and the Kyoto
Protocol implemented. The destruction of the rain forest
must be stopped and further desertification prevented, and
we must halt the squandering of our planet’s natural
resources and switch to renewable energy as quickly as
possible. The world does not have much time left to
14


remap a course towards sustainability. This will also require
a much more active population policy, including a
long-term strategy to deal with the ageing of our world’s
population. The International Plan of Action on Ageing,
adopted in 1982, is in need of urgent revision. We intend
to hold a ministerial conference in Germany on this issue
under the auspices of the Economic Commission for
Europe.
With the leap into the next millennium, the nation
State principle will continue to diminish in importance. It
will no longer be possible to find answers to major global
problems within the framework of the traditional nation
state. Rather, this will take place in a strengthened
international structure and with a transfer of power to
international organizations, with the United Nations at their
head. This will entail a transformation of traditional power
into justice, the reconciliation of interests and a greater role
for civil society in the international political system, with
the ever-greater involvement of representatives of civil
society and industry. Reaching agreement on minimum
standards with regard to social issues — on the issue of
child labour, for example — will be possible in many cases
only in a global context. I support the proposal put forward
by Secretary-General Kofi Annan that a global pact on
common values and principles be concluded within the
framework of a public/private partnership, between the
United Nations and major companies, in order to lend the
law of the market a human face.
The United Nations must become the core of effective
global governance. Strengthening the United Nations, which
must begin by guaranteeing its financial basis, is therefore
one of Germany’s most important foreign policy objectives.
During the past 50 years, and for the first time in its
history, Germany has been opting wholeheartedly for
integration into multilateral structures, thereby achieving
democracy, freedom and reunification. Today, out of a
sense of deep conviction and historical responsibility, our
country is committed to peaceful reconciliation of interests
and to multilateralism. We are taking this conviction with
us to our old and new capital, Berlin. In the international
State system of tomorrow the answer to the challenges of
globalization will come from multilateralism alone. Our
world will always be plural, and no form of unilateralism
can therefore work in the long run. For that reason, the
twenty-first century, with its more than 6 billion people and
their States, will need a United Nations that is capable of
taking action. The United Nations and its Members can
therefore be certain that we Germans will be their
staunchest allies in the efforts to strengthen the United
Nations.


I would like
first of all to congratulate you, Sir, on your election to the
presidency of the fifty-fourth session of the General
Assembly. It attests to the esteem in which the
international community holds you and your country. I
would like to include in this tribute the Secretary-
General, who bears the weighty responsibility of
promoting the universality of the Organization and the
effectiveness of its action. Lastly, I wish to congratulate
the three new Members of the United Nations. The great
and fine ideal that the United Nations embodies is very
much alive — of this I am firmly convinced.
The United Nations is undertaking a grand civilizing
endeavour, a task that is constantly being challenged but
ever necessary. To unite peoples to work together for
peace and development, to affirm a body of legal rules
framing relations among States and to achieve common
standards: that is the goal of the United Nations — a
civilizing goal.
That goal is achieved first of all through the peaceful
settlement of conflicts. The role of the Security Council
in this mission is more vital than ever, a pre-eminence it
derives from the Charter. France will recall this
fundamental rule as often as necessary. To be sure, there
have been circumstances when an urgent humanitarian
situation dictated we should act immediately, but such an
26


approach must remain an exception. We must take care, as
in the case of Kosovo, to reintegrate this action into the
context of the Charter. Our fundamental rule is that it is for
the Security Council to resolve crisis situations. For that
reason, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization’s new
strategic concept recalls that the Washington Treaty
recognizes the primary responsibility of the Security
Council in the maintenance of peace.
Indeed, the universal nature of the Organization is
intangible. The United Nations must strive to respond to
crises, wherever they may occur. While we have not
hesitated to do precisely that in recent years and on several
continents, I would like to express regret at the relative
timidity of the Organization where Africa is concerned. The
extent of the tragedies on that continent requires us to take
more resolute action.
Universality is compatible with complementarity in
action. In the interests of efficiency, the United Nations
must encourage, in every part of the world, regional
arrangements among States capable of handling crises in
the first instance. Such is the spirit of Chapter VIII of the
Charter. Tasks should be realistically shared between the
regional organizations and the Security Council without
weakening the latter’s authority. For instance, my country
has, through the RECAMP programme, along with others,
strengthened African peacekeeping capabilities through
assistance provided under United Nations auspices in
cooperation with the Organization of African Unity.
International security also demands continued
disarmament in the context of multilateral and verifiable
agreements. This is an ongoing objective for France, which
hopes that the work of the Conference on Disarmament will
be relaunched in the months prior to the Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. France would like to see
the prompt entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty, the start of negotiations on banning the
production of fissile materials for nuclear-weapon use, and
the conclusion of a verification protocol to the Biological
Weapons Convention. We would not support any
development that might bring the Anti-Ballistic Missile
Treaty into question and upset strategic balances.
The United Nations mission is not limited to the
settlement of conflicts between States. With humankind’s
growing aspirations for greater freedom and responsibility,
this mission extends to the safeguarding of human dignity,
within each State and, when necessary — as the Charter
allows — against States. State-instigated violence has
spawned serious humanitarian crises over the past few
years. Civilians have been targeted, whole populations
have been forcibly displaced, and refugee camps are not
longer secure. This is unacceptable. Consequently, we
must uphold the principle of international intervention,
under United Nations auspices, to assist the victims.
Every crisis recalls the need for the founding
principle of working for peace and for respect for the law
and the human person. A case in point is the conflict in
Kosovo. Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), which
laid down the foundations of the settlement, illustrates
these principles and this resolve.
We have set ourselves ambitious objectives: ensuring
security for all, organizing reconstruction, ensuring
coexistence between communities, transferring authority
to local leaders, and promoting democracy and pluralism.
The Secretary-General’s Special Representative and the
KFOR Commander have done remarkable work. Much,
however, remains to be done. The atrocities must be
stopped, the exodus stemmed and housing built before
winter. On the political front, preparations must be made
for the future, which will require establishing dialogue
between the communities. Elections will, I hope, be held
in the year 2000. France has made resolute efforts in this
respect, alongside its partners in the European Union,
which is providing half the international financing agreed
upon by the conference of donors for Kosovo.
In East Timor, another people is asking that its
rights be recognized. Overwhelmingly, it chose
independence through a referendum. Some have tried to
oppose that choice with violence. I therefore welcome the
adoption, on 15 September, of Security Council resolution
1264 (1999). It paves the way for the restoration of peace
and should enable the democratic process to be
successfully concluded. France is participating in the
international force established by decision of the Security
Council.
Our Organization therefore remains true to the
values we celebrated last year, on its fiftieth anniversary.
But much effort is still needed for these values to be
respected everywhere. To achieve this, it is essential to
strengthen international criminal law. France actively
supports the work of the international criminal tribunals
of The Hague and Arusha. The establishment of the
International Criminal Court will be a new and decisive
step in the progress of law. France hopes that it will be
set up quickly; to that end, it has already amended its
own Constitution.
27


To carry out its mission, the United Nations needs
assured means. In order to deal with financial difficulties
and prevent these from becoming a pretext for inaction, all
Member States must meet their financial obligations
vis-à-vis the Organization. France does so completely and
unreservedly. A responsible attitude on the part of
contributing States would advance the necessary reform of
the Organization, including that of its Security Council.
I should like to share with the Assembly my second
firm conviction: that the United Nations is admirably suited
to meeting the challenges of our new world. Indeed, its
mission is strengthened by globalization.
Initially, the idea of organizing relations between
States at the world level may have seemed utopian to some.
It was merely before its time. Indeed, I consider the United
Nations to be modern for the following reasons. Our global
and unstable world needs organization and the goal of the
United Nations has always been to seek a better
organization of the world. The United Nations is in step
with a networked world. It is itself a network, a rich and
unique panoply of specialized but independent and
coordinated agencies. In half a century, the United Nations
has made a tool for action which can be adapted to our
world. The United Nations has not aged; it has grown with
the world. It must allow us to face the new challenges
emerging in today’s world.
A contradictory state of affairs has replaced the
euphoric illusion which followed the end of the
confrontation between blocs 10 years ago. Globalization is
not monolithic. While it is unifying, it also divides. While
it generates remarkable progress, it also leads to
unacceptable inequalities. While it opens societies to one
another, it carries with it the threat of creating uniformity.
While it frees up energy, it also releases negative forces
that must be brought under control. The movement of
populations and the clash of cultures are therefore
accompanied by rising fears as to identity, by religious
intolerance and by xenophobia. France, which has a
presence on five continents and is itself a land of
immigration, has had experience of such confrontations in
its history. It knows the risks they entail and the wealth
they bring. We will give our full support to the world
conference on racism, to be held in 2001. Preventing the
emergence of prejudice, which too often has deadly
consequences, will prepare the way for peace for future
generations.
The fruits of globalization are not shared equally. The
opening of economies, the increase in trade and the
acceleration of technological progress all fuel growth. But
inequalities are growing between countries and within
each economy. Nearly one in four human beings lives in
great poverty. We cannot leave matters as they stand. The
rapid expansion of communications networks does not
benefit everyone. Yet the multiplication of sources of
information, the increased circulation of ideas and the
profusion of new inventions are full of promise. Lower
communications costs made possible by the Internet can
be an asset for businesses in countries in the South. But
inequalities in education hinder access to these
technologies. These impressive instruments for furthering
knowledge may become formidable factors in inequality.
Communication is also a right. It is essential that this
right not be threatened by the concentration in just a few
hands of sources of information and the means of
production and distribution. France will staunchly defend
cultural diversity.
Globalization must encourage all of us to take
account of the fragility of our world — our Earth and our
commonweal. Our environment is not a product, a simple
stock of raw materials on which we can draw without
giving thought to future generations. True development is
sustainable development. Since the Rio Summit in 1992
this realization has been behind the adoption of important
commitments with regard to the climate, biodiversity and
desertification. The Kyoto Protocol on climate change and
the current negotiations on a protocol on biosafety attest
to the importance of the achievements. But the uncertain
future of climates and the recurrence of natural
catastrophes urge us to make further efforts.
The Earth is fragile, but so, too, is the human
species. The spread of new epidemics endangers the
health of entire populations. Inequalities in development
exacerbate those scourges. Some 40 million people live
with the AIDS virus today, the majority of them in
developing countries. The spread of the pandemic in
Africa is a matter of major concern for us. I shall come
back to that issue.
Globalization is changing the nature of organized
crime, an area in which there has been a real explosion.
The much greater fluidity in movement allows criminal
networks to exploit the inconsistencies between one
national law and another and the weaknesses of some of
them so as to hide from justice. My country is ready to
make every effort to combat this scourge. The President
of the French Republic made that clear last year at the
special session of the General Assembly devoted to that
issue. The United Nations has long been engaged in the
28


fight against international drug-trafficking, building up
expertise, establishing specialized services and drafting a
body of doctrine and a legal framework. These must be
strengthened. But, above all, States must be more
committed to action. In January negotiations began in
Vienna on a convention against transnational organized
crime. We must bring this to a satisfactory conclusion in
the year 2000.
Faced with globalization, we have a choice to make.
We can either go along with the supposedly universal
economic laws, and in so doing abdicate our political
responsibilities, or we can seek to impose order on
globalization and thereby achieve control of our collective
future. For my part, I believe that global problems call for
global responses and that an unstable world needs to be
regulated, requiring what our Anglo-Saxon friends might
call “rules and regulations”. This world needs rules. It
needs the United Nations.
This choice is also a matter of sovereignty. As the
Secretary-General pointed out on 8 December last year in
Paris, the first words of our Charter, “We the Peoples of
the United Nations”, make it an expression of popular
sovereignty. But in order for the sovereignty of peoples to
be affirmed they must find the means to acquire the
mechanisms, the means of control and the benefits of
globalization. That is my third conviction. The more the
world becomes globalized, the more it needs rules. Faced
with the temptation of unilateralism, it is more necessary
than ever to base our action on multilateral rules respected
by all. First of all, these concern the economy. We must
define the rules of the game so that everyone can benefit
from globalization. We must define the rules of the game
between the industrial and developing countries and
between the major economic actors, small and medium-
sized business and the citizens of our countries who work
and produce.
In the financial sphere, we have to strengthen the
stability of the monetary and financial system by ensuring
the political legitimacy of the International Monetary Fund
(IMF), involving the developing countries more closely in
the adoption of common rules and making private financial
operators liable for the consequences of their decisions for
countries in crisis. Real progress has been made since the
crises of 1997 and 1998. France contributed to this by its
proposals, especially in regard to hedge funds and fiscal
havens. It will continue to work to this end, as much
remains to be done.
These rules of the game have to be based on better
coordination among international institutions. Since 1945,
international cooperation has respected the principle of
specialization of institutions. In the future, the task is to
make them more complementary. Economic and trade
rules cannot disregard the most elementary social and
environmental norms. Accordingly, France supported the
adoption by the International Labour Conference a year
ago of a declaration on the fundamental principles and
rights involved in labour. The International Labour
Organization (ILO) is an irreplaceable forum for dialogue
between government and social partners and for the
formulation of minimal standards. It is desirable that it
establish close relations with other organizations, such as
the World Trade Organization (WTO) and the World
Bank.
For these rules of the game to be better respected,
appropriate cooperation has to be established with the
poorest countries. Their debt burden continues to be the
primary obstacle to development. At their meeting in
Cologne, the G-7 countries pledged to grant further debt
relief. France contributed to this. Three principles will be
applied: solidarity, which calls for us to grant the poorest
countries the most favourable debt treatment; fairness,
which requires the rich countries to share the financial
effort in a balanced way; and responsibility, whereby the
countries benefiting from this aid undertake policies
directed towards sustainable development and the fight
against poverty. For these countries, official development
assistance remains indispensable. France will continue to
advocate greater effort on the part of the richest countries.
Our action should be increasingly inspired by the
affirmation of common values and rules. Human rights
are central to this approach. I am referring in particular to
the weakest children. The ILO Convention which outlaws
the worst forms of child labour is a new case in point.
The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the
Child must be supplemented as soon as possible by the
two protocols now being negotiated, one against the
recruitment of children in armed conflicts, the other
against the sale of children and child prostitution and
pornography.
To affirm the rights of women is to recognize their
decisive role in education, in the production of wealth and
in development. But it is also to combat the
discrimination and violence which they suffer. France has
made equality between women and men one of the
cornerstones in the renewal of its public life. The
additional protocol to the Convention on the Elimination
29


of All Forms Discrimination against Women, submitted to
the General Assembly for approval, offers women the
possibility to assert their rights in an individual capacity.
That is a major step forward. The special session of the
General Assembly in June 2000 will highlight the progress
that has been achieved since the 1995 Conference in
Beijing.
Reaffirming the right of all human beings to health
means combating pandemics everywhere. In December
1997, in Abidjan, France proposed the establishment of a
“therapeutic solidarity fund” to mobilize the international
community to care for and treat AIDS sufferers. The
countries of the South and associations involved in
combating the disease welcomed the proposal warmly. But
the impact of AIDS on development remains dramatic. We
must intensify our efforts to reduce this plague. Only the
United Nations can give these efforts the necessary breadth.
The principle of precaution has to be the basis for our
action regarding the environment and health safety. The
Montreal Protocol for the protection of the ozone layer,
based on the principle of differentiated commitments
between the North and South, is an example of well-
conceived international action. These efforts must be
continued. We will do so by advocating, with our European
Union partners, a world convention on forests and by
redoubling efforts to reduce carbon dioxide emissions in the
atmosphere. Precaution must also be the guiding principle
in monitoring food safety. The combination of concern for
sustainable agriculture, the quality of products and the
preservation of food traditions in each country explain the
intensity of recent reactions. France therefore intends to see
these demands taken into account at the forthcoming WTO
negotiations.
In order to address and overcome the world’s
problems, to derive the best from globalization, we need
nations to be aware of their responsibilities, and we need
also to have “more” of the United Nations. Through an
Organization strengthened by a renewed sense of mission,
supported by sovereign States and regional organizations,
we will be able to further respect for human rights, promote
democracy, work for sustainable development and help all
to achieve their potential.



It is just over half a
century since the then British Prime Minister, Clement
Attlee, presented the Charter of the United Nations to our
Parliament. He told our Parliament:
“We are seeking not merely good relations
between nations but between the human beings
within nations”.
The concept he saw expressed in the Charter of the United
Nations was revolutionary. That responsibility for the
security, freedom and development of people does not
belong solely to each State acting individually, but to all
nations of the world acting as a united body.
Over the past 50 years, the United Nations has done
much to discharge that responsibility. The United Nations
and its agencies have led programmes around the world that
have released the potential of individual human beings on
every continent. We have helped double the literacy rate
among women in developing countries. We have helped
immunize 80 per cent of the world's children against some
of the most lethal diseases. We have established the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights as the benchmark
for freedom for individuals. And this General Assembly
played a leading role in insisting on equal democratic
rights, regardless of race, and in forcing an end to
apartheid. Today the United Nations provides shelter and
sanctuary to refugees in every corner of the world.
As we meet this week, United Nations agencies
provide homes, food, welfare, health and education to 19
million refugees — more than the population of most
Member States. We should take pride in these
achievements, because it will help give us the confidence
to tackle the challenges that remain.
But we must also be frank about where we have
failed. We have failed to deliver peace to many of the
peoples of the world. We have not realized the vision of
our founders, of nations and peoples within them living
in peace with each other. We have averted world war. But
we have not averted a world with too much war.
That is why I want to support the excellent opening
address by our Secretary-General by focusing my remarks
also on what we must do if we are to replace failure to
halt war with success in preventing conflict. The
harrowing scenes we have witnessed this past year from
Kosovo, from Sierra Leone, from East Timor and too
many other places underline the urgency of improving our
performance in preventing conflicts and also in stopping
them once they have started.
I propose five priority areas for action. First, we
must tackle the root causes of conflict, starting with the
poverty that breeds it. War is becoming a poor man's
burden. In the modern world, wealthy nations no longer
experience the trauma of conflict on their soil. The
soundest basis for peace is prosperity, and the best way
we can prevent conflict is by promoting sustainable
development. The forthcoming Millennium Assembly
must make a reality of the commitment to halving the
proportion of people in extreme poverty and reducing the
number of nations in heavy debt.
Secondly, we must promote human rights and good
governance. Development of a nation will be more rapid
where people have the right to develop their full potential.
Conflict is more likely where governments rule without
the consent of their people.
Thirdly, we must curb the supply of weapons that
fuel conflict. For decades, the United Nations, rightly, has
focused on halting the spread of weapons of mass
destruction. Yet in truth, in those same decades, the
weapons that have killed masses in conflicts have been
the most common of small arms. In Friday's debate in the
Security Council, we will have the opportunity to take
forward action to halt the illegal trade in small arms, to
promote regional moratoriums on small arms and to limit
arsenals of military firearms to legitimate Government
agencies.
34


Fourthly, we must stop the illegal trade in diamonds
and other precious commodities which pay for the small
arms — and all too often the mercenaries — which sustain
conflict. The markets for these commodities, especially the
market in diamonds, are small and tightly located in a few
centres. We must encourage cooperation with those who
manage those markets to cut off the supply of funds to
those who are promoting conflict.
Lastly, I strongly endorse the view expressed by our
Secretary-General this morning that we must counter the
culture of impunity. Those who break international
humanitarian law, from Kosovo to East Timor, must know
that they will be held to account by the international
community.
The international criminal tribunals have shown what
can be done. We must build on their work by getting a
permanent international criminal court up and running with
all speed.
But we will not always succeed in preventing conflict.
We need, therefore, to be better equipped to restore peace
when war breaks out. As my Prime Minister, Tony Blair,
said in Chicago earlier this year, working out the conditions
and identifying the circumstances when it is right in the
modern world to intervene is the most pressing problem in
foreign policy today. His speech demonstrated that Britain
is anxious to play its full part in that debate. Our starting
point is that our common interest in preserving the world
from major conflict is greater than our individual interests
as nations.
Globalization is the long and rather ugly term which
is used to describe how in today’s world we are
interdependent with each other rather than independent of
each other. We are bound together by our strengthening
links in trade and investment, in travel and communication.
What happens in one country can have a direct impact on
the prosperity and the security — even the climate — of
countries on the other side of the world.
And we are also bound together by the consequences
of conflict. In Britain 90 per cent of the heroin on the
streets of our big cities is grown in Afghanistan under
cover of the generation-long conflict in that land. In central
Africa, the upheavals of population sparked by the mass
genocide in Rwanda have destabilized the region and
caught up half a dozen countries in the conflicts that have
ensued. Across the countries of Europe there are now
several hundred thousands of citizens of the former
Yugoslavia who have fled to seek sanctuary from the
repeated conflicts there. Just as few nations can stand
alone in the modern world, there are now few major
conflicts which remain only an internal matter with no
impact on the rest of the world.
If we are to respond adequately when conflict
breaks out, then the United Nations needs to develop
three strengths — credibility, consensus and capacity.
If the United Nations is to have the credibility to
press the parties to a conflict to a solution, it must be
more representative of the modern world. A small
increase in the size of the Security Council would be a
modest price to pay for the big increase in its credibility
which would come from a more representative permanent
membership.
But greater credibility would be pointless without
consensus on when the authority of the United Nations
should be invoked. Intervention must always be a last
resort. We can all agree that the first responsibility for
reconciling internal conflict rests with the State in which
that conflict arises. But we also have a shared
responsibility to act when we are confronted with
genocide, mass displacement of people or major breaches
of humanitarian law. To know that such atrocities are
being committed and not to act against them is to make
us complicit in them. And to be passive in the face of
such events is to make it more likely that they will be
repeated.
Credibility, though, also requires us to demonstrate
not just the consensus, but also the capacity, to act. We
often hear demands that the United Nations should do
something. Let us be honest — the United Nations is
nothing more than the aggregate of its Member States.
The United Nations cannot do something except when we,
its Member States, are prepared to provide the means.
We need to ensure that the United Nations has a
sound financial base, which requires all of us to meet our
assessed contributions in full, on time. But we must also
ensure that when peacekeeping forces are required, they
are made available. Britain has signed a standby
agreement earmarking forces we are prepared in principle
to provide for emergency peacekeeping work. Such
agreements enable the United Nations to plan for
emergencies with greater confidence that we can rapidly
put in the field the right skills, with the necessary
equipment. A score of other Member States have signed
similar agreements. The more of us that do so, the greater
35


will be the capacity of the United Nations in brokering a
basis for peacekeeping deployment.
But in Kosovo we discovered that it was less difficult
to put together an armed force to end the military violence
than to assemble a United Nations police force to keep civil
order. Today, therefore, I can announce that Britain will
follow up our standby agreement with the United Nations
on troops with a similar agreement increasing the number
of United Kingdom police officers available for United
Nations troops. This will include a commitment to a rapid
response squad, ready for deployment at short notice when
it is urgently needed. We shall also be establishing with the
United Nations a flagship training course in Britain to train
police from around the world to play their part in our joint
missions.
I am conscious that the agenda I have set out is an
ambitious one. But, in all humility, I have to say that it is
less ambitious than the visionary programme set out half a
century ago by the founders of the United Nations. As our
Secretary-General said earlier this year, unless we can unite
around the aim of confronting massive human rights
violations, against crimes against humanity, then we will
betray the very ideals of our founders.
In the modern world in which we live — the modern
world of satellite communications — we know instantly
when such violations are taking place. We have the
resources and the mobility to move our assets quickly in an
emergency. Modern technology has made all of us each
other’s neighbours. We now need to match that technology
with an international doctrine that also reflects the modern
world. And it must be founded on the clear principle that
the only war we agree to wage is one in which our nations
are united in combating conflict.





It is a particular pleasure to see
Mr. Gurirab presiding over the last session of the General
Assembly of the twentieth century. I consider myself
singularly fortunate and greatly honoured to be representing
my country, India, on this occasion. I do believe that, in the
many years that he spent here pursuing the dream of
independence for his people — which, happily, is now a
reality — he, more perhaps than others, has seen the United
Nations at its best. That is why the perspective that he
brings to the office of the President, enriched as it is by
living through the very articles of faith of the United
Nations, is near unique. I am sure we will all profit from it.
I take this opportunity also to warmly welcome three
new Members to the United Nations: Kiribati, Nauru and
Tonga. I have no doubt their presence shall enrich our
deliberations.
Even as I address this Assembly, the century draws to
a close and the world prepares to meet the year 2000. It is
only appropriate and instructive, therefore, to look back and
to reflect upon the journey that humanity set out upon 100
years ago. Where did we think we were then headed and
where have we actually reached? Could any then foresee
what 1999 would bring? Thus, are there, in the passage of
the years that have gone by, any landmarks that could
indicate a path for our future? For that, we need to assess
the twentieth century, and there is but one yardstick by
which we can judge: the criteria of the stated objectives
of the United Nations.
Indisputably, the twentieth has been the bloodiest of
all centuries. But, in contradistinction, it has also been a
century of the most profound transformations and of the
most significant social, political and technological
advancements. This, above all, has been the century of
the ascendancy of the individual and of democracy. It is
that period in which dynasties vanished and revolutions
swept empires off the face of ancient lands. Centuries-old
colonialism became history against the irresistible heave
of the colonized to reclaim their lands, their souls, so that
oppressed humanity could regain a voice, a say in its own
political and economic destiny. It is the century in which
we plumbed the depths of the oceans and soared into the
infinities of space; when man first set foot on the moon,
reached Mars and even deeper into the recesses of the
unknown. In a wired-up world, the computer has today
become what the fountain pen was in the early years of
the twentieth century. The revolution of the digital has
arrived.
Humanity today is healthier, better fed and more
sheltered than our forefathers were. But want and hunger,
disease and deprivation are still widespread, including in
developed societies. We have at our command more
information than ever before, but are we that much wiser?
Literacy has spread, but is mankind better educated? We
are more connected globally, but are we as humankind?
Have this linkage and interconnection reduced conflict
and animosity? And thus, the tabulation of our assets and
liabilities of this century flows.
As we have improved upon and added to almost
everything that we inherited in 1900, so most sadly have
we to violence, too. This century has been the most
bloodthirsty, perhaps because it is in these last 100 years
that humanity has employed science to perfect means of
killing as never before. Our passage has seen us move
from the Gatling gun to a world menaced today by
MIRVs. That early machine gun, the then-great mower
down of the early 1900s, seems today almost a toy by
comparison. We have split the atom, but employ the
released energy less for peace and more for weapons of
unimaginable destruction. Chemical defoliants and
sophisticated biological weapons are also this century's
contribution.
The century that passes experienced not two, but
three great wars. Each was a cataclysm, fought globally
and at enormous cost. When the first ended, the survivors
39


emerged from the trenches, searching for a better world so
that war would not recur. In response, we created the
League of Nations. But war, regrettably, was not avoided.
The League failed because we failed the League. And thus
followed the second great war, at the end of which the
world emerged armed with weapons that could destroy all
that human genius and ingenuity had created and every
vestige of life. But, from the ruins and devastation of the
second also emerged the United Nations, with mandates of
broader powers and responsibilities. The third great conflict
was the cold war. This deeply affected, shaped and
influenced the development of the United Nations. This
war, too, extracted a heavy price, directly and through
proxy conflicts, as well as political and social upheavals,
but then these became its epilogue. What significance lies
in the observation that no global peace conference has taken
place to mark the end of this last war?
The United Nations could have been cast anew, made
contemporary and democratized, drawing upon our
collective experience to tackle new challenges with greater
responsiveness. Can we, even now, do something at this
last session of the General Assembly of this millennium to
correct this? Can we pledge afresh to invest this institution
with faith, commitment, political will and the resources that
it needs to make it the vehicle capable of realizing the
aspirations of all humanity, an instrument that will steer
planet Earth into the next century?
We do not enjoy an abundance of options. The
sapping of the vitality or the diminishing of the centrality
of the United Nations must not be permitted. We have but
one Earth, and there is but one United Nations.
Another development of this century, of crucial
significance, is the transformation that we have experienced
in the role of the State. From an agency that controlled and
regulated all spheres of human activity, we move into a
phase wherein the State must become more supportive,
caring and encouraging of the citizen's individual and
collective endeavours; it must release, not contain, the
energies and genius of its people.
It would be an error, however, to assume that the days
of the State are over. The State continues to have a crucial
role and relevance; also, therefore, do national
sovereignties. The United Nations was not conceived as a
super-State. It will not ever become so, principally because
there is no viable substitute for the sovereign State. Even
globalization can work only through State intermediaries.
To diminish, marginalize or ignore the State would also be
bad practice, because the weaker the State is rendered, the
less it shall be able to promote the interests of its citizens.
The State needs to be strengthened functionally, not
weakened. Besides, it is axiomatic that a United Nations
of weak nations can only be a weak United Nations.
Globalization is an idea that has re-emerged, but also
its reverse: fragmentation. The first is politico-economic,
the second entirely political. Let us dwell a bit on this.
Obviously, the technology that is driving this process can
now scarcely be unlearned; the speed of travel and of
communications will only increase; the age of the digital,
as I said, has dawned. However, though globalization may
apparently be driven by impersonal market forces, it is in
reality impelled by power seeking political and financial
advantage. It is, in essence, a political process, and if
history teaches us anything, it is that such processes are
not linear. Simply in terms of economic indicators, the
world was as globalized at the turn of the century as it is
now. A backlash followed: barriers went up, confrontation
replaced cooperation and the world jostled into the
tensions that led to the first great war. Are we, for the
sake of temporary gain, perhaps even unwittingly,
repeating yesterday's mistakes? Political hindsight tells us
that globalization has to be politically directed for
creating equal economic opportunity, both within States
and among States.
In India, we cherish the creative genius of the
people. We believe that Indian excellence lies in the
freedom of the individual. We do not subscribe to
constricting choice through State impositions. But can free
markets offer true freedom of choice to those that are not
even a part of the market? That is why the State
continues to have the responsibility to protect the needy,
to strengthen the weak. That is a part of our democratic
creed, too.
We note that human rights have been made a cross-
cutting theme of the work of the United Nations. That is
important. The flowering, however, of human rights
requires economic development and growth because many
of the deprivations faced by individuals, whether in the
developed or in the developing world, are rooted in
marginalization created by poverty. We believe, therefore,
that development should be the cross-cutting theme of the
United Nations and that the multilateral development
system, which has been one of its successes, must be
strengthened, its focus narrowed to the core challenges of
economic growth with social justice, and it must be given
the resources it requires to respond to the needs of the
developing countries. The international community will
find that no investment yields better returns.
40


I have the honour to address the Assembly as a
representative of the largest democracy in the world. Even
now, as I share these thoughts, an electorate of about 600
million, matching the combined populations of the United
States, Canada and Western Europe, is going through the
exciting process of democratically electing its next
Government in my country. It is an awe-inspiring spectacle,
this unstoppable flow of the great Ganga of Indian
democracy. It is a democracy whose economy grew by
more than 6 per cent last year, even in the aftermath of the
major shocks to the international economy brought about by
what was described as the East Asian meltdown of the mid-
1990s.
We move with the challenges posed by globalization,
without either retreating into a “fortress India” or
abandoning our social objectives. We have worked out our
own answers and devised our own policies to meet these
new challenges because we hold that the sheer diversity of
mankind dictates differences in approach, in human beings'
respective search for relevant alternatives. This is a truth
borne out by the fact that the twentieth century has been
witness to the detritus of many false certainties.
Today, when capital moves without almost any
constraint, it is virtually impossible for developing countries
to resist either its demands or manage the consequences of
its sudden departure. Let us reflect upon the absence of
order, system or any global oversight of currency flows,
particularly short-term flows, even as we attempt to bring
order and equity to trade in goods, services and
commodities. But how are we to address the problem when
currency, instead of being a vehicle of trade, has in itself
become a commodity of trade, when the volume of trade in
currency daily has outstripped global trade in goods and
services or even global gross national product manifold?
If globalization is to benefit all, and as we simply
cannot accept that wheels of progress should grind down
the common man, then surely some new international
regulation, some order, is needed here. Let the United
Nations take the initiative to hold an urgent international
conference on financing for development.
In the political domain, too, managing change
demands openness and reasoned discourse, an essential
ingredient of which is abjuring violence. That is why
terrorism is the very antithesis of all that the United
Nations represents and stands for. Terrorism is the great
global menace of our age. In this age of democracy, it is a
violation of the very basic precepts of it. Because its
principal targets become the innocent, it is a crime against
humanity, a violation of basic human rights. It is also
now a grave threat to international peace and security.
That is why I urge that we strengthen the international
consensus against terrorism. India has called for a
comprehensive international convention against terrorism.
We hope to make progress on the issue in this session of
the General Assembly.
We also know how terrorism uses the international
financial system, how it exploits the breakdown of
countries and societies, and how it has preyed on the
nexus between drugs and the proliferation of small arms.
Thus, today, we witness a scimitar of narco-terrorism
cutting across the Caucasus to the South Asian
subcontinent. Two of the world’s largest sources of illicit
drugs flank us. Terrorism financed by drugs has for years
been the deadly export of our neighbours.
Here the crippling intermixing of cause and effect is
cruelly exemplified in Afghanistan. The world has been
witness to the decades-old distress of the innocent men,
women and children of that country. The disorders of
Afghanistan, and the near anarchy into which that country
has been pushed, are a consequence, chiefly, of the play
of external forces and of a reversion to medieval
fundamentalism of the most obscurantist variety. This
disorder now overspills; it is also exported. It is not that
human rights, particularly of women and children, are
routinely violated there; they simply do not exist.
Our relationships with this neighbour are ancient and
rooted in a past that we share. That is why we urge this
Assembly to be seized of the enormous human suffering
of the Afghans, and to encourage and support the early
formation of a Government truly representative of all
sections of that society and country.
Terrorism is a menace to which open societies are
vulnerable; it becomes particularly difficult for
democracies to counter when terrorists are armed,
financed and backed by Governments or their agencies,
and benefit from the protection of State power. Cross-
border terrorism, sponsored from across our borders, has
taken the lives of thousands of our citizens and ruined
those of countless others. We will counter it, as we have
done over the past decades, using the methods available
to a democracy. India will defeat such forces. That is both
our duty and our obligation to our citizens.
Earlier this year India was subjected, yet again, to an
act of premeditated aggression. In February this year,
hoping yet again to set aside the sterility of relations of
41


the past half century to set the South Asian subcontinent on
the path of development, with a view to addressing the real
adversaries of our region — poverty, want and hunger —
Prime Minister Vajpayee extended a hand of peace, amity
and cooperation to neighbouring Pakistan. The pathbreaking
bus journey from Delhi to Lahore followed. In Lahore we
concluded a triad of agreements, among which was the
Lahore Declaration. It was the route chart of moving
towards lasting amity and peace.
This act of faith was betrayed. Premeditated
aggression by regular forces was committed against India.
Not simply was the Lahore Declaration violated, but so was
the Simla Agreement, which had prevented conflict for
more than a quarter of a century. In self-defence, yet with
the utmost restraint, India took all necessary and
appropriate steps to evict the aggressor forces from its
territory. Most regrettably, this aggression has set back the
Lahore process of peace that we had initiated. For whereas
aggression over territory can more easily be vacated, that
territory of trust which has been transgressed is infinitely
more difficult to restore.
Permit me, Sir, to draw attention to the fact that this
aggression upon India in Kargil was a demonstration of
wanting to hold to ransom the world, through an act of
aggression. It was also a manifestation of the larger
disorders that the world has been witnessing in Afghanistan.
There is an aspect that I stress. It was a gross violation
of the Geneva Conventions when Indian soldiers taken
prisoner were tortured, subjected to inhuman treatment and
killed in captivity. These violations took place at a time
when the international community has repeatedly been
trying to establish the rule of law, stripping away the layers
of impunity that have protected those who give the orders
that lead to violations of international humanitarian law.
And it is thus that I find it necessary to reiterate some
essential verities of Indian nationhood. From the earliest
days of our struggle against imperialism and colonial rule
it has been an unquestionable article of faith with us that
India is one nation: a nation of many faiths, a diversity of
beliefs, a cultural harmony arranged through the interplay
of myriad forms and manifestations, but a unity,
strengthened by its pluralism, that is beyond question. And
of this is born India’s democratic vitality, too. Also of this
oneness and unity, the Indian State of Jammu and Kashmir
is an integral part, and shall remain so. Because this is not
any territorial dispute; it is the assertion of two antipodal
approaches to national identity. India has never represented
denominational nationhood; it is civic nationalism to which
we subscribe. That is why Jammu and Kashmir is not a
so-called core issue. It is at the very core of Indian
nationhood.
Yet the path of the India-Pakistan composite
dialogue process is open. No preconditions attend it. The
only essential ingredient that remains is an abjuring of
violence and cross-border terrorism, principles that are
integral to both the Simla Agreement and the Lahore
Declaration — indeed, the very process of peace itself.
This process needs to be resumed.
We have been greatly disappointed by this
compulsive hostility of Pakistan, because it is an
aberration in our region today, where all the other South
Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC)
countries are at peace with each other, and are trying,
bilaterally and through the SAARC mechanisms, to tackle
together the great challenge of development. But we
remain unshaken in our vision of cooperation and shared
prosperity of the South Asian region, as embedded in the
Charter of SAARC, as well as in our faith in the ability,
talent and will of the people of the region to take their
rightful place in the world community. The destiny of all
our peoples is linked. It is a region with a collective
history reaching back to the beginnings of human history
and of the highest civilizational accomplishments. In
striving to attain the promise of the future in our region,
we also see the recovery of a great past.
This is perhaps the right juncture at which to say a
few words about pluralism in an age of globalization.
Though we find sterile the debate over universal and
regional values, extreme positions are still taken on both
sides. In a spirit of engagement, we would urge our
partners in the West to be a bit more tolerant, and a bit
more introspective. While all democratic Governments try
to promote good governance, human rights and social
responsibility, the perspective they approach them from,
and their ability to implement them, vary. Rigidly
applying, as a universal paradigm, value systems that
reflect the state of western economies and societies in the
late twentieth century, produces an inevitable reaction,
which does not make either for dialogue or constructive
decisions.
Globalization has also influenced our thinking on
security issues by generating a greater awareness about
new security concerns. Equally important, with the end of
the cold war there is a growing realization that peace
cannot be maintained through balance of power or
hegemonic order. To maintain global peace and security,
42


to deal with threats of a global nature, the international
community has to accept the concept of collective security.
The United Nations provides a framework for such a
contract among nations. With the cold war behind us, the
General Assembly should reactivate this framework.
Global nuclear disarmament was the objective set out
by the 1946 General Assembly in the first resolution that it
adopted. That objective still beckons us.
I say this as the representative of a country that has
been obliged to acquire nuclear weapons because of the
failure of the existing non-proliferation regime to address
our primary security concerns. Yet let me also state with
full conviction that India’s commitment to global nuclear
disarmament stands undiluted. India is the only nuclear-
weapon State ready to negotiate a nuclear weapons
convention that will prohibit for ever the development,
production, stockpiling, use and threat of use of nuclear
weapons and provide for the elimination of all existing
weapons under international verification.
If this can only be a step-by-step process, the first step
at a technical level is for all countries possessing nuclear
weapons to take measures that will reduce the dangers of,
and provide added safeguards against, any unintended or
accidental use. Coupled with this is the political step of
reorienting nuclear doctrines, towards no-first-use, and then
non-use, thus delegitimizing nuclear weapons globally.
Independent expert opinion across the globe has spoken
strongly in favour of such measures. In fact, every single
study that has been published since the end of the cold war
on the measures to achieve a nuclear-weapon-free world
has highlighted the need for shifting to doctrines based on
no-first-use and non-use, and technical measures towards
de-alerting, as the inevitable first steps in the process. We
have taken initiatives to urge the international community
forward on both counts, and hope that in this General
Assembly session the Indian initiatives will receive the
unanimous support that they merit.
Last year my Prime Minister declared in this
Assembly that India was engaged in discussions on a range
of issues, including the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty (CTBT). These discussions are in process and will
be resumed by the newly- elected Government of my
country. Our position remains consistent. We remain ready
to bring these discussions to a successful conclusion.
Naturally, this requires the creation of a positive
environment as we work towards creating the widest
possible consensus domestically. We also expect that other
countries will adhere to this Treaty without any conditions.
Notwithstanding India’s readiness to engage in
constructive negotiations on a treaty to prohibit the future
production of fissile materials for nuclear weapons and
nuclear explosive devices, the Conference on
Disarmament in Geneva has so far, sadly, been unable to
register any forward movement. This, too, is something to
ponder over, for we all know that a fissile material cut-off
treaty (FMCT) can only contribute to our shared objective
as part of a step-by-step process. Let us then overcome
this reluctance and agree to look beyond the FMCT.
So, at the end of this centennial audit, what is it that
we would want the United Nations to do in the first few
years? It is clear that there are two major problems facing
the United Nations as an institution: Security Council
reform and the United Nations financial crisis. These need
to be addressed. The Security Council must be made
more representative, with developing countries inducted
as permanent members, to reflect the changes in the
United Nations membership and today’s political realities.
As we said earlier, on any objective criteria, India’s
credentials for permanent membership are persuasive.
Sustainable and environmentally sound development
is a goal to which India continues to attach the utmost
importance. In 2002 we will complete a decade of
Agenda 21, adopted at the Rio Earth Summit in 1992. I
trust that the current session of the General Assembly will
put in place a preparatory process for the “Rio + 10”
review. This will enable the Member States to take stock
of the implementation of the commitments undertaken by
the Member States in Agenda 21 over the past decade.
Such a process is vital for attaining our common goal of
sustainable and environmentally sound development.
This century has shown us that our challenges are
common; they are intertwined. Problems flow across
boundaries, they batten on each other. Political, security,
economic and social challenges are braided around each
other; when they form a knot, that has to be cut by all of
us together. Here, and nowhere else, can we do this. It is
convenient to look at security issues in the First
Committee, at economic issues in the Second, at human
rights and social issues in the Third, and so on, but we
often do not see them together, and so fail to use the
United Nations as we should.
May I, in conclusion, therefore, propose that in the
next decade the United Nations endeavour to address the
most urgent problems that face us today. We have to do
this as a unity of nations, as also of issues, for it is
evident that solutions in one field will depend on, or be
43


facilitated by, progress in another. Without tackling them
together we will fail to address them at all. Therefore, may
I urge the Assembly to consider the following areas for
action in the opening years of the next decade: an
international conference on financing for development;
binding, irreversible steps to reduce the dangers of use of
nuclear weapons; reform and expansion of the Security
Council; a comprehensive convention against terrorism; and
strengthening of the United Nations development system in
this era of globalization.
I leave you with a sloka from the Rigveda. Though
written 5,000 years ago, it reaches across time to us as at
this session of the General Assembly, in the last year of the
twentieth century. In translation, it reads,
“Be of one heart, one mind and free of hate.
Let your aim be common, your assembly common,
United your mind and thoughts;
May you make your resolutions with one mind,
Perform your duties righteously.
Let our hearts be together”.








The fifty-fourth session of
the General Assembly of the United Nations takes place
at a time marking humanity's crossing into the next
millennium. It emerges as a link in the long chain of
tumultuous events that have reshaped the map of the
family of nations.
12


The United Nations was born against the backdrop of
the destruction and desolation of the Second World War,
the most bitter, deadly and inhumane war known to
mankind. The descent of the Nazi regime to the depths of
evil was like an eclipse in the history of civilization and
will be recalled in history as a nightmare in which man
created the devil, who wreaked devastation, destruction,
terror and annihilation upon the world. The stand taken by
the Allied forces against the Nazi monster, and the creation
of the United Nations in April 1945, on the verge of the
defeat of the forces of destruction, was an act that marked
the return of humanity to its senses, to salvage the future of
mankind.
In this month when we mark 60 years since the
outbreak of the most horrible of wars, we are strengthened
more than ever in our sense of hope and confidence in the
necessity of the United Nations and of its activities
throughout the world. The various agencies of the United
Nations work to enhance world health and tend the sick; to
supply the needy with food and nourishment; to build
bridges between cultures; to promote education and
overcome ignorance; to instil hope into the lives of refugees
and displaced persons; and to assist the victims of disasters,
whether natural or man-made.
The soldiers of the United Nations forces are the true
peacekeepers of our age. In its corps are soldiers from all
the nations of the world. At times they risk their lives in
areas riddled with conflict and violence around the world,
whether their United Nations mandate is to make peace or
to be observers that safeguard the peace. These distinctions,
important as they may be to the policy makers and shapers
of international relations, have no meaning to the individual
United Nations soldier, posted far from his country, who
brings hope and tranquillity to places fraught with tragedy,
suffering and violence.
After many centuries of violence and war, of
enslavement and destructiveness in the name of murderous
ideologies, after decades of cold war and polarized world
alliances of the East and the West, the human race is now
making great strides down the paths of peace and
reconciliation. Before our very eyes, a process is
enveloping the world, signalling hope for the future.
Mankind is adopting a new path, the path of the prophet
Isaiah, who as far back as 2,600 years ago prophesied that
the day would come when
“they shall beat their swords into ploughshares, and
their spears into pruning-hooks: nation shall not lift up
sword against nation, neither shall they learn war
any more.” (The Holy Bible, Isaiah 2:4)
This prophecy — which has been adopted by the
United Nations as a source of hope, as the symbol of the
victory of the good in human beings over evil — should
serve today more than ever as a beacon and a path for all
who cherish peace around the world and for their
representatives gathered here today.
The world has become more open. Satellites, the
Internet and telecommunications networks shorten
geographical and cultural distances. The political and
ideological blocs of the past have disintegrated, and the
walls of animosity have fallen along with the tyrants and
dictators who built them. They are being replaced by new
blocs, some of which are in the process of being created
where development and prosperity reign. I hope and
believe that these beneficial transformations will also
occur in the Middle East.
In our region, too, the light of hope has been
rekindled. We are now in the midst of a political process,
the objective of which is to reach peace between States
and reconciliation between peoples. Israel aspires to reach
a comprehensive peace with its neighbours, a peace of
harmony. Israel will not be satisfied with a merely
political or strategic peace. In our eyes, the absence of
war is not the peace we aspire to achieve.
May I be allowed to emphasize once again that
peace means a culture of peace; peace means no more
threats of violence, whether implied or categorical; peace
entails the end of boycotts, the end of contempt and
defamation, the end of incitement and confrontation...
peace is also a language of peace: it is the way leaders
address their nations, teachers teach their students and
religious leaders inspire their followers.
At a time when various kinds of religious extremism
are rearing their heads and eroding human wisdom and
human freedom, it is essential that inter-faith dialogue be
strengthened and that the religions be manifested in their
enlightened forms, which sanctify tolerance and
coexistence.
On the way to achieving peace in our region, we
often find ourselves confronted with contradictory
realities. Parallel to the political process, our negotiating
partners are conducting a constant political war against
Israel in various international forums, including from the
podium of this Assembly. This dualism is inconsistent
13


with the peace process and is intolerable, as are the extreme
decisions taken by the Arab League against Israel. These
decisions are not in keeping with the spirit of peace, as
expressed in the Sharm el-Sheikh Memorandum.
We hoped for and expected a different atmosphere,
one that would complement the impetus initiated by the
new Government in Israel. We have been saddened to
witness events that undermine the essence of peace. These
events can be defined only as anti-peace resolutions.
Engaging in a peace process, on the one hand, and
maintaining anti-Israel declarations and resolutions, on the
other, raises some serious concerns about our negotiating
partners and their concept of peace. Is it a peace of
normalization with open borders, or is it only one of
temporary initial recognition? Will our relations with the
Gulf and Maghreb countries, such as Morocco, Tunisia,
Mauritania, Qatar and Oman, be allowed to expand and
develop? Or will these relations remain hostage to mood
swings after each and every difficulty in the negotiations or
whenever there is disagreement? Continued doubts about
these cardinal questions cannot be tolerated in the light of
the heavy price and grave risks that Israel is taking upon
itself in this process.
Three weeks ago, on 4 September, Israel and the
Palestinian Authority signed the Sharm el-Sheikh
Memorandum, which for the first time creates a direct,
chronological, political and conceptual link between the
Interim Agreements and the final status agreement. On 13
September, the final status talks were renewed between
Israelis and Palestinians.
We are determined to reach a framework agreement
that will form the basis of the final status agreement by
February 2000, as stated and agreed upon in the Sharm
el-Sheikh Memorandum. In this framework we will select
the issues and set an agenda for the final status agreement.
The topics at hand are known, as are the differing vantage
points and positions of each side. The differences can be
resolved only by direct negotiations.
Regarding the final status, I wish to affirm from this
podium that when we refer to political separation as one of
the prime concepts of the permanent settlement, we are also
saying that, for the benefit of both sides, we should not
necessarily sever ties that are vital to coexistence in the
various spheres of living.
From Israel’s perspective, there is no competition and
never has been any between the different negotiating tracks.
Israel also aspires to reach peace with Syria, our
neighbour to the north. This is, after all, in the higher
common interests of both Israel and Syria. H o w e v e r ,
along with these common interests, the following point
must be made clear: A democratic country like Israel
cannot accept a precondition to beginning the talks that
requires a prior acceptance of the final outcome as
dictated by the extreme and dogged formulas of the
opposing side.
We must maintain the momentum of good will so
that we can face our children, Syrian and Israeli alike,
with a clear conscience and say to them in all honesty:
We tried everything and did our utmost. I call upon the
leaders of Syria, in view of what we have gone through
together, to cease hesitating. It is time to talk. Meetings
and discussion are not political sacrifices — they are
basic necessities.
On the road to a comprehensive peace, we wish to
see Lebanon join the camp of peacemakers. The anomaly
which has developed in its territory must come to an end.
We have never had nor do we have now any territorial
claims or disputes with Lebanon. Our one and only
interest is to guarantee the safety and security of our
citizens. I must say that, regrettably, the Government of
Lebanon has for many years failed to enforce its
sovereignty in the southern part of Lebanon and to disarm
Hezbollah. I hope that this situation will improve and that
Israel, within the framework of an agreement, will be able
to leave the southern part of Lebanon.
Nevertheless, with that as our ambition, I wish to
emphasize that we will not be held hostage much longer
on this track to a stubborn and defiant attitude. We will
make our own independent decisions, as we see fit, in
order to ensure our protection and our vital interests,
taking all options under consideration.
A reconciliation between Israel and its neighbours
must extend the promise that all the peoples of the region
may reap the benefits of peace. Normalization must not
be viewed as a one-sided gesture. As a natural outcome
of peaceful coexistence, normalization is not in the
service of one particular party. It is in the interests of all
the nations of the region.
We hope to renew the multilateral tracks as early as
this year. There is a need for close cooperation in
regional multilateral projects. Our region has tremendous
potential. In order to fully realize this potential, we must
establish a mechanism of true cooperation among the
14


States of the region. This cooperation would clearly be to
the benefit of all of us in the region.
The scarcity of water in our region, which will only
get worse, may impose a new way of life on the inhabitants
of the Middle East in the coming years. Israel is
anticipating this problem and preparing for it, but in this
case, as in others, cooperation in the region is essential and
will benefit all sides.
The working groups of the multilateral tracks
undertook various assignments of primary importance.
Unfortunately, their activities have been frozen for
irrelevant reasons. This is the time to resurrect them. Any
delay or imposed condition is liable to undermine the peace
process and delay the aid packages so essential to the
peoples of the region. Throughout this important process,
on the bilateral and the multilateral tracks alike, we are
accompanied by the international community. First and
foremost was the United States of America, along with the
Russian Federation, the European Union, Canada, Norway,
Japan, China and other countries and organizations that
have assisted and continue to do so. Their key contributions
earn them special commendation from this rostrum.
Egypt and Jordan were our first partners in breaking
down the walls of enmity and in thawing relations in our
region. Improving our relations with Egypt, as well as
renewing the multilateral tracks, are essential to furthering
the common objectives of the nations in our region. T h e
relations between Israel and Jordan are an example of
appropriate and favourable relations between neighbouring
countries. We intend to strengthen and broaden the relations
between the two nations in the economic, social and
political realms.
As we march further along the difficult path of
making peace, we look back with sorrow and sadness as we
remember the pioneers who broke new ground and are no
longer with us today: the late Menachem Begin, Anwar
Saddat, Yitzhak Rabin, King Hussein and King Hassan II
of Morocco. Their vision and their work inspire us to
continue to work towards completing their enterprise of
peacemaking.
We cannot afford to be disillusioned. Our region is
neither North America nor Benelux. Even as we negotiate
the peace process, we remain aware of the threats and
dangers directed against us, threatening the stability of the
entire region. The mix of extreme fundamentalism, on the
one hand, and of the potential use of weapons of mass
destruction, on the other, threatens the peace, stability and
future of the entire region. This threat is not just an
element of academic debates in the study of international
relations, but a harsh reality which we must all face.
From this international platform, I call for a halt to
all technological, scientific and other kinds of assistance
to countries looking to obtain unconventional weapons,
while threatening the existence of the State of Israel and
the region as a whole.
The Persian Gulf War demonstrated that leadership
lacking reason and stability poses a threat to all the
countries in the region and to the world at large. The
monitoring groups and machinery in Iraq must be
immediately resumed. That is the obligation of the
international community so long as the Iraqi regime seeks
non-conventional weapons and threatens the region. The
United Nations is the largest, most authoritative and most
recognized international body. It should therefore be the
one to take the initiative and the responsibility in curbing
this danger.
Terrorism is an additional strategic enemy and we
cannot come to terms with its existence. It is a threat not
only to Israel, but to many other nations across the world
as well. Terror knows no borders or civilized rules. There
can be no coexistence with terror, either in the context of
the negotiations conducted by Israel with its neighbours,
or in the broader regional context. Anyone who believes
that terror is a nuisance which can be tolerated is
mistaken. Terror is in essence a strategic threat. A
synthesized, coordinated and unrelenting approach must
be adopted against it.
Here, in this building of stone and glass, reflecting
the current image of our world today with its points of
light and shadows of darkness, counterparts and enemies
meet as friends and allies in the creation of a forum for
discussion and coexistence. Discussion is the way to
resolve conflict. It is also the way of tomorrow. Dialogue
and common language are the tools of diplomacy, the raw
material for the creation of a new reality and the
foundation for a stable and safer society.
It was here in the General Assembly, at the
beginning of the decade, that I first met with my Chinese
counterpart. After 40 years of total dissociation between
our two countries, we endeavoured to re-establish
diplomatic relations between Israel and China. It was also
here that we laid the groundwork for establishing ties
with the former Soviet Union, as well as with India,
Nigeria and other States. These are only a few examples
15


demonstrating the possibility in this arena for building a
bridge between nations and States.
As a nation that experienced great difficulties,
overcome only by accelerated development efforts, the State
of Israel takes part in the international effort to aid others
and share knowledge, experience and technology,
experience which it has accumulated in various fields. The
nation of Israel is proud of its ancient tradition of sharing
and identifying with the world at large.
Through the Division for International Cooperation
within the Israeli Foreign Ministry, Israel maintains ongoing
projects and a broad range of training courses in Israel. We
have demonstration units and we are conducting research.
For example, a special medical centre was recently
established in Mauritania and serves the many citizens of
that State who suffer from chronic eye problems. Similarly,
Israel invests great efforts and resources in training
professionals to acquire the skills and abilities necessary for
meeting the various challenges that engage many parts of
the world.
In the more than 40 years since its inception, the
Division for International Cooperation has trained more
than 70,000 trainees from more than 120 countries, who
have come to Israel and attended its training courses in the
areas of agriculture, water resources, health and medicine,
science, education and others.
In 1998 alone, some 155 courses were held in Israel
on a variety of topics, with the participation of more than
4,000 trainees. Gladly, I can report that many of the
trainees were from Middle Eastern countries. Fully 820
Palestinians participated in these courses over the past year,
thereby helping to strengthen the bridges of peace which
have been built between Israelis and Palestinians. In the
same year, Israel ran more than 150 courses in over 60
different countries, with the participation of over 7,000
trainees. I am proud to point out that in many of the
countries to which we sent Israeli experts, the local
personnel managed to translate our goodwill into positive
results on the ground, to the benefit of their people and
their land.
Because of the reputation it has acquired, the Division
for International Cooperation is also one of the central
addresses in Israel to which people can turn in times of
disaster around the world. We have recently witnessed just
how essential such assistance can be in times of natural
disasters. Israel has always responded favourably to
requests for aid and relief, regardless of the political
context or the state of diplomatic relations.
We wish to support and commend the United States
of America, our friend and ally, an inspiration to us all in
its efforts to promote the values of cooperation among
nations. This is also the time to express our appreciation
to the United States for its intensive efforts to bring true
peace to the Middle East.
Even today in the United States we have witnessed
again a new resort to the threat of boycott. The case at
hand is the threat to declare a boycott against the
American company Disney, because the company dared
to allow Jerusalem to be portrayed in an exhibition
celebrating the millennium. We condemn these threats and
the use by certain Arab States of this anachronistic
device. It has no place here or anywhere else in the
world.
Over thousands of years, since the time of biblical
King David, the builder of Jerusalem, until the present
day, Jerusalem has not served as the capital of any other
nation in the world besides the nation of Israel, the
Jewish people. Even after our forced exile from the land
of Israel, we continued, generation after generation, to
stay faithful to Jerusalem. The flame of Jerusalem was
carried in our hearts as a hidden source of faith and hope.
In our wanderings, in the East and in the West, in
the African deserts and on the outskirts of Siberia, from
the golden age of Spain through the dark Inquisition,
during the prosperous Europe of the romantic era to the
charred ashes of the Holocaust, throughout all the above
the eyes of the Jews and their prayers have been directed
toward Jerusalem. Year after year, from father to son, the
anthem of the Jewish nation has constantly been “Next
Year in Jerusalem”.
With the passing of those previous generations and
exiles, we have had the privilege of being deemed worthy
to return to Jerusalem, to rebuild the ruins, to rededicate
the city as a centre radiating with beauty, open to all
followers of all religions, as the poet has said, where
freedom of all religions is a fact of life.
It is so upsetting then that even today, 51 years since
the independence of the State of Israel, there are still
those who would deny our natural right to decide the
location of our capital, a natural right given to every
nation in the world. From Jerusalem, the city of David, I
will quote from the original song of David on Jerusalem,
16


in words which transcends the limits of time and retains
their meaning in every generation:
“Our feet shall stand within thy gates, oh Jerusalem.
Jerusalem is built as a city that is bound firmly
together.” (The Holy Bible, Psalm 122:2-3)
Today, as before, from this podium we declare to the
entire world, to our friends and people and those who are
distant from us: Jerusalem, unified under Israeli
sovereignty, is and will remain forever the capital of Israel.


First let me
congratulate you, Sir, the Foreign Minister of Namibia, on
your election as President of the General Assembly this
session. I certainly recall my meetings with you and your
President in your country last year.
I also wish to welcome three new Members to the
United Nations — Kiribati, Nauru and Tonga — all very
close friends and neighbours of New Zealand. I trust that
the faith they have shown in the United Nations will be
fulfilled in the years ahead, and we certainly look forward
to working closely with them.
When addressing this Assembly, especially as a
representative of a smaller Member State, one is reminded
10


that the United Nations must remain the fundamental point
of reference in international relations. Indeed, that is a truth
that all Member States have an obligation to acknowledge.
Furthermore, it is of course sound policy for all who need
and rely on the rule of international law in place of
lawlessness. And it is particularly important to restate it at
this time. The United Nations collective security
framework, which is one of the fundamental elements of
the Charter together with cooperation on economic and
social problems and promoting respect for human rights,
has perhaps never been more severely tested than in this
last year of the twentieth century.
Armed conflicts, many of them internal and ethnically
based, have continued to present a serious moral challenge
to the international community, and they are likely to do so
for the foreseeable future. The Security Council's response
to these problems does not always increase our confidence
in the Organization.
The Secretary-General's remarks in his statement at the
beginning of this debate about the need to reconcile
universal legitimacy with effectiveness in defence of human
rights were most timely. New Zealanders place a very good
deal of faith in the United Nations: when we see on our
television screens evidence of violence and inhumanity
against the vulnerable, and we are told that the Security
Council cannot reach an agreement on collective action, we
are left worried, and wondering whether our trust in the
Security Council is well placed. A Council which loses the
trust of the people is a Council which will become
irrelevant.
I want to talk to the Assembly about two extremely
serious challenges the Council faced this year: Kosovo and
East Timor. Both highlight the importance of the actions of
the Security Council.
In East Timor, following President Habibie's
courageous offer to the East Timorese people, prompt and
effective action was taken by the Security Council to set in
train the popular consultation process. The ballot —
undertaken in extremely difficult circumstances by highly
committed United Nations workers, international and local,
all of whom deserve acclaim — produced a resounding and
incontrovertible expression of the will of the East Timorese
people. This was the essential basis for the international
community's response since the ballot.
Post-ballot events were appallingly tragic and have
rightly provoked a strong reaction around the world. The
dispatch to Jakarta and Dili of the Security Council mission
led by Ambassador Andjaba of Namibia was a key step
in addressing this grievous situation. The efforts made by
representatives of all countries present at the time of the
meeting of Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Council
leaders in Auckland, joined by the British Foreign
Secretary representing the European Union, reinforced the
Secretary-General's urging that Indonesia accept the offer
of international help. The assistance could not have come
too early.
New Zealand is proud to be a contributor, alongside
the forces of other nations from the region and from
further afield, and under the leadership of Australia, to the
United-Nations-authorized multinational force that is now
operating in East Timor. Our soldiers from New Zealand
are on the ground in East Timor right now. We are
prepared also to take part in the United Nations
peacekeeping operation foreshadowed in Security Council
resolution 1264 (1999), and we urge the Council to take
prompt action — next week would not be too soon — to
establish this operation, which would be part of the
United Nations transitional administration in East Timor.
We are contributing to the efforts of humanitarian
agencies to provide support to the hundreds of thousands
of ordinary people who have been displaced in East
Timor; those currently in West Timor should be speedily
repatriated. New Zealand has added its voice to those who
believe that the people responsible for crimes against
humanity in East Timor should be brought to account.
The overriding objective must now be to ensure the
realization of the 30 August ballot outcome and East
Timor's transition to independence. It is clear that in
laying the basis for East Timor's future, the United
Nations will be the indispensable organization.
It is inevitable that comparison will be made
between East Timor and Kosovo. In Kosovo the world
saw a grave humanitarian crisis with the Security Council
unable to act. In New Zealand's view, collective action to
try to put a stop to a humanitarian disaster involving
genocide and the most serious crimes against humanity
should never be held hostage to the veto. When it is, the
Security Council loses its credibility and its relevance. I
need hardly reiterate New Zealand's continuing opposition
to the veto, voiced since San Francisco in 1945. While it
is understandable that national interests will influence
how members vote in the Security Council, we have
never accepted that some narrow interests of any one of
five countries should be able to override the will of a
clear majority of members.



The adoption by the Security Council of its resolution
1244 (1999) of 10 June, which provided the international
community's endorsement of a political solution to the
Kosovo conflict, was certainly greeted with much relief in
most quarters, including in New Zealand. The resolution
was proof, if any were needed, that the United Nations
remains, as in East Timor, the indispensable organization.
And as the Secretary-General observed at the time, it also
gave strong legal underpinning to the task ahead, a task
which, he noted, is daunting. The contribution of the
dedicated United Nations and specialized agency staff who
are now working with little fanfare in Kosovo certainly
deserves our recognition.
Both Kosovo and East Timor have put the Security
Council to the test. In their own ways they have challenged
this Organization's capacity to take effective action in the
face of severe difficulties. The world must never again
witness horrors such as those in Kosovo whilst the Security
Council remains impotent. The case of East Timor shows
that the Security Council can react swiftly and effectively
when the will exists. For this to be possible, the fullest
commitment to support those humanitarian ideals that are
the basis of the United Nations Charter remains essential.
The adoption of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court shows such a commitment. The
international community must now deliver on its promise,
with signature and early ratification of that Statute.
As we know, the United Nations also has before it the
pressing demands of the various and sometimes interrelated
conflicts throughout Africa with, of course, their appalling
humanitarian consequences. Who can put out of their minds
the images of atrocities we have seen from Sierra Leone,
for instance? Yet the Council's response has until very
recently been low-level. Once again, the credibility of the
Security Council depends in large part on its being seen as
even-handed in its attention to crises, wherever they may
occur, and whether the Cable News Network (CNN) is
there or not.
For much of the past year we have seen the Council
virtually paralysed on the important question of
disarmaming Iraq of its weapons of mass destruction. In the
meantime, this potentially very serious threat to the security
of the region remains unresolved. The reason again has
been the very sharp divisions among the permanent
members, which by virtue of the veto power can block any
action. This situation remains unacceptable.
New Zealand's awareness of the importance of the
role of collective action has also been heightened by
recent events in our own immediate region. Here, the
United Nations demonstrated its ability to respond to the
different demands of supporting the regionally inspired
peace process on the island of Bougainville, part of Papua
New Guinea, and of assessing the needs created by
disruptions to the population on Guadalcanal in the
Solomon Islands.
The United Nations must be capable of responding
effectively. Small and vulnerable nations in particular
need confidence in the United Nations, as it may be their
only hope in times of trouble. I am very concerned
therefore by the apparent trend away from financing new
peacekeeping operations by means of assessed
contributions and an increasing reliance instead on
voluntary funding. This, of course, poses a threat to the
collective responsibility that is at the heart of this
Organization. In practical terms it is likely to mean that
those regions which fail to attract donor support will not
receive the response they are entitled to as Members of
the United Nations. This trend must be urgently reversed;
all operations must be put on an equal financial footing
by means of assessed contributions.
In addition, as I noted here last year, the largest
contributor's arrears to the peacekeeping and regular
budgets continue to cast a long shadow over the
Organization. Outstanding dues and very slow payments
to troop contributors affect us all, and can severely
constrain the ability of countries to contribute to pressing
peacekeeping needs. We call again on those Member
States who are in dereliction of their obligations to make
payment on time, in full and, of course, without
conditions.
Reform of the Security Council remains one of the
most important items on our agenda. Further useful
progress has been made this year. While the issue of
enlargement continues to be complex, we believe there
has existed for some time wide agreement on the equally
important areas of reforming the Council's working
methods and the curtailing of the veto. The linkage
between the veto and enlargement was also explicitly
recognized in this year's report to the General Assembly
of the Open-ended Working Group on the Question of
Equitable Representation on and Increase in the
Membership of the Security Council and Other Matters
Related to the Security Council.
12


As for the task of providing more equitable
representation, I am not convinced that we will be able to
achieve this while the regional groups in the United Nations
continue to reflect the political geography of the 1960s.
Quite different and far more sensible arrangements have
been adopted in other multilateral forums, as, for example,
in the context of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty (CTBT). The present system here in New York
locks in very great disparities in representation. Small
countries that can make an excellent contribution are often
severely disadvantaged, especially where a political bloc
inside a regional group may coordinate closely on electoral
matters.
I would, therefore, wish to add my voice to those of
the Prime Ministers of Fiji and Samoa and the Foreign
Ministers of Papua New Guinea and Australia, who spoke
earlier in this debate on the need for reconfiguration.
Reconfiguration of the regional groups may well hold one
of the keys to an overall package on Security Council
reform.
New Zealand still looks forward to the day when we
can join a regional group here in New York which includes
our Asia-Pacific neighbours. In the meantime, we will
continue to build linkages in our region and developing the
many areas of our common understanding.
One of the great strengths of the General Assembly is
the equal status ascribed to each Member. All Members,
large or small, rich or poor, have a right to be heard here.
Each has a single vote. While we must all from time to
time temper our own national ambitions in the interests of
reaching a common understanding, we respect the point of
view of each individual member. The special session on
small island developing States over the last few days was
a very good opportunity to do just that. New Zealand is
firmly committed to assisting the small island developing
States SIDS in the spirit of common purpose and
partnership envisaged at Barbados five years ago. We are
very pleased that all participants in the special session have
reaffirmed their commitment to implement fully the
Barbados Programme of Action.
In April New Zealand, represented by my colleague,
the Honourable Simon Upton, had the privilege of chairing
the seventh session of the Commission on Sustainable
Development. We were pleased to be able to help
reinvigorate debate and build consensus around the need for
a more coordinated approach to stewardship of the world's
oceans and the need to recognise, in an ongoing way, the
special characteristics and needs of small island
developing States.
The Commission faces the great challenge of
pursuing the implementation of Agenda 21. Two other
great challenges we as a world face on the environmental
front are the threat of global climate change, caused at
least in part by human-induced emissions of greenhouse
gases, and the need to maintain an approach to
international trade and environmental issues which is
based on sound scientific analysis and agreed rules and
procedures. It is vitally important that we should continue
to act in concert to face these international challenges.
International cooperation in addressing economic,
social and humanitarian problems is, and always will be,
one of the cornerstones of the United Nations Charter.
The substantial decline in official development assistance
flows over the last decade is of great concern to many
Member States. In this connection, I am concerned to
note that the core resources of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) have been greatly
reduced over the past five years, to the point where its
universality is seriously threatened. I applaud the efforts
the new administrator is making to turn this situation
around and to put UNDP on a more secure footing, with
more clearly defined priorities.
Private capital flows to developing countries have
shown major increases. There is a tendency, however, for
such investment to be heavily concentrated on a few
countries where investment prospects seem brightest.
Many developing countries remain vulnerable and can be
all too easily marginalized. Official development
assistance continues to be an essential tool to help build
the capacity of countries in sectors such as education so
that they can benefit from the unstoppable phenomenon
of globalization. It is certainly a matter of particular pride
for me, as New Zealand's Foreign Minister, to have
overseen increases in New Zealand's official development
assistance funding effort — up by some 40 per cent since
the time of the Rio Summit in 1992.
I welcome, also, the positive steps that are being
taken on the financing for development and debt-relief
initiatives. It is vital that we continue the dialogue among
Member States and with the international financial
institutions to ensure a sounder basis for meeting the
challenges of international development.
Last year I referred to the important role the United
Nations has to play in shaping the moves towards
13


globalization and the opening up of opportunities for world
trade. Later this year, in Seattle, we expect to launch a new
round of multilateral trade negotiations. This will clearly
provide a forum in which to advance trade liberalization
and the rules-based trading system. The role of these
negotiations in promoting the development prospects of all
countries and in fostering the integration of least developed
countries into the global system will be a particular focus.
Deliberations in this Organization at many levels will help
to advance our people's understanding of the value and
purpose of the global trade agenda and their ability to
benefit from it. However, I would emphasise the
importance of major trading partners in continuing to play
a leadership role. The adoption of trade restrictions and
distortions by wealthy economies does much to erode their
moral authority in the broader debate.
New Zealand continues to attach the utmost
importance to seeing all countries work together to bring
about a world free of nuclear weapons. For this reason we
were a cosponsor last year of the so-called New Agenda
resolution, which called for faster progress towards the
elimination of nuclear weapons. The cosponsors will be
presenting this moderate resolution again this year, and we
urge all countries to look carefully at it.
The Conference on Facilitating the Entry into Force of
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty will meet in
Vienna in a week's time. I would urge all those countries
which have not ratified the Treaty to do so, so that it can
enter into force without further delay.
Strengthening the United Nations remains an important
goal for New Zealand. I take this opportunity to commend
the forward-looking management reforms introduced by the
Secretary-General. They have greatly improved policy
coordination among senior management and have produced
positive, tangible effects throughout the Secretariat.
Improving the way the Organization plans its programmes
and expenditures is a critical next step, where work is
already under way. There must be a greater focus on results
when budgets are prepared in order to promote the best use
of the resources of the Organization, and in turn the best
return for Member States.
This year marks the fiftieth anniversary of the Geneva
Conventions, and last year we commemorated the fiftieth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Events over the past 12 months have shown that challenges
to the values and principles embodied in the Universal
Declaration remain as daunting as ever. In this
interdependent world in which we live, New Zealand
continues to see the United Nations as central to
international efforts to work together to protect and
promote, for all our people, those fundamental human
rights and freedoms to which we are committed under the
Universal Declaration.
Next year the United Nations will host the
millennium summit. This symbolic event will provide an
excellent opportunity for Member States to reaffirm their
commitment to the ideals of this great Organization.
Recognizing the frailties of our collective performance to
date, and the critical importance of finding workable
solutions for the future, I call on all Member States to
take the opportunities offered by the millennium summit
to enter into open and constructive dialogue and step into
the next millennium with an unequivocal recommitment
to the visionary principles enshrined in the Charter.
It is nine years since I first addressed this body in
1991 as the Foreign Minister of New Zealand. For the
United Nations, and particularly the Security Council, it
has been a tumultuous period. After the cold war the
number of problems multiplied; the world's expectations
of what the United Nations could deliver were raised
above the possible; and the solutions demanded required
determination, resolve, tact, understanding and
imagination. The demands on the United Nations will not
lessen, but each year must see a better performance than
in the past. However, as this may well be the last
statement I make to this body, I want to thank all United
Nations officials and peacekeepers everywhere: those I
have met here in New York; in Cambodia and in
Somalia; in Mozambique; in Bosnia, Croatia and Albania;
in Papua New Guinea and, of course, now in East Timor.
I thank them for their continuing, often unsung and heroic
efforts. They are much appreciated.




There is no doubt that the twentieth century, which is now
coming to a close, will leave a deep imprint on the history
of the world. This has been an epoch of global
transformation and social change, scientific discoveries and
achievements. The realization of the idea of a universal
world Organization, which has become the foundation
uniting the entire international community, has indeed been
one of the positive things about this century.
However, the twentieth century has witnessed the most
severe upheavals. Millions of people have perished in the
flames of world wars, revolutions and civil and ethnic
conflicts. On a few occasions, humanity teetered on the
brink of self-destruction, and the burden of outstanding
problems it has left for the new era is a heavy one. We
cannot resolve all these problems before the advent of the
third millennium, but we are indeed duty bound to lay
down the foundations for resolving them in the long-term
and to start moving in that direction.
The most important thing we should do is to define
the parameters of the world in which we are going to live.
This lies at the core of the initiative put forward by the
President of the Russian Federation, President Yeltsin, to
develop a world concept for the twenty-first century. As a
world Power and permanent member of the Security
Council, Russia is fully conscious of its special role in and
responsibility for world developments and stands for the
establishment of a multipolar world built on a solid
foundation of international law. Our country is pursuing in
practice a multifaceted foreign policy with a view to
establishing equitable and mutually beneficial bilateral and
multilateral relations with all the countries of the world and
to strengthening international security and stability.
The world concept for the twenty-first century
involves establishing a new culture which would aim to
form a common system of values and models of
behaviour. A world without wars and conflict, a world of
democracy and prosperity must be the highest priority for
all peoples and States. Every nation is entitled to its
rightful place among other nations and to security on an
equal footing in all its aspects, including in the political,
military, economic and social areas.
How and through what mechanisms can this be
achieved? Is there a body which can reflect the interests
of all States in a balanced manner? The answer is
obvious: it is the United Nations. From the outset, the
United Nations Charter put the Organization at the service
of all humankind. There is simply no other universal
mechanism to regulate international relations.
We are fully aware of the danger posed by the
threats and challenges facing our world today: the various
manifestations of militant nationalism, separatism,
terrorism and extremism, which know no borders. This is
a common challenge which is claiming countless victims
and wreaking destruction in various parts of the globe.
Aggressive separatism, which has become a growth
medium for various extremist forces, has become one of
the main sources of domestic conflict and regional
instability. No one is immune to it. The international
community and, above all, the United Nations, must
decisively clamp down on any manifestations of
separatism and strictly and consistently defend the
principles of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
States and the inviolability of their borders. Outside
encouragement and support for separatist forces must be
totally eradicated.
Recently, separatism has been increasingly merging
with the monster of terrorism. We could even now, during
this session, take a number of specific steps to stimulate
practical international cooperation in combating terrorism.
We must finalize the draft international convention on the
suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism. I therefore
suggest that we should develop and adopt a declaration of
principles for cooperation between States on combating
terrorism more vigorously. It is the States’ bounden duty
to protect their citizens against terrorist attacks and to
prevent activities from taking place in their territory that
are aimed at organizing such acts against the citizens of
other countries. Russia therefore supports the initiative to
convene, under United Nations auspices, a conference or
a special session of the General Assembly next year on
13


combating terrorism. Such an event would give a powerful
political impetus to the struggle against terrorism at a global
level.
The capabilities of the United Nations should also be
used more efficiently in the fight against drug-related
threats and organized crime. Only through joint efforts that
are also in strict compliance with the rules of international
law can we defeat this evil.
The founding fathers of the United Nations made
provision for a law-based response to violations of peace
and security. The international community can take also
coercive measures, but this should be done in accordance
with the Charter and following a decision by the Security
Council. Unlawful means can only undermine rightful ends.
It is from this very perspective that we assess such
doctrines as that of humanitarian intervention. In general,
we should take an extremely careful approach to coercive
measures; what is more, we must not allow them to turn
into a repressive mechanism for influencing States and
peoples that are not to the liking of some.
Of course, evolution of the international situation
means that it is appropriate for existing rules of
international law to be developed and adapted to prevailing
conditions, but this should be done through collective
discussion and the adoption of appropriate decisions, not as
a fait accompli and not working from scratch: it should be
based on valid rules of international law. This is precisely
what Russia had in mind with its initiative to consider at
the Millennium Summit legal aspects of the use of force in
international relations in the era of globalization. We invite
all countries to a broad and open dialogue on this issue.
Much has been said in recent years about the reform
of the United Nations, which is only natural. Life is an
evolving process and, as times change, any system will
need to be updated. What objectives future reform should
pursue is another matter. In our view, reform means, first
and foremost, the adoption of a package of measures to
enhance the role of the United Nations in the world arena.
The Organization should be ready to respond in a timely
and appropriate way to the challenges that globalization
presents to mankind. We must give serious thought to how
to enhance the efficiency of the Security Council and how
to make that principal organ of the United Nations more
representative through the inclusion of influential new
members, including — and this is absolutely
indispensable — developing countries. This would help
maintain the overall balance in the system of international
relations, especially when the use of force, bypassing the
Security Council, continues. It is also beyond doubt that
preservation of the right of veto of permanent members
is indispensable for meaningful and efficient work in the
Council.
Generally speaking, the entire system of international
organizations needs sensible and responsible reform. At
the same time, the United Nations must remain a focal
point of the international community’s efforts to settle the
most burning problems of the day. The issue of
strengthening the authority of the United Nations after it
has been seriously and painfully tested by the Balkan and
Iraq crises is at the very top of the agenda at the current
session of the General Assembly. First of all, we must
continue strenuous efforts to restore the role of the
Security Council in world affairs.
We have managed through joint efforts to bring the
settlement of the Kosovo problem back within the legal
and political framework of the United Nations. Now we
need jointly to strive for strict and consistent
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999). We cannot afford to let the re-emerging political
process be undermined again, since that could become a
tragedy for all of Europe and could once again bring the
world to the brink of catastrophe. Equally urgent is the
issue of post-conflict rehabilitation in the Balkans. The
United Nations has an important role to play in meeting
these challenges as well.
We all should draw serious lessons from recent
crises. Non-legitimate methods of exerting power only
exacerbate problems and result in even greater deadlock.
Developments in the Middle East, where the peace
process has of late acquired a new positive impetus,
clearly exemplify the optimal alternative, that of
negotiated settlement.
Also on the agenda is the issue of improving
sanctions regimes, to which the international community
has frequently resorted over the past decade. Sanctions
are an extreme measure. They must be applied only when
other means of political influence have been exhausted
and when the Security Council has established the
existence of a threat to peace. The Council, for its part,
should be guided by clear criteria for the imposition and
the lifting of sanctions, and should not permit any free
interpretation of the decisions it has adopted, much less
permit the use of its decisions by anyone for selfish
political or economic ends. It is necessary to take very
serious account of the humanitarian implications of
sanctions both for the population of the States subject to
14


such sanctions and for third countries. The punishment of
entire nations, especially for an indefinite time and
indiscriminately, is inadmissible.
Peacemaking is one of the key areas of United Nations
activities. During the past 50 years the Organization has
acquired vast practical experience in this field. Having
successfully survived intense disputes and ideological
battles, peacemaking has proved its vital power and
importance for securing world and regional stability. The
evolution of the theory and practice of present-day
peacemaking confirms that there is no alternative to
maintaining the central role of the United Nations in this
sphere. The encouragement of peacemaking and the
strengthening of its legal basis in strict conformity with the
fundamental principles of the Charter should become an
important component of the concept of the world in the
twenty-first century. Building up and modernizing the anti-
crisis capability of the United Nations is a key prerequisite
for tackling these tasks successfully. The top priority here
is to begin truly using the system of stand-by agreements
with the United Nations.
Taking into account the limited resources of the world
Organization, and given the high demand for peacekeeping
operations, cooperation and division of labour between the
United Nations and regional structures has become a
priority. It is of fundamental importance that such
cooperation should be in strict accordance with Chapter
VIII of the Charter and should be fully consistent with the
prerogatives of the Security Council.
For Russia, the question of peacemaking cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations is
far from theoretical. For many years, Russian peacemakers
within the peacekeeping forces of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) have contributed to stabilizing the
situations in Abkhazia, Georgia, in Tajikistan, and in Trans-
Dniestria, Moldova. This testifies to the fact that the
settlement of conflicts within the framework of the CIS is
a priority for Russia. As before, we do not see any
reasonable alternative to political settlement of these crisis
situations, for which political will, patience and
commitment to one’s obligations are needed. We consider
it important for the United Nations to continue to play a
prominent role in finding solutions in Tajikistan and in
Abkhazia, Georgia.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), which is called upon to play a central role
in ensuring European security and stability, can and should
be the main United Nations peacemaking partner in Europe.
When this arrangement fails to work, not only do specific
European countries suffer, but providing for global and
continental security becomes complicated. In a broad
sense, OSCE peacemaking parameters, ranging from
conflict prevention to peacekeeping operations and post-
conflict rehabilitation, should be defined in a charter on
European security. Russia proposes too that the charter
should also reflect such principles important for the future
of Europeans as ensuring the security and the foundations
of the relations between European and Euro-Atlantic
organizations in this area. Then the charter will indeed
become a kind of political constitution for the Europe of
the twenty-first century. As the Istanbul summit of the
OSCE, which is expected to adopt the charter, is
approaching fast, we should press ahead with the
formulation of a substantive document.
The Conference on Interaction and Confidence-
building Measures in Asia may become an important
factor for stability on the Asian continent after the new
positive impetus it received at the recent Almaty Foreign
Affairs Ministers’ Meeting of the founding States. The
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN)
Regional Forum, a venue for active dialogue on a broad
spectrum of urgent international issues, is yet another
example of the focus of the Asian countries on the
formation of solid structures for security and cooperation
on the continent.
It is necessary to enhance the potential of African
regional and subregional organizations, which are acting
in close cooperation with the United Nations to curb and
cope with conflicts and humanitarian catastrophes
emerging in Africa. It is the duty of the international
community to render every possible support to the
African peoples.
While strengthening the legal and practical basis of
peacemaking activities, special attention should be paid to
what is commonly called the human rights dimension.
This relates not only to measures to minimize human
sufferings caused by armed conflicts, but also to efforts
aimed at preventing humanitarian crises.
In this connection, I cannot fail to mention the
unacceptable situation of countless thousands of people in
the centre of Europe who, due to arbitrary actions by
authorities, have found themselves deprived of their
citizenship and of the right to use their native language
and enjoy full rights in their State of residence. Civilized
integration, rather than latent assimilation — this is the
way out of the prevailing humanitarian situation in these
15


countries. We welcome the efforts of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the Council
of Europe and the Council of Baltic Sea States (CBSS)
aimed at eliminating violations of human rights and
freedoms of the non-indigenous population of Latvia and
Estonia. We hope that the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights will make her contribution
to these efforts.
The risk of losing positive dynamics in the sphere of
disarmament as a result of attempts to rely on unilateral
power methods cannot but cause concern. If the political
and legal fabric regulating international relations continues
to disintegrate further, then trends to ensure national
security through an arms race will become even stronger.
Russia has consistently advocated the reduction and
limitation of nuclear arsenals and strict compliance with the
non-proliferation regime. For without this, ensuring
strategic stability would prove impossible.
We realize the importance of early ratification of the
START II Treaty and of the initiation of START III
negotiations, under which Russia would be prepared, on a
reciprocal basis, to agree to considerable further reduction
of strategic offensive armaments. Naturally, this process
will be feasible only if the existing agreements in this field,
first of all the ABM Treaty, are strictly observed. We
believe that the General Assembly should come out clearly
in support of the preservation and observance of the ABM
Treaty, which is a cornerstone of strategic stability, because
unilateral actions aimed at undermining the time-tested
regime established by this Treaty are fraught with
extremely dangerous consequences. A collective search for
political and diplomatic solutions is the alternative to
military responses to the problems of proliferation. This is
precisely the target of Russia’s initiative concerning the
global system of control over proliferation of missiles and
missile technologies.
Substantive discussions on threats to international
information security must also be continued within the
framework and under the auspices of the United Nations.
The time has come to reach, through joint efforts, a
common understanding of such threats and of measures to
reduce them.
The twentieth century has brought about economic
globalization. All economies have become open and closely
linked as a result of advances in science and technology.
All these factors have provided a powerful impetus to
social and economic development while creating their own
specific problems. The gap between the industrial and the
formerly colonial worlds has not only persisted but has
begun to widen. Development assistance should remain a
principal focus of future United Nations activities. Crises,
primarily financial ones, have assumed an international
character. We must draw the appropriate lessons and
modernize the architecture of the world financial system.
The United Nations and its specialized agencies should
play a role here.
The expansion of human economic activities has
brought about a globalization of both natural and
man-made disasters, and this has become a major
destabilizing global factor. The challenges related to the
prevention of such disasters and the elimination of their
consequences require that the most advanced technologies
be used for the benefit of the world community as a
whole. Why not consider, therefore, the establishment,
under the auspices of the United Nations, of a specialized
international emergency agency which would assume
relevant functions?
A widely known saying reads: "It is much easier to
win a war than a peace." The United Nations founders
won the war and laid the foundations for peace. It is our
duty to win this peace and to make it comprehensive and
irreversible.













Today, we look ahead to the
new millennium. And at this last General Assembly of the
twentieth century, we look back on a century that taught
us much of what we need to know about the promise of
tomorrow. We have learned a great deal over the last one
hundred years: how to produce enough food for a
growing world population; how human activity affects the
environment; the mysteries of the human gene. An
information revolution now holds the promise of universal
access to knowledge. We have learned that open markets
create more wealth, that open societies are more just. We
have learned how to come together, through the United
Nations and other institutions, to advance common
interests and values.
Yet for all our intellectual and material advances, the
twentieth century has been deeply scarred by enduring
human failures: by greed and lust for power, by
hot-blooded hatreds and stone-cold hearts. At century’s
end, modern developments magnify greatly the dangers of
these timeless flaws. Powerful forces still resist
reasonable efforts to put a human face on the global
economy, to lift the poor, or to heal the earth’s
environment. Primitive claims of racial, ethnic or religious
superiority, when married to advanced weaponry and
2


terrorism, threaten to destroy the greatest potential for
human development in history, even as they make a
wasteland of the soul.
Therefore, we look to the future with hope, but with
unanswered questions. In the new millennium, will nations
be divided by ethnic and religious conflicts? Will the
nation-state itself be imperiled by them, or by terrorism? Or
will we keep coming closer together instead, while enjoying
the normal differences that make life more interesting? In
the new century, how will patriotism be defined — as faith
in a dream worth living, or as fear and loathing of other
people’s dreams? Will we be free of the fear of weapons of
mass destruction, or forced to teach our grandchildren how
to survive a nuclear, chemical or biological attack? Will
globalism bring shared prosperity, or will it make the
desperate of the world even more desperate? Will we use
science and technology to grow the economy and protect
the environment, or put it all at risk in a world dominated
by a struggle over natural resources?
The truth is that the twentieth century’s amazing
progress has not resolved these questions. But it has given
us the tools to make the answers come out right — the
knowledge, the resources, the institutions. Now, we must
use them. If we do, we can make the millennium not just
a changing of the digits, but a true changing of the times —
a gateway to greater peace, prosperity and freedom. With
that in mind, I offer three resolutions for the new
millennium.
First, let us resolve to wage an unrelenting battle
against poverty and for shared prosperity so that no part of
humanity is left behind in the global economy.
Globalization is not inherently divisive. While infant
mortality in developing countries has been cut nearly in half
since 1970, life expectancy has increased by 10 years.
According to the United Nations Human Development
Index, which measures a decent standard of living, a good
education, a long and healthy life, the gap between rich and
poor countries on this measure has actually declined.
Open trade and new technologies have been engines
of this progress; they have helped hundreds of millions to
see their prospects rise by marketing the fruits of their labor
and creativity abroad. With proper investments in education,
developing countries should be able to keep their best and
brightest talent at home and to gain access to global
markets for goods and services and capital.
But this promising future is far from inevitable. We
are still squandering the potential of far too many. As many
as 1.3 billion people still live on less than a dollar a day.
More than half the population of many countries has no
access to safe water. A person in South Asia is 700 times
less likely to use the Internet than someone in the United
States. Forty million people a year still die of hunger,
almost as many as the total number killed in World
War II. We must refuse to accept a future in which one
part of humanity lives on the cutting edge of a new
economy, while the other lives at the knife edge of
survival.
What must we do? We can start by remembering
that open markets advance the blessings and
breakthroughs we want to spread. That is why we in the
United States have worked to keep our markets open
during the recent global financial crisis, though it has
brought us record trade deficits. It is why we want to
launch a new global trade round when the World Trade
Organization meets in Seattle this fall. It is why we are
working to build a trading system that strengthens the
well-being of workers and consumers, protects the
environment and makes competition a race to the top, not
the bottom. It is why I am proud we have come together
at the International Labour Organization to ban abusive
child labour everywhere in the world.
We do not face a choice between trade and aid, but
instead the challenge to make both work for people who
need them. Aid should focus on what is known to work:
credit for poor people starting businesses, keeping girls in
school, meeting the needs of mothers and children.
Development aid should be used for development, not to
buy influence or finance donors’ exports. It should go
where Governments invest in their people and answer to
their concerns.
We should also come to the aid of countries
struggling to rise but held down by the burden of debt.
The G-7 nations have adopted a plan to reduce by up to
70 per cent the outstanding debt of the world’s poorest
countries, freeing resources for education, health and
growth.
All of us, developed and developing countries alike,
should take action now to halt global climate change.
What has that to do with fighting poverty? A great deal.
The most vulnerable members of the human family will
be hurt first and hurt most if rising temperatures devastate
agriculture, accelerate the spread of disease in tropical
countries and flood island nations.
3


Does this mean developing countries must sacrifice
growth to protect the environment? Absolutely not.
Throughout history, a key to human progress has been
willingness to abandon big ideas that are no longer true.
One big idea that is no longer true is that the only way to
build a modern economy is to use energy as we did in the
industrial age. The challenge and opportunity for
developing countries today is to skip the costs of the
industrial age by using technologies that improve the
economy and the environment at the same time.
Finally, to win the fight against poverty, we must
improve health care for all people. Over the next 10 years
in Africa, AIDS is expected to kill more people and orphan
more children than all the wars of the twentieth century
combined. Each year diseases such as malaria, tuberculosis
and pneumonia leave millions of children without parents
and millions of parents without children. Yet for all these
diseases, vaccine research is advancing too slowly, in part
because the potential customers are too poor. Only 2 per
cent of all global biomedical research is devoted to the
major killers in the developing world.
No country can break poverty’s bonds if its people are
disabled by disease and its Government overwhelmed by
the needs of the ill. With United Nations leadership, we
have come close to eradicating polio, once the scourge of
children everywhere. We are down to 5,000 reported cases
worldwide. I have asked our Congress to fund a major
increase to finish the job, and I ask other nations to follow
suit. We have begun a comprehensive battle against the
global AIDS epidemic. This year I am seeking another
$100 million for prevention, counselling and care in Africa.
I want to do more to get to those who need them most new
drugs that prevent transmission from mothers to newborns.
And today I commit the United States to a concerted effort
to accelerate the development and delivery of vaccines for
malaria, tuberculosis, AIDS and other diseases that
disproportionately affect the developing world. Many
approaches have been proposed, from tax credits to special
funds for the purchase of these vaccines.
To tackle these issues, I will ask public-health experts,
the chief executive officers of our pharmaceutical
companies, foundation representatives and members of
Congress to join me at a special White House meeting and
to strengthen incentives for research and development,
working with, not against, the private sector to meet our
common goal.
The second resolution I hope we will make today is to
strengthen the capacity of the international community to
prevent and whenever possible to stop outbreaks of mass
killing and displacement. This requires, as we all know,
shared responsibility, like the one West African nations
accepted when they acted to restore peace in Sierra
Leone; the one 19 democracies in the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) embraced to stop ethnic
cleansing in Bosnia and in Kosovo; the one that Asian
and Pacific nations have now assumed in East Timor,
with the strong support of the entire United Nations,
including the United States.
Secretary-General Annan spoke for all of us during
the Kosovo conflict, and more recently in regard to East
Timor, when he said that ethnic cleansers and mass
murderers can find no refuge in the United Nations, no
source of comfort or justification in its Charter. We must
do more to make these words real. Of course, we must
approach this challenge with some considerable degree of
humility. It is easy to say “never again”, but much harder
to make it so. Promising too much can be as cruel as
caring too little.
But difficulties, dangers and costs are not an
argument for doing nothing. When we are faced with
deliberate, organized campaigns to murder whole peoples
or expel them from their land, the care of victims is
important but not enough. We should work to end the
violence. Our response in every case cannot and should
not be the same. Sometimes collective military force is
both appropriate and feasible. Sometimes concerted
economic and political pressure combined with diplomacy
is a better answer, as it was in making possible the
introduction of forces to East Timor. Of course, the way
the international community responds will depend on the
capacity of countries to act and on their perception of
their national interests. NATO acted in Kosovo, for
example, to stop a vicious campaign of ethnic cleansing
in a place where we had important interests at stake and
the ability to act collectively.
The same considerations brought Nigerian troops and
their partners to Sierra Leone and Australians and others
to East Timor. That is proper — so long as we work
together, support each other and do not abdicate our
collective responsibility. I know that some are troubled
that the United States and others cannot respond to every
humanitarian catastrophe in the world. We cannot do
everything, everywhere. But simply because we have
different interests in different parts of the world does not
mean we can be indifferent to the destruction of innocents
in any part of the world. That is why we have supported
the efforts of Africans to resolve the deadly conflicts that
4


have raged through parts of their continent. It is why we
are working with friends in Africa to build the African
Crisis Response Initiative, which has trained more than
4,000 peacekeepers from six countries. It is why we are
helping establish an international coalition against genocide
to bring nations together to stop the flow of money and
arms to those who commit crimes against humanity.
There is also a critical need for countries emerging
from conflict to build police institutions accountable to
people and the law, often with the help of civilian police
from other nations. We need international forces with the
training to fill the gap between local police and military
peacekeepers, as French, Argentine, Italian and other
military police have done in Haiti and Bosnia. We will
work with our partners and the United Nations to continue
to ensure that such forces can deploy when they are needed.
What is the role of the United Nations of in preventing
mass slaughter and dislocation? Very large. Even in
Kosovo, NATO’s actions followed a clear consensus,
expressed in several Security Council resolutions, that the
atrocities committed by Serb forces were unacceptable and
that the international community had a compelling interest
in seeing them end. Had we chosen to do nothing in the
face of this brutality, I do not believe we would have
strengthened the United Nations. Instead we would have
risked discrediting everything it stands for.
By acting as we did, we helped to vindicate the
principles and purposes of the United Nations Charter to
give the United Nations the opportunity it now has to play
the central role in shaping Kosovo’s future. In the real
world, principles often collide and tough choices must be
made. The outcome in Kosovo is hopeful.
Finally, as we enter this new era, let our third
resolution be to protect our children against the possibility
that nuclear, chemical and biological weapons will ever be
used again. The last millennium has seen constant advances
in the destructive power of weaponry. In the coming
millennium, this trend can continue or, if we choose, we
can reverse it with global standards universally respected.
We have made more progress than many realize. After
the collapse of the Soviet Union, Belarus, Kazakhstan and
Ukraine courageously chose to give up their nuclear
weapons. America and Russia have moved forward with
substantial arms reductions. President Yeltsin and I agreed
in June, even as we await Russian ratification of START II,
to begin talks on a START III treaty that will cut our cold-
war arsenals by 80 per cent from their height. Brazil has
joined the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), capping a process that has almost totally
eliminated the threat of nuclear proliferation in Latin
America. We have banned chemical weapons from the
Earth, though we must implement that commitment fully
and gain universal coverage. One hundred and fifty-two
nations have signed the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty and, while India and Pakistan did test nuclear
weapons last year, the international reaction proved that
the global consensus against proliferation is very strong.
We need to bolster the standards to reinforce that
consensus. We must reaffirm our commitment to the
NPT, strengthen the Biological Weapons Convention and
make fast progress on a treaty to ban production of fissile
materials. To keep existing stocks from the wrong hands,
we should strengthen the Convention on Physical
Protection of Nuclear Materials. And today, again I ask
our Congress to approve the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty.
We must stop the spread of nuclear weapons,
materials and expertise at the source. Since 1992, we have
worked with Russia and the other nations of the former
Soviet Union to do that. We are expanding that effort
because challenges remain, but thus far we can say that
the nightmare scenario of deadly weapons flowing
unchecked across borders and of scientists selling their
services en masse to the highest bidder has been avoided.
Now, we must work to deny weapons of mass
destruction to those who would use them. For almost a
decade, nations have stood together to keep the Iraqi
regime from threatening its people and the world with
such weapons. Despite all the obstacles Saddam Hussein
has placed in our path, we must continue to ease the
suffering of the people of Iraq. At the same time, we
cannot allow the Government of Iraq to flout 40 — and
I say 40 — successive United Nations Security Council
resolutions and to rebuild his arsenal.
Just as important is the challenge of keeping deadly
weapons away from terrorist groups. They may have
weaker capabilities than States, but they have fewer
compunctions about using such weapons. The possibility
that terrorists will threaten us with weapons of mass
destruction can be met with neither panic nor
complacency. It requires serious, deliberate, disciplined
concern and effective cooperation from all of us.
There are many other challenges. Today I have
spoken about just three: the need to do something about
5


the world’s poor and to put a human face on the global
economy; the need to do more to prevent killing and
dislocation of innocents; the need to do more to ensure that
weapons of mass destruction will never be used on our
children. I believe they are the most important. In meeting
them, the United Nations is indispensable.
It is precisely because we are committed to the United
Nations that we have worked hard to support the effective
management of this body. But the United States also has a
responsibility to equip the United Nations with the
resources it needs to be effective. As I think most Members
know, I have strongly supported the United States meeting
all its financial obligations to the United Nations and I will
continue to do so. We will do our very best to succeed this
year.
When the cold war ended, the United States could
have chosen to turn away from the opportunities and
dangers of the world. Instead, we have tried to be engaged,
involved and active. We know this moment of unique
prosperity and power for the United States is a source of
concern to many. I can only answer by saying this: In the
seven years that I have been privileged to come here to
speak to this body, America has tried to be a force for
peace. We believe we are better off when nations resolve
their differences by force of argument rather than force of
arms. We have sought to help former adversaries like
Russia and China become prosperous, stable members of
the world community because we feel far more threatened
by the potential weakness of the world’s leading nations
than by their strength. Instead of imposing our values on
others, we have sought to promote a system of
government — democracy — that empowers people to
choose their own destinies according to their own values
and aspirations. We have sought to keep our markets open
because we believe a strong world economy benefits our
own workers and businesses, as well as the people of the
world who are selling to us. I hope that we have been and
will continue to be good partners with the rest in the new
millennium.
Not long ago, I went to a refugee camp in Macedonia.
The people I met there, children and adults alike, had
suffered horrible, horrible abuses, but they had never given
up hope because they believed that there is an international
community that stands for their dignity and their freedom.
I want to make sure that, 20 or 50 or 100 years from now,
people everywhere will still believe that about our United
Nations. So let us resolve, in the bright dawn of the new
millennium, to bring in an era in which our desire to create
will overwhelm our capacity to destroy. If we do that, then,
through the United Nations and far-sighted leaders,
humanity finally can live up to its name.








On behalf of our Government and
in my capacity as Chair of the Non-Aligned Movement, I
wish to extend our sincere congratulations to you,
Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab, on your election as President of the
General Assembly. I would also like to thank you for the
kind remarks you made about my country as you assumed
your high position.
We have worked together for many decades. Thanks
in good measure to your statespersonship, as neighbours we
live together in peace and have joined hands as equals to
ensure the all-round fulfilment of both our peoples. These
experiences convince us that you will discharge your
responsibilities as President of the General Assembly in a
manner that will help humanity make our common world a
better place for all. We are pleased that you will be
working with the Secretary-General, Kofi Annan, who has
demonstrated unquestionable commitment to the realization
of the attainment of the goals of the Organization.
The Charter of this Organization and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights provide all of us with the
vision towards which we should strive. At the time these
documents were adopted, they reflected the international
determination to ensure that the catastrophe occasioned by
the rise of fascism and Nazism should never recur. We
recall them today because we believe that the time has
come for determined measures to be taken to ensure that
they inform what happens in the common world we all
share. The central message they contain is expressed in the
words of the preamble to the Declaration:
“the peoples of the United Nations have in the Charter
reaffirmed their faith in fundamental human rights, in
the dignity and worth of the human person and in the
equal rights of men and women and have determined
to promote social progress and better standards of
life in larger freedom”.
We believe that the time has come for all of us to
ensure that we work together to reconstruct human society
in a manner consistent with this perspective. We further
believe that what we have said constitutes a particular and
historic challenge to those who occupy positions of
political leadership in the modern era, those who, like us,
will have the privilege of addressing this General
Assembly. Only time will tell whether we have the moral
and intellectual courage to rise to this challenge.
But this we feel we can say: that conditions exist in
the world today for us successfully to pursue the vision
contained in the United Nations documents to which I
have referred. What may be in short supply is the courage
of the politicians, as opposed to an abundance of good-
sounding rhetoric. What are these conditions of which we
speak? The cold war has come to an end. There is no
sign anywhere of an ideology-driven contest among
super-Powers which dictates that each should seek to
destroy the other in order to protect itself. It is true that
a number of countries still possess weapons of mass
destruction, especially nuclear weapons, which constitute
a threat. The only logical way to address this is
vigorously to sue for universal disarmament and the
destruction of such weapons.
Secondly, I believe it would be correct to say that
the overwhelming majority of countries in the world have
opted for democratic forms of government. Having
learned from their own experiences, the nations have
turned their backs on dictatorship. Of course, we cannot
say that such dictatorships do not exist or that no attempt
will be made in the future to establish them. But we can
make bold to say that these exceptions prove the rule,
rather than disprove the proposition we are trying to
advance.
The combination of these two factors should lead to
three conclusions, at least. The first is that there should be
no need on the part of any country to seek to establish
spheres of influence as a supposed necessary condition for
the advancement of its national interests.
Secondly, the very sustenance of democracy across
the globe requires that in every democratic country the
ordinary people should feel that they actually do enjoy the
right to determine their destiny. In other words, no
country should be required to restrict its exercise of this
8


right simply because some other more powerful country
dictates that this should be so.
Thirdly, these circumstances create the possibility for
a more democratic system of international governance, as
would be reflected by a correct restructuring of this very
Organization. In any case, the process of globalization
necessarily redefines the concept and the practice of
national sovereignty. The frontiers of that sovereignty are
being pushed back, especially as regards the smaller
countries of the world, such as our own. As this happens,
inevitably, so does it become necessary that a compensatory
movement take place towards the reinforcement of the
impact of these countries on the system of global
governance through the democratization of the system of
international relations.
The developments we have spoken of also suggest that
perhaps, and depending on what we all do, humanity has
never had as bright a prospect for durable world peace and
security as it does today. The mere spread of democracy
throughout the world speaks of a greater commitment
among the nations to the resolution of national and
international conflicts by peaceful means.
I am certain that when President Abdelaziz Bouteflika,
the current Chairperson of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), addresses the Assembly, he will report on the
important decision recently taken at the Algiers summit of
the OAU to exclude from its ranks, with effect from the
next summit, all military regimes that may still exist on the
African continent. A further decision was taken to assist
such countries resolutely to move towards a democratic
system of government.
The developments on which we have commented
would suggest that the Organization has a responsibility to
focus especially on the objective contained in Article I,
paragraph 1, of its Charter, which says,
“to take effective collective measures for the
prevention and removal of threats to the peace ... and
to bring about by peaceful means, and in conformity
with the principles of justice and international law,
adjustment or settlement of international disputes or
situations which might lead to a breach of the peace”.
This, we believe, imposes a solemn and supreme
responsibility on the United Nations to work for the
prevention of conflicts and to endeavour to resolve them so
that a durable peace can be established. Sometimes, our
response to conflicts has been to wait for them to develop
into violence, and even wars, and subsequently to
intervene through costly peacekeeping operations. These,
at times, serve to freeze those conflicts, perpetuate
polarization and make their timely resolution more
difficult.
Moreover, the requirement on the United Nations to
make such interventions to prevent the outbreak of
hostilities imposes an obligation on the United Nations
that it should be seen by Governments and peoples as a
truly even-handed interlocutor and peacemaker. It can
attain this only if it works genuinely to
“develop friendly relations among nations based on
respect for the principle of equal rights and self-
determination of peoples”,
as stated in Article I, paragraph 2, of its Charter.
If indeed we are seriously committed to these critical
objectives of peace and democracy in the world, then we
have no excuse to permit the further postponement of the
meaningful restructuring of the United Nations. If we
were honest with ourselves, we would admit that what is
blocking progress is the desire to accommodate what are
perceived as new power relations, to reinstitutionalize
relations of inequality within the United Nations in an
amended form. This is based on the thesis that the
institutionalization of such relations has precedence over
the Organization’s founding principle of respect for the
principle of equal rights among the nations.
In the situation of the cold war and the prevalence
of dictatorship in many countries, the politics of power
might have been seen as the only path to survival. The
management of the world today through the exercise of
such power, however modified, will itself subvert the
objectives of democracy and peace, spawning pretenders
to the throne at global, continental and regional levels.
Simultaneously as the United Nations focuses on the
critical question of the prevention of conflict, so must it
attend to such issues as the elimination of weapons of
mass destruction, the implementation of the ban on anti-
personnel mines, the removal of mines in those countries
which face this problem and the control of the
proliferation of small arms. Of course, none of these
proposals gainsay the need for the United Nations to act
with all necessary vigour to help end all existing conflicts
of which it is seized, including those in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Angola, Western Sahara, East
Timor, Eritrea and Ethiopia, Kosovo and others.
9


We started off with a quotation from the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, which speaks of affirming
the dignity and worth of the human person, the promotion
of social progress and securing a better life for all. We
argued that conditions exist for movement towards the
realization of the objectives spelt out in the Declaration. It
is a matter of common cause among all of us that the levels
of poverty, ignorance and disease that continue to afflict
billions around the globe constitute a direct denial of the
dignity and worth of the human person to which we have
committed ourselves. I am certain that we would also agree
that the process of globalization has also been accompanied
by growing inequality within and among countries. We
have also seen how movements of short-term capital have
produced disastrous economic consequences in some
countries.
As with the challenges of peace and democracy, it is
our firm belief that sufficient resources exist within the
world economy actually to address the social progress and
the better life for all for which the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights calls. Further to this, science and technology
continue to develop in such a way that it is difficult to
believe that, taken together with the large concentrations of
capital that characterize the world economy, the means do
not exist within human society to make the required impact
on poverty, ignorance and disease. Indeed, it can be argued
quite rationally that international peace, democracy and
prosperity are a necessary condition for the further rapid
growth of the world economy, and with it the further
expansion of the corporations, both small and big, which
require global markets.
Similarly, the revolution in information and
communication technology, a critical driver of the process
of globalization, both enables and calls for higher levels of
education and standards of living among the billions who
constitute the human population. However, it is clear that
there is no automatic or inherent mechanism within the
operation of the markets to enable both capital and
technology to make the sort of impact we are talking about
on all countries of the globe. When we say this we should
not be taken to mean that we are contemptuous of all that
has been said about what each country needs to do to create
the conditions conducive to investment and technology
transfers. Nor should it be taken to mean that we are
reopening the debate about the role of markets in the
allocation of resources. What we are saying is that the
functioning of the markets does not and cannot exclude
conscious interventions being made, both to increase
economic opportunities and to raise the standards of living
and the life possibilities of many in the world denied their
human dignity by the scourge of poverty.
In his interesting book Living on Thin Air, the
British author Charles Leadbeater, writes:
“The new (knowledge driven) economy needs a
mobilizing vision and institutions fashioned to make
it real. Bit by bit, our institutions are changing
through reform, reorganisation and restructuring —
but the process is much too slow, haphazard and
piecemeal — it must become more conscious,
imaginative and radical.”
Once more, the matter turns on the will of the
political leaders actually to discover among themselves
the moral and intellectual courage to do what is correct
and necessary. What is correct and necessary also requires
that in this field as well, which affects socio-economic
matters, we should review the functioning of all
multilateral institutions, including those that belong within
the United Nations family. This should be done to ensure
that these too reflect the very necessary imperative of the
democratization of the international system of governance.
The United Nations documents to which we referred
earlier give us a starting point. Accordingly, we believe
that there is no need for anyone among us to rediscover
a new vision that would inform our actions to build a new
world which affirms the dignity and worth of the human
person. What is necessary is that we match the beliefs we
profess with the necessary action.
We speak of action that will practically address the
related issues of peace, democracy and development.
I am certain that such a practical programme of
action would meet the aspirations not only of the
members of the Organization of African Unity and the
Non-Aligned Movement, of which we are a member. It
would also respond to the most deep-seated feelings of
the peoples of the developed North, who can have no
interest in conflict, oppression and poverty, even if these
occur beyond the borders of their own countries.
It also goes without saying that the democratic
systems in which we operate would also require that,
through committed advocacy, we should secure the
support of the electors for what should be a programme
of action of the United Nations for the twenty-first
century.
10


The evolution of human society has presented the
world leaders who will stand at this rostrum with new
possibilities to move our globe a giant step forward towards
a new actuality, of which the poor and the powerless dream
every day. We will be betraying those millions if we do not
act to turn their dream into reality. Let future generations
not say that because of the force of inertia we failed to act.




Please allow me to warmly congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the General Assembly at
this session. I am confident that with your wisdom and
experience, you will be able to accomplish your lofty
mission successfully. At the same time, I would like to
express my appreciation to Mr. Opertti for the
contribution he made as President of the General
Assembly at its previous session. I also wish to take this
opportunity to extend my sincere congratulations to the
Republic of Kiribati, the Republic of Nauru and the
Kingdom of Tonga on their admission to the membership
of the United Nations.
The current session of the General Assembly is of
special significance, as it is the last one of this century. A
review of the past may help us predict the future. In
retrospect, during the past century humanity, on the one
hand, created unprecedented material wealth and culture
and, on the other, suffered from the scourge of two world
wars and the ordeal of the cold war, which lasted for
almost 50 years. Since the end of the cold war, the world
has been moving towards multipolarity and the overall
international situation has started to relax. The
maintenance of peace, the pursuit of stability and the
promotion of development have become the common
aspiration and demand of the people of all countries.
Nevertheless, the harsh reality suggests that the world is
far from tranquil. The cold-war mentality still lingers on.
Hegemonism and power politics have manifested
themselves in new expressions. Military blocs are being
expanded and reinforced, and there is an increasing
tendency towards military intervention. Triggered by
ethnic, religious and territorial issues, regional conflicts
and disputes continue to emerge one after another. The
conflict between the North and the South has become
ever more acute. The gap between the rich and the poor
continues to grow. World peace is still elusive, and
development faces even more serious challenges.
Hegemonism and power politics are the root causes
of the turmoil in today’s world. The outbreak of war in
Kosovo sounded a resounding alarm. A regional military
organization, in the name of humanitarianism and human
rights, bypassed the United Nations to take large-scale
15


military actions against a sovereign State, thus creating an
ominous precedent in international relations. This act was
a violation of the United Nations Charter and other
universally recognized norms governing international
relations. It has eroded the leading role of the United
Nations in safeguarding world peace and security and
gravely undermined the authority of the United Nations
Security Council. During that war, the Chinese Embassy in
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was bombed, which
caused heavy casualties and much loss of property. It was
an incident such as has rarely been seen in diplomatic
history, and naturally roused the utmost indignation of the
entire Chinese people and the strong condemnation of the
international community.
As a permanent member of the Security Council,
China has held a clear and consistent position on the issue
of Kosovo. We seek no selfish interests and are only
upholding justice. For the sake of peace, we maintain that
the Kosovo issue should be resolved through peaceful
negotiations on the basis of respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and with guarantees of the legitimate rights and interest of
all ethnic groups in Kosovo. We are opposed to the use of
force under any pretext.
Mankind is on the threshold of the twenty-first
century. Where should the world go? What kind of new
international political and economic order should be
established? These are urgent questions facing the
Governments and the peoples of all countries.
The world is undergoing significant and profound
changes. A changed world calls for a corresponding new
international political and economic order. World peace and
development demand the establishment of a just and
reasonable new international order, which is the common
aspiration of the international community. It should be
based on the five principles of peaceful coexistence, the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and
other universally recognized principles governing
international relations. In this connection, I wish to
highlight the following points.
The first relates to sovereign equality and non-
interference in the internal affairs of others. Such arguments
as human rights taking precedence over sovereignty and
humanitarian intervention seem to be in vogue these days.
Some countries have even put such arguments into practice.
We believe that it is the sacred duty of all Governments to
promote and protect human rights and fundamental
freedoms, and that all countries have an obligation to
promote and protect the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of their own peoples in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and
international human rights instruments, and in the light of
their respective national conditions and relevant laws. But
as political systems, levels of economic development,
history, cultural background and values vary from country
to country, it is only natural that countries should have
different interpretations and even diverging views on
human rights. Countries should engage in dialogue and
exchanges on the basis of equality and mutual respect so
as to better understand each other, expand common
ground and handle their differences properly, rather than
resort to confrontation or interference in the internal
affairs of others under the pretext of human rights.
The issue of human rights is, in essence, the internal
affair of a given country, and should be addressed mainly
by the Government of that country through its own
efforts. Ours is a diversified world. Each country has the
right to choose its own social system, approach to
development and values that are suited to its national
conditions. The history of China and other developing
countries shows that a country’s sovereignty is the
prerequisite for and the basis of the human rights that the
people of that country can enjoy. When the sovereignty
of a country is put in jeopardy, its human rights can
hardly be protected effectively. Sovereign equality, mutual
respect for State sovereignty and non-interference in the
internal affairs of others are the basic principles governing
international relations today. In spite of the major changes
in the post-cold-war international situation, these
principles are by no means out of date. Any deviation
from or violation of these principles would destroy the
universally recognized norms governing international
relations, and would lead to the rule of hegemonism; if
the notion of “might is right” should prevail, a new gun-
boat policy would wreak havoc, the sovereignty and
independence by virtue of which some small and weak
countries protect themselves would be jeopardized and
international peace and stability would be seriously
endangered.
The Kosovo crisis has proved that to engage in so-
called humanitarian intervention in a sovereign State with
neither a mandate from the Security Council nor the prior
consent of the country concerned will cause a greater
humanitarian catastrophe instead of resolving the problem.
In view of this, under the current circumstances, the
principles of respect for State sovereignty and non-
interference in the internal affairs of others must be
16


effectively strengthened rather than weakened in order to
maintain world peace and stability.
The second principle is the pacific settlement of
international disputes. This principle, initiated by the Hague
peace conference 100 years ago, is now an important
principle of the United Nations Charter and a basic
principle of contemporary international law. History shows
that deviation from this principle over the past century has
led to, “the scourge of war, which twice ... has brought
untold sorrow to mankind”, and to foreign aggression,
which has inflicted tremendous suffering on the peoples of
a number of countries. In the current international situation,
adherence to the principle of the pacific settlement of
international disputes is still highly relevant to the
contemporary world.
The pacific settlement of international disputes is
predicated on the non-use and non-threat of force in
international relations. We maintain that handling State-to-
State relations with the mentality and modalities of “hot”
wars, cold wars, power politics or bloc politics will get
nowhere. All international disputes and regional conflicts
should be resolved in a fair and reasonable manner through
peaceful negotiation and consultation on the basis of
equality, rather than through the arbitrary use or threat of
force based on the power of military superiority. Only in
this way can fundamental solutions to disputes or conflicts
be found without complicating or aggravating them or
leaving behind a hidden peril. And only in this way can
States coexist in harmony and achieve common
development. This is the only way to lasting peace and
stability in the world. Otherwise, the world will never be a
tranquil place.
The third principle relates to strengthening the role of
the United Nations and preserving the authority of the
Security Council. The role of the United Nations is
indispensable for the achievement of genuine peace and
development and for the establishment of a just and
reasonable new international order. Strengthening the role
of the United Nations is in line with the historical trend; it
meets the needs of the times and conforms to the shared
aspiration of all the world’s peoples. In order to strengthen
the role of the United Nations, efforts should first be made
to uphold the sanctity of the purposes and principles of the
Charter. The most important reason why the United Nations
has been able to grow from 51 founding Members to its
current size is that it has acted according to these purposes
and principles. Those purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations have already taken deep root in
international practice and form a legal basis on which
peaceful and friendly relations between countries are
guided. It is the view of the Chinese Government that
despite the great changes that have taken place in the
international situation, the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter are still relevant. We are opposed
to any irresponsible interpretation or revision of them,
with whatever excuse.
If the United Nations role is to be strengthened, the
authority of the Security Council must be preserved.
According to the provisions of the Charter, the Security
Council shoulders primary responsibility for safeguarding
international peace and security. It has been proved that
the role of the Security Council is irreplaceable. Given
the current circumstances, it is imperative to preserve its
authority and leading role. Any act to weaken this
authority or to impose the will of an individual country or
a group of countries on the Security Council is very
dangerous. Instead of contributing to the maintenance of
peace, it will further breed power politics and
hegemonism and will give rise to endless troubles.
If the United Nations role is to be strengthened, it is
essential to ensure that all Member States have the right
to equal participation in international affairs, so that their
reasonable propositions will be fully reflected and their
legitimate rights and interests protected by the United
Nations. Decisions adopted by the United Nations must
give expression to the common will of the majority of its
Member States. Any attempt by a few countries or a
group of countries to monopolize world affairs and decide
the destiny of the people of other countries goes against
the trend of the times and will never succeed.
Fourthly, we must foster a new security concept and
safeguard international security. The old security concept
is based on military alliance and arms build-up and does
not help safeguard international security, still less build a
lasting peace in the world. In today’s world it is
necessary to foster a new security concept that satisfies
the needs of the times and to explore new ways of
maintaining peace and security. The core of the new
security concept should be mutual trust, mutual benefit,
equality and cooperation. The Five Principles of Peaceful
Coexistence and the purposes of the United Nations
Charter are the political foundation for the maintenance of
international security, while mutually beneficial
cooperation and common development constitute its
economic guarantee. Dialogue on an equal footing, full
consultation and peaceful negotiations are the right way
to maintain international security.
17


Relaxation in the international situation and the
disarmament process are complementary to each other. It is
regrettable, however, that some recent negative
developments in the international situation have seriously
hindered the healthy development of the disarmament
process. How to promote the disarmament process, prevent
an arms race and safeguard international security have
become pressing concerns for the international community.
We are opposed to any attempt, on the basis of excuses that
are not genuine, to seek military strength that goes beyond
a country’s legitimate defence needs. We are also opposed
to any attempt to restrict and weaken other countries in the
name of disarmament and non-proliferation in order to seek
absolute, unilateral security supremacy for one country or
group of countries. We call on the international community
to take the new security concept as a guideline and
wholeheartedly promote the healthy development of the
disarmament process, in the interest of world peace and
security.
Fifthly, we must reform the international economic
system and promote the common development of all
countries. The old and irrational economic order has
seriously impeded the sound development of the world
economy, further widening the wealth gap between the
North and the South. The East Asian financial crisis that
broke out two years ago has affected many countries in the
world. To prevent financial risks and ensure economic
security has become an urgent task facing many countries,
especially the developing countries. The world economy is
an interrelated and indivisible whole. All members of the
international community should take a responsible approach
and, in a spirit of risk sharing, strengthen their cooperation
and jointly promote a steady growth of the world economy.
Therefore, it is necessary to reform the current
international economic and financial systems. The United
Nations and the international financial institutions should
earnestly construct a framework to prevent and overcome
financial and other economic risks. Accordingly, the
developed countries should take on more obligations. The
developing countries have the right to equal participation in
world economic decision-making and the formulation of
relevant rules. In the new round of negotiations that will
soon begin in the World Trade Organization, the reasonable
demands of developing countries should be fully reflected.
Cooperation should be strengthened on the basis of mutual
benefit. No country should prejudice other countries’
economic security and development by virtue of its
economic, technological and financial advantages. We
should all oppose trade discrimination, the rich bullying the
poor and the arbitrary resort to economic sanctions or the
threat of sanctions against other countries. The developed
and developing countries both have their own advantages
and should learn from each other to make up for their
deficiencies so as to achieve common sustainable
development.
Moreover, on such global issues as the environment,
population, poverty and debt the developed countries
should not shirk their responsibility and obligation; rather,
they should take the lead in providing technological and
financial assistance to the developing countries. We deem
it necessary for the United Nations to hold a special
conference at an appropriate time to discuss the
globalization of the world economy, in order to promote
international cooperation in this field and to achieve
common prosperity.
The People’s Republic of China will soon celebrate
its fiftieth anniversary. For half a century, especially in
the last 21 years of reform and opening-up, earth-shaking
changes have taken place in China, and the Chinese
people have scored tremendous achievements in socialist
economic, political and cultural development as well as in
diplomatic and other endeavours. Following Hong Kong’s
return to the motherland the year before last, the Chinese
Government will soon resume the exercise of sovereignty
over Macao. At present, China enjoys political stability,
sustained economic growth, national unity, social
tranquillity and progress. Although difficulties and serious
challenges still lie ahead, we are confident and capable of
overcoming the difficulties, rising to the challenges and
forging ahead with every aspect of the socialist cause of
building a strong, prosperous, democratic and culturally
advanced country.
In the face of international vicissitudes, the Chinese
Government will steadfastly take up economic
development as the central task, resolutely press ahead
with reform and opening up, consistently maintain social
stability and unswervingly pursue an independent foreign
policy of peace. We are willing to continue to develop
friendly relations and cooperation on the basis of the five
principles of peaceful coexistence with all other countries
in the world and to make our due contribution to
safeguarding world peace and promoting common
development.
The Chinese Government and people will, as always,
resolutely safeguard China's sovereignty and territorial
integrity and will continue to advance the great cause of
national reunification. It is a fact universally recognized
by the international community that there is only one
18


China in the world, that Taiwan is an inalienable part of
Chinese territory and that the Government of the People's
Republic of China is the sole legitimate government
representing the whole of China. China's territory and
sovereignty are absolutely indivisible. The ultimate
reunification of the motherland represents the common
aspiration and firm resolve of all the Chinese people,
including our compatriots on Taiwan. No force can hold us
back in this great cause.
The Chinese Government will continue to adhere to its
established policy for settling the question of Taiwan. We
are firmly opposed to any efforts to create “independence
for Taiwan”, “two Chinas”, or “one China, one Taiwan”.
All moves to divide the motherland are doomed to failure.
China's great cause of national reunification can and will be
accomplished.
A few days ago a powerful earthquake shook China's
province of Taiwan. This earthquake caused heavy loss of
life and property damage for our compatriots in Taiwan.
We are extremely concerned about this catastrophe and
express our sympathy to our compatriots on the island. We
also express our condolences to the families of the victims
of the earthquake. People on both sides of the strait are
brothers and sisters in one big family. The disaster that hit
Taiwan and the pains of our compatriots on the island are
shared by the entire Chinese people. We will provide every
possible support and assistance to alleviate the harm caused
by the earthquake.
I take this opportunity to thank the President of the
General Assembly and the international community as a
whole for their sympathy, condolences and assistance.
The twenty-first century is dawning. The future of the
world is bright, and the new century is bound to be a more
splendid one than this. The Chinese people stand ready to
work with the people of other countries for the
establishment of a just and rational new international order,
for peace and development in the new century, and for the
overall progress of human society.





First of all, I would like
to warmly congratulate you, Sir, on your election to the
presidency of the fifty-fourth session of the General
Assembly and to wish you every success in this difficult
office.
I should also like to thank Foreign Minister Opertti for
his tireless dedication in successfully presiding over the
fifty-third session of the General Assembly.
I welcome Kiribati, Nauru and Tonga, with which
Germany has long enjoyed friendly ties, as new Members
of the world Organization.
I endorse the statement of my Finnish colleague, Tarja
Halonen, on behalf of the European Union.
This session of the General Assembly is the last in
this “century of extremes”, as the British historian Eric
Hobsbawm called the century now drawing to a close. That
is reason enough to take stock. Since its foundation, the
United Nations has greatly enhanced relations between
peoples. The development of international law, protection
of human rights, decolonization, worldwide humanitarian
and disaster aid, arousing awareness of the great problems
facing mankind, such as population growth, poverty and the
global environmental crisis — all of this would be
inconceivable without the United Nations.
There is no alternative to the United Nations
objectives and values — peace, human rights, freedom,
justice and development — and they have gained
worldwide recognition, even if, unfortunately, they are not
always respected everywhere. Nevertheless, even after more
than 50 years, there is still a long way to go before they are
universally respected and implemented. Despite all its
efforts, the international community has not yet succeeded
in ridding our planet of war, oppression, tyranny, expulsion
and grave human rights violations, including genocide. At
the close of this century, the United Nations and its
Member States are unable to fully master their core task,
namely, safeguarding peace and security. The great hope
that following the end of the East-West conflict the era of
multilateral cooperation and worldwide rule of law would
dawn has not yet come to fruition.
Today the question of peacekeeping must be
considered under conditions very different to those during
the United Nations early years. First, most conflicts today
are internal rather than international, as in earlier times.
Secondly, the role of the nation State has been
considerably relativized by the increased importance of
human rights and the globalization of the economy and
society. Against this background, the question of
peacekeeping arises more and more in an area of tension
between traditional State sovereignty and protection of
human rights.
What is to be done when entire States collapse and
the civilian population is massacred in never-ending civil
wars from all sides? What if ethnic tensions in a State are
partly provoked by criminal Governments, which then
respond with pogroms, mass expulsions and mass
murders, even genocide? Should the United Nations then
regard State sovereignty as more important than
protection of individuals and their rights? Rwanda,
Kosovo and East Timor are dramatic examples of this.
In many ways, therefore, the Kosovo conflict
represents a turning point. The international community
could no longer tolerate a State waging war against its
own people and using terror and expulsion as a political
instrument. As Secretary-General Kofi Annan said in his
brilliant and trail-blazing speech to the fifty-fifth session
of the Commission on Human Rights, no Government has
the right to use the cover of the principle of State
sovereignty to violate human rights. Non-interference in
internal affairs must no longer be misused as a shield for
dictators and murderers. The World Conference on
Human Rights in Vienna reaffirmed this in 1993, with the
approval of all United Nations Members States, with the
words:
“the promotion and protection of all human rights is
a legitimate concern of the international
community”. (Vienna Declaration and Programme
of Action, I, para. 4)
However, the Kosovo conflict also marks a change
of direction in the development of international relations.
How will the international community decide in the
future — this question has just been raised once more in
East Timor — when it comes to preventing massive
human rights violations against an entire people? Two
developments are conceivable.



A practice of humanitarian interventions could evolve
outside the United Nations system. This would be a very
problematic development. The intervention in Kosovo,
which took place in a situation where the Security Council
had tied its own hands after all efforts to find a peaceful
solution had failed, was intended to provide emergency
assistance and, ultimately, to protect the displaced Kosovo
Albanians. The unity of the European States and the
Western Alliance, as well as various Security Council
resolutions, were of crucial significance here. However, this
step, which is only justified in this special situation, must
not set a precedent for weakening the United Nations
Security Council's monopoly on authorizing the use of legal
international force. Nor must it become a licence to use
external force under the pretext of humanitarian assistance.
This would open the door to the arbitrary use of power and
anarchy and throw the world back to the nineteenth century.
The only solution to this dilemma, therefore, is to
further develop the existing United Nations system in such
a way that in the future it is able to intervene in good time
in cases of very grave human rights violations, but not until
all means of settling conflicts peacefully have been
exhausted and — this is a crucial point — within a strictly
limited legal and controlled framework.
In the twenty-first century the individual and his rights
must take a more prominent place alongside the rights of
States in the concept of security as defined by the
international community. The reform of the Security
Council, the central body for safeguarding world peace,
must be oriented towards this principle. The Security
Council is, in fact, authorized to act, and able to do so,
where peace or security are at risk due to internal
developments. This has been demonstrated by a long chain
of decisions, from the apartheid resolution to the
interventions in Iraq, Bosnia and Haiti. However, in
Rwanda, Kosovo and the Congo, decision making in the
Security Council was blocked, thus rendering it unable to
live up to its responsibilities enshrined in the United
Nations Charter, with disastrous results for the peoples in
question.
These conflicts are a pressing reason, particularly in
view of the important Millennium General Assembly, to
finally carry out the long-overdue substantial reform of the
Security Council. The Security Council must be adapted to
the new realities of the global political situation. It must
have a more representative composition and, above all, it
must be equipped to react to the crises and conflicts of
today. Reform must involve enlargement to include both
more permanent and non-permanent members, as well as a
strengthening of its decision-making powers. As the
Assembly knows, Germany has for some time now
expressed its willingness to assume more and lasting
responsibility in this connection. We stand by this
unreservedly.
In the debate on reform we must not avoid the issue
of the permanent members' right of veto, a question of
key importance for the Security Council's capability to
act. The right of veto is regarded by many as outdated in
its current form. However, it is a situation with which we
have to reckon internationally for a long time to come.
How then can decision-making in the Security Council be
made more efficient?
According to the Charter, the Security Council acts
with the mandate, and on behalf, of all United Nations
Member States. But hitherto they have not been entitled
to learn why a State has exercised its right of veto. This
is not only neither democratic nor transparent, but also
makes it easier for States to veto a draft resolution
unilaterally for national rather than international interests.
The introduction of an obligation for a State to explain to
the General Assembly why it is vetoing a draft resolution
would make it more difficult to do so and thus bring
about substantial progress towards using the right of veto
more responsibly. Why should not the General Assembly
assume more responsibility in the future, too?
A second approach to making the international
peacekeeping system more efficient would be via Chapter
VIII of the United Nations Charter, namely by
strengthening the regional security systems and
redistributing tasks and areas of responsibility among
them and the United Nations. It is becoming clear that the
regional organizations could be allocated an even greater
implementation role. This would also foster the
capabilities of regional organizations to engage in security
cooperation, as well as their collaboration with the United
Nations. However, the primacy of the Security Council
remains absolutely essential.
Without reforms in the area of peacekeeping, the
Security Council will be circumvented more and more
frequently, resulting in the erosion of the Security Council
and, ultimately, of the entire United Nations system. The
United Nations, one of civilization's greatest achievements
this century, as well as the values and principles it
represents, would thus be at risk of subsiding into
insignificance. We must prevent that.
12


The disaster in East Timor is currently demonstrating
how necessary close cooperation is between a Security
Council capable of taking action and the countries in the
region. The Security Council's mandate to send a
multilateral peacekeeping force must be fully implemented.
Indonesia must now cooperate closely with the United
Nations Mission and do everything in its power to
guarantee its success. The bloodshed must end. The victims
must be helped. Those displaced must be able to return
home safely. Germany has already provided humanitarian
and food aid. We will send a medical corps to assist the
peacekeeping troops and make further contributions towards
rebuilding the destroyed country. I am confident that our
Parliament will lend this plan its full backing.
In Africa, the Great Lakes region, the Congo and
Sierra Leone have for many years been the scene of terrible
wars, mass murders, destruction and much suffering on the
part of refugees. The Organization of African Unity (OAU)
and the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and its Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) have
done much to contain and resolve these conflicts. However,
these organizations also need the support of the United
Nations, in Sierra Leone, in the Congo and, in particular, in
the conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Both parties to
the conflict must observe the agreements concluded and
work closely together with the United Nations and the OAU
so that the peace process now begun can be brought to a
successful conclusion.
The international community must focus on the causes
rather than merely the symptoms of wars and conflicts in
the context of multilateral peacekeeping. Secretary-General
Kofi Annan rightly called for a “culture of prevention” to
be developed in order to prevent the outbreak of wars and
avert natural disasters more effectively in future.
Everyone knows how difficult the transition from the
“culture of reaction” to the “culture of prevention” will be.
It takes a lot of persuading to summon up the political and
economic will for measures intended to prevent something
which we hope will never happen. However, on financial
grounds and, above all, on humanitarian grounds, it is our
duty and responsibility to revise our thinking here. Progress
is urgently required in four areas.
First, we must move on from early warning to early
response. The United Nations has considerable resources at
its disposal for preventive diplomacy, which must be used
even more. There is also a great potential for synergy in
cooperation with non-governmental organizations.
Secondly, peacekeeping operations must be carried
out before conflicts erupt. The United Nations mission in
Macedonia has set a standard in this respect.
Thirdly, disarmament and the non-proliferation of
means of mass destruction are in need of fresh political
impetus. It is essential that the Geneva negotiations gain
momentum, particularly in the fields of global nuclear
disarmament and the verification of biological weapons,
and in the implementation of the Chemical Weapons
Convention. Furthermore, Germany advocates the
adoption of a convention on preventing the illegal transfer
of small arms worldwide.
Fourthly, peace-building is a prevention task of
growing importance. With the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), the United
Nations is facing one of the most comprehensive tests in
its history. Building public order by creating an efficient
judicial system and quickly sending the pledged
international police units is now crucial. Since the United
Nations began incorporating national police units in the
international standby system, they have been able to act
more swiftly. We must continue along this path.
Protection of human rights and the growing
democratization of States form the basis for a preventive
peace policy and civil conflict management. It is a
historical fact that democracies with a well-developed
civil society hardly ever wage war against each other.
Lasting economic success cannot be achieved in the
globalized information society of tomorrow without good
governance founded on human rights, the separation of
powers and a functioning legal and constitutional
framework.
In the field of human rights, welcome progress has
been made towards broadening the legal basis for
international relations, particularly during the last year.
The detention of Pinochet and the indictment of Milosevic
by the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia are milestones along the path towards creating
a world in which the rule of law prevails. In future,
dictators and perpetrators of human rights violations will
no longer be able to rely on not being called to account
for their actions. This must also apply to the murderers of
Dili and those who issued the orders. Just like everywhere
else in the world, internal peace is contingent upon
justice.
The adoption of the Statute of the International
Criminal Court represented a quantum leap in the
13


development of international law. I call upon all States to
respect the integrity of the Rome Statute, to sign it and to
swiftly ratify it, so that the Court can commence work next
year.
Germany is doing all it can to bring about progress in
the following fields of human rights. The heinous crimes of
child trafficking and child prostitution must be banned
throughout the world, as must the use of child soldiers. In
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflicts,
the age limit must be raised to 18.
In many countries women are still largely without
rights and protection and subjected to discrimination and
violence. This is an unacceptable injustice. Unfortunately,
our world is still a long way from genuine equality, even
with regard to fundamental rights. We must therefore aim
to adopt the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women.
In our view, the death penalty cannot be justified
either ethically or legally. Together with its European
partners, Germany will therefore continue to vigorously
work towards ensuring the implementation of the joint
resolution on abolishing the death penalty.
Protection of press freedom must be improved. The
freedom to inform is a reliable gauge of respect for human
rights. Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights guarantees the right to freedom of opinion.
However, censorship, intimidation and reprisals are the
order of the day in many countries. It is particularly
shocking that year after year dozens of journalists are killed
while on assignment. The United Nations should take a
closer look at this issue and consider practical solutions as
well as enhance legal protection for journalists. To this end
we will shortly be extending invitations to a conference to
be held in Germany.
The United Nations third major task alongside
peacekeeping and promoting human rights in the coming
century will be to bring about a reconciliation between rich
and poor countries.
The tenth Human Development Report of the United
Nations Development Programme came to the sad
conclusion that globalization has further widened the gap
between rich and poor countries. The international
community must endeavour to counter this trend. The
development of the poorer and the poorest countries must
not be left to the invisible hand of the global market. The
individual, not the market, must be the focus of the
globalization debate. This will also require greater
steering at the political level.
The rich countries have a responsibility to help poor
countries take advantage of globalization and enable them
to have a fairer share of the world economy by assisting
them with internal reforms and by opening up markets.
Within the framework of its European Union and Group
of 8 presidencies, Germany launched substantial
initiatives, which must be further developed in the form
of the 1999 Köln Debt Initiative and the commencement
of negotiations on a follow-up arrangement for the Lomé
Convention.
Development cooperation in the broadest sense must
become one of the United Nations core tasks to a greater
degree than hitherto. Science and technology are geared
far too much to the problems of rich countries. Why do
we not make greater use of the United Nations framework
to build bridges here? The economist Jeffrey Sachs made
the interesting suggestion, for example, that a millennium
vaccine fund could be established, with guaranteed
markets in the future for vaccines against tropical viruses
such as tuberculosis, malaria and, above all, AIDS.
Furthermore, in the context of the emergence of a global
knowledge society, the international regime for the
protection of intellectual property must be revised in order
to ensure that the world’s poor do not lose a large part of
their rights and freedoms in the near future. Rich and
poor countries should get together with one another more
frequently to discuss such proposals. During its
presidency of the Group of Eight, Germany made a start
by meeting the non-aligned countries and the Group of
77.
The destruction of the environment has long since
ceased to be a soft issue, but, rather, has become a very
hard question which will have an increasingly strong
impact on international security. According to the new
study by the United Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP), global warming and water shortages will be the
biggest problems facing humanity in the coming century.
UNEP also rightly draws attention to the close connection
between environmental destruction, poverty and excessive
consumption. The deadlock in the climate protection
negotiations must finally be overcome and the Kyoto
Protocol implemented. The destruction of the rain forest
must be stopped and further desertification prevented, and
we must halt the squandering of our planet’s natural
resources and switch to renewable energy as quickly as
possible. The world does not have much time left to
14


remap a course towards sustainability. This will also require
a much more active population policy, including a
long-term strategy to deal with the ageing of our world’s
population. The International Plan of Action on Ageing,
adopted in 1982, is in need of urgent revision. We intend
to hold a ministerial conference in Germany on this issue
under the auspices of the Economic Commission for
Europe.
With the leap into the next millennium, the nation
State principle will continue to diminish in importance. It
will no longer be possible to find answers to major global
problems within the framework of the traditional nation
state. Rather, this will take place in a strengthened
international structure and with a transfer of power to
international organizations, with the United Nations at their
head. This will entail a transformation of traditional power
into justice, the reconciliation of interests and a greater role
for civil society in the international political system, with
the ever-greater involvement of representatives of civil
society and industry. Reaching agreement on minimum
standards with regard to social issues — on the issue of
child labour, for example — will be possible in many cases
only in a global context. I support the proposal put forward
by Secretary-General Kofi Annan that a global pact on
common values and principles be concluded within the
framework of a public/private partnership, between the
United Nations and major companies, in order to lend the
law of the market a human face.
The United Nations must become the core of effective
global governance. Strengthening the United Nations, which
must begin by guaranteeing its financial basis, is therefore
one of Germany’s most important foreign policy objectives.
During the past 50 years, and for the first time in its
history, Germany has been opting wholeheartedly for
integration into multilateral structures, thereby achieving
democracy, freedom and reunification. Today, out of a
sense of deep conviction and historical responsibility, our
country is committed to peaceful reconciliation of interests
and to multilateralism. We are taking this conviction with
us to our old and new capital, Berlin. In the international
State system of tomorrow the answer to the challenges of
globalization will come from multilateralism alone. Our
world will always be plural, and no form of unilateralism
can therefore work in the long run. For that reason, the
twenty-first century, with its more than 6 billion people and
their States, will need a United Nations that is capable of
taking action. The United Nations and its Members can
therefore be certain that we Germans will be their
staunchest allies in the efforts to strengthen the United
Nations.


I would like
first of all to congratulate you, Sir, on your election to the
presidency of the fifty-fourth session of the General
Assembly. It attests to the esteem in which the
international community holds you and your country. I
would like to include in this tribute the Secretary-
General, who bears the weighty responsibility of
promoting the universality of the Organization and the
effectiveness of its action. Lastly, I wish to congratulate
the three new Members of the United Nations. The great
and fine ideal that the United Nations embodies is very
much alive — of this I am firmly convinced.
The United Nations is undertaking a grand civilizing
endeavour, a task that is constantly being challenged but
ever necessary. To unite peoples to work together for
peace and development, to affirm a body of legal rules
framing relations among States and to achieve common
standards: that is the goal of the United Nations — a
civilizing goal.
That goal is achieved first of all through the peaceful
settlement of conflicts. The role of the Security Council
in this mission is more vital than ever, a pre-eminence it
derives from the Charter. France will recall this
fundamental rule as often as necessary. To be sure, there
have been circumstances when an urgent humanitarian
situation dictated we should act immediately, but such an
26


approach must remain an exception. We must take care, as
in the case of Kosovo, to reintegrate this action into the
context of the Charter. Our fundamental rule is that it is for
the Security Council to resolve crisis situations. For that
reason, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization’s new
strategic concept recalls that the Washington Treaty
recognizes the primary responsibility of the Security
Council in the maintenance of peace.
Indeed, the universal nature of the Organization is
intangible. The United Nations must strive to respond to
crises, wherever they may occur. While we have not
hesitated to do precisely that in recent years and on several
continents, I would like to express regret at the relative
timidity of the Organization where Africa is concerned. The
extent of the tragedies on that continent requires us to take
more resolute action.
Universality is compatible with complementarity in
action. In the interests of efficiency, the United Nations
must encourage, in every part of the world, regional
arrangements among States capable of handling crises in
the first instance. Such is the spirit of Chapter VIII of the
Charter. Tasks should be realistically shared between the
regional organizations and the Security Council without
weakening the latter’s authority. For instance, my country
has, through the RECAMP programme, along with others,
strengthened African peacekeeping capabilities through
assistance provided under United Nations auspices in
cooperation with the Organization of African Unity.
International security also demands continued
disarmament in the context of multilateral and verifiable
agreements. This is an ongoing objective for France, which
hopes that the work of the Conference on Disarmament will
be relaunched in the months prior to the Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. France would like to see
the prompt entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty, the start of negotiations on banning the
production of fissile materials for nuclear-weapon use, and
the conclusion of a verification protocol to the Biological
Weapons Convention. We would not support any
development that might bring the Anti-Ballistic Missile
Treaty into question and upset strategic balances.
The United Nations mission is not limited to the
settlement of conflicts between States. With humankind’s
growing aspirations for greater freedom and responsibility,
this mission extends to the safeguarding of human dignity,
within each State and, when necessary — as the Charter
allows — against States. State-instigated violence has
spawned serious humanitarian crises over the past few
years. Civilians have been targeted, whole populations
have been forcibly displaced, and refugee camps are not
longer secure. This is unacceptable. Consequently, we
must uphold the principle of international intervention,
under United Nations auspices, to assist the victims.
Every crisis recalls the need for the founding
principle of working for peace and for respect for the law
and the human person. A case in point is the conflict in
Kosovo. Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), which
laid down the foundations of the settlement, illustrates
these principles and this resolve.
We have set ourselves ambitious objectives: ensuring
security for all, organizing reconstruction, ensuring
coexistence between communities, transferring authority
to local leaders, and promoting democracy and pluralism.
The Secretary-General’s Special Representative and the
KFOR Commander have done remarkable work. Much,
however, remains to be done. The atrocities must be
stopped, the exodus stemmed and housing built before
winter. On the political front, preparations must be made
for the future, which will require establishing dialogue
between the communities. Elections will, I hope, be held
in the year 2000. France has made resolute efforts in this
respect, alongside its partners in the European Union,
which is providing half the international financing agreed
upon by the conference of donors for Kosovo.
In East Timor, another people is asking that its
rights be recognized. Overwhelmingly, it chose
independence through a referendum. Some have tried to
oppose that choice with violence. I therefore welcome the
adoption, on 15 September, of Security Council resolution
1264 (1999). It paves the way for the restoration of peace
and should enable the democratic process to be
successfully concluded. France is participating in the
international force established by decision of the Security
Council.
Our Organization therefore remains true to the
values we celebrated last year, on its fiftieth anniversary.
But much effort is still needed for these values to be
respected everywhere. To achieve this, it is essential to
strengthen international criminal law. France actively
supports the work of the international criminal tribunals
of The Hague and Arusha. The establishment of the
International Criminal Court will be a new and decisive
step in the progress of law. France hopes that it will be
set up quickly; to that end, it has already amended its
own Constitution.
27


To carry out its mission, the United Nations needs
assured means. In order to deal with financial difficulties
and prevent these from becoming a pretext for inaction, all
Member States must meet their financial obligations
vis-à-vis the Organization. France does so completely and
unreservedly. A responsible attitude on the part of
contributing States would advance the necessary reform of
the Organization, including that of its Security Council.
I should like to share with the Assembly my second
firm conviction: that the United Nations is admirably suited
to meeting the challenges of our new world. Indeed, its
mission is strengthened by globalization.
Initially, the idea of organizing relations between
States at the world level may have seemed utopian to some.
It was merely before its time. Indeed, I consider the United
Nations to be modern for the following reasons. Our global
and unstable world needs organization and the goal of the
United Nations has always been to seek a better
organization of the world. The United Nations is in step
with a networked world. It is itself a network, a rich and
unique panoply of specialized but independent and
coordinated agencies. In half a century, the United Nations
has made a tool for action which can be adapted to our
world. The United Nations has not aged; it has grown with
the world. It must allow us to face the new challenges
emerging in today’s world.
A contradictory state of affairs has replaced the
euphoric illusion which followed the end of the
confrontation between blocs 10 years ago. Globalization is
not monolithic. While it is unifying, it also divides. While
it generates remarkable progress, it also leads to
unacceptable inequalities. While it opens societies to one
another, it carries with it the threat of creating uniformity.
While it frees up energy, it also releases negative forces
that must be brought under control. The movement of
populations and the clash of cultures are therefore
accompanied by rising fears as to identity, by religious
intolerance and by xenophobia. France, which has a
presence on five continents and is itself a land of
immigration, has had experience of such confrontations in
its history. It knows the risks they entail and the wealth
they bring. We will give our full support to the world
conference on racism, to be held in 2001. Preventing the
emergence of prejudice, which too often has deadly
consequences, will prepare the way for peace for future
generations.
The fruits of globalization are not shared equally. The
opening of economies, the increase in trade and the
acceleration of technological progress all fuel growth. But
inequalities are growing between countries and within
each economy. Nearly one in four human beings lives in
great poverty. We cannot leave matters as they stand. The
rapid expansion of communications networks does not
benefit everyone. Yet the multiplication of sources of
information, the increased circulation of ideas and the
profusion of new inventions are full of promise. Lower
communications costs made possible by the Internet can
be an asset for businesses in countries in the South. But
inequalities in education hinder access to these
technologies. These impressive instruments for furthering
knowledge may become formidable factors in inequality.
Communication is also a right. It is essential that this
right not be threatened by the concentration in just a few
hands of sources of information and the means of
production and distribution. France will staunchly defend
cultural diversity.
Globalization must encourage all of us to take
account of the fragility of our world — our Earth and our
commonweal. Our environment is not a product, a simple
stock of raw materials on which we can draw without
giving thought to future generations. True development is
sustainable development. Since the Rio Summit in 1992
this realization has been behind the adoption of important
commitments with regard to the climate, biodiversity and
desertification. The Kyoto Protocol on climate change and
the current negotiations on a protocol on biosafety attest
to the importance of the achievements. But the uncertain
future of climates and the recurrence of natural
catastrophes urge us to make further efforts.
The Earth is fragile, but so, too, is the human
species. The spread of new epidemics endangers the
health of entire populations. Inequalities in development
exacerbate those scourges. Some 40 million people live
with the AIDS virus today, the majority of them in
developing countries. The spread of the pandemic in
Africa is a matter of major concern for us. I shall come
back to that issue.
Globalization is changing the nature of organized
crime, an area in which there has been a real explosion.
The much greater fluidity in movement allows criminal
networks to exploit the inconsistencies between one
national law and another and the weaknesses of some of
them so as to hide from justice. My country is ready to
make every effort to combat this scourge. The President
of the French Republic made that clear last year at the
special session of the General Assembly devoted to that
issue. The United Nations has long been engaged in the
28


fight against international drug-trafficking, building up
expertise, establishing specialized services and drafting a
body of doctrine and a legal framework. These must be
strengthened. But, above all, States must be more
committed to action. In January negotiations began in
Vienna on a convention against transnational organized
crime. We must bring this to a satisfactory conclusion in
the year 2000.
Faced with globalization, we have a choice to make.
We can either go along with the supposedly universal
economic laws, and in so doing abdicate our political
responsibilities, or we can seek to impose order on
globalization and thereby achieve control of our collective
future. For my part, I believe that global problems call for
global responses and that an unstable world needs to be
regulated, requiring what our Anglo-Saxon friends might
call “rules and regulations”. This world needs rules. It
needs the United Nations.
This choice is also a matter of sovereignty. As the
Secretary-General pointed out on 8 December last year in
Paris, the first words of our Charter, “We the Peoples of
the United Nations”, make it an expression of popular
sovereignty. But in order for the sovereignty of peoples to
be affirmed they must find the means to acquire the
mechanisms, the means of control and the benefits of
globalization. That is my third conviction. The more the
world becomes globalized, the more it needs rules. Faced
with the temptation of unilateralism, it is more necessary
than ever to base our action on multilateral rules respected
by all. First of all, these concern the economy. We must
define the rules of the game so that everyone can benefit
from globalization. We must define the rules of the game
between the industrial and developing countries and
between the major economic actors, small and medium-
sized business and the citizens of our countries who work
and produce.
In the financial sphere, we have to strengthen the
stability of the monetary and financial system by ensuring
the political legitimacy of the International Monetary Fund
(IMF), involving the developing countries more closely in
the adoption of common rules and making private financial
operators liable for the consequences of their decisions for
countries in crisis. Real progress has been made since the
crises of 1997 and 1998. France contributed to this by its
proposals, especially in regard to hedge funds and fiscal
havens. It will continue to work to this end, as much
remains to be done.
These rules of the game have to be based on better
coordination among international institutions. Since 1945,
international cooperation has respected the principle of
specialization of institutions. In the future, the task is to
make them more complementary. Economic and trade
rules cannot disregard the most elementary social and
environmental norms. Accordingly, France supported the
adoption by the International Labour Conference a year
ago of a declaration on the fundamental principles and
rights involved in labour. The International Labour
Organization (ILO) is an irreplaceable forum for dialogue
between government and social partners and for the
formulation of minimal standards. It is desirable that it
establish close relations with other organizations, such as
the World Trade Organization (WTO) and the World
Bank.
For these rules of the game to be better respected,
appropriate cooperation has to be established with the
poorest countries. Their debt burden continues to be the
primary obstacle to development. At their meeting in
Cologne, the G-7 countries pledged to grant further debt
relief. France contributed to this. Three principles will be
applied: solidarity, which calls for us to grant the poorest
countries the most favourable debt treatment; fairness,
which requires the rich countries to share the financial
effort in a balanced way; and responsibility, whereby the
countries benefiting from this aid undertake policies
directed towards sustainable development and the fight
against poverty. For these countries, official development
assistance remains indispensable. France will continue to
advocate greater effort on the part of the richest countries.
Our action should be increasingly inspired by the
affirmation of common values and rules. Human rights
are central to this approach. I am referring in particular to
the weakest children. The ILO Convention which outlaws
the worst forms of child labour is a new case in point.
The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the
Child must be supplemented as soon as possible by the
two protocols now being negotiated, one against the
recruitment of children in armed conflicts, the other
against the sale of children and child prostitution and
pornography.
To affirm the rights of women is to recognize their
decisive role in education, in the production of wealth and
in development. But it is also to combat the
discrimination and violence which they suffer. France has
made equality between women and men one of the
cornerstones in the renewal of its public life. The
additional protocol to the Convention on the Elimination
29


of All Forms Discrimination against Women, submitted to
the General Assembly for approval, offers women the
possibility to assert their rights in an individual capacity.
That is a major step forward. The special session of the
General Assembly in June 2000 will highlight the progress
that has been achieved since the 1995 Conference in
Beijing.
Reaffirming the right of all human beings to health
means combating pandemics everywhere. In December
1997, in Abidjan, France proposed the establishment of a
“therapeutic solidarity fund” to mobilize the international
community to care for and treat AIDS sufferers. The
countries of the South and associations involved in
combating the disease welcomed the proposal warmly. But
the impact of AIDS on development remains dramatic. We
must intensify our efforts to reduce this plague. Only the
United Nations can give these efforts the necessary breadth.
The principle of precaution has to be the basis for our
action regarding the environment and health safety. The
Montreal Protocol for the protection of the ozone layer,
based on the principle of differentiated commitments
between the North and South, is an example of well-
conceived international action. These efforts must be
continued. We will do so by advocating, with our European
Union partners, a world convention on forests and by
redoubling efforts to reduce carbon dioxide emissions in the
atmosphere. Precaution must also be the guiding principle
in monitoring food safety. The combination of concern for
sustainable agriculture, the quality of products and the
preservation of food traditions in each country explain the
intensity of recent reactions. France therefore intends to see
these demands taken into account at the forthcoming WTO
negotiations.
In order to address and overcome the world’s
problems, to derive the best from globalization, we need
nations to be aware of their responsibilities, and we need
also to have “more” of the United Nations. Through an
Organization strengthened by a renewed sense of mission,
supported by sovereign States and regional organizations,
we will be able to further respect for human rights, promote
democracy, work for sustainable development and help all
to achieve their potential.



It is just over half a
century since the then British Prime Minister, Clement
Attlee, presented the Charter of the United Nations to our
Parliament. He told our Parliament:
“We are seeking not merely good relations
between nations but between the human beings
within nations”.
The concept he saw expressed in the Charter of the United
Nations was revolutionary. That responsibility for the
security, freedom and development of people does not
belong solely to each State acting individually, but to all
nations of the world acting as a united body.
Over the past 50 years, the United Nations has done
much to discharge that responsibility. The United Nations
and its agencies have led programmes around the world that
have released the potential of individual human beings on
every continent. We have helped double the literacy rate
among women in developing countries. We have helped
immunize 80 per cent of the world's children against some
of the most lethal diseases. We have established the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights as the benchmark
for freedom for individuals. And this General Assembly
played a leading role in insisting on equal democratic
rights, regardless of race, and in forcing an end to
apartheid. Today the United Nations provides shelter and
sanctuary to refugees in every corner of the world.
As we meet this week, United Nations agencies
provide homes, food, welfare, health and education to 19
million refugees — more than the population of most
Member States. We should take pride in these
achievements, because it will help give us the confidence
to tackle the challenges that remain.
But we must also be frank about where we have
failed. We have failed to deliver peace to many of the
peoples of the world. We have not realized the vision of
our founders, of nations and peoples within them living
in peace with each other. We have averted world war. But
we have not averted a world with too much war.
That is why I want to support the excellent opening
address by our Secretary-General by focusing my remarks
also on what we must do if we are to replace failure to
halt war with success in preventing conflict. The
harrowing scenes we have witnessed this past year from
Kosovo, from Sierra Leone, from East Timor and too
many other places underline the urgency of improving our
performance in preventing conflicts and also in stopping
them once they have started.
I propose five priority areas for action. First, we
must tackle the root causes of conflict, starting with the
poverty that breeds it. War is becoming a poor man's
burden. In the modern world, wealthy nations no longer
experience the trauma of conflict on their soil. The
soundest basis for peace is prosperity, and the best way
we can prevent conflict is by promoting sustainable
development. The forthcoming Millennium Assembly
must make a reality of the commitment to halving the
proportion of people in extreme poverty and reducing the
number of nations in heavy debt.
Secondly, we must promote human rights and good
governance. Development of a nation will be more rapid
where people have the right to develop their full potential.
Conflict is more likely where governments rule without
the consent of their people.
Thirdly, we must curb the supply of weapons that
fuel conflict. For decades, the United Nations, rightly, has
focused on halting the spread of weapons of mass
destruction. Yet in truth, in those same decades, the
weapons that have killed masses in conflicts have been
the most common of small arms. In Friday's debate in the
Security Council, we will have the opportunity to take
forward action to halt the illegal trade in small arms, to
promote regional moratoriums on small arms and to limit
arsenals of military firearms to legitimate Government
agencies.
34


Fourthly, we must stop the illegal trade in diamonds
and other precious commodities which pay for the small
arms — and all too often the mercenaries — which sustain
conflict. The markets for these commodities, especially the
market in diamonds, are small and tightly located in a few
centres. We must encourage cooperation with those who
manage those markets to cut off the supply of funds to
those who are promoting conflict.
Lastly, I strongly endorse the view expressed by our
Secretary-General this morning that we must counter the
culture of impunity. Those who break international
humanitarian law, from Kosovo to East Timor, must know
that they will be held to account by the international
community.
The international criminal tribunals have shown what
can be done. We must build on their work by getting a
permanent international criminal court up and running with
all speed.
But we will not always succeed in preventing conflict.
We need, therefore, to be better equipped to restore peace
when war breaks out. As my Prime Minister, Tony Blair,
said in Chicago earlier this year, working out the conditions
and identifying the circumstances when it is right in the
modern world to intervene is the most pressing problem in
foreign policy today. His speech demonstrated that Britain
is anxious to play its full part in that debate. Our starting
point is that our common interest in preserving the world
from major conflict is greater than our individual interests
as nations.
Globalization is the long and rather ugly term which
is used to describe how in today’s world we are
interdependent with each other rather than independent of
each other. We are bound together by our strengthening
links in trade and investment, in travel and communication.
What happens in one country can have a direct impact on
the prosperity and the security — even the climate — of
countries on the other side of the world.
And we are also bound together by the consequences
of conflict. In Britain 90 per cent of the heroin on the
streets of our big cities is grown in Afghanistan under
cover of the generation-long conflict in that land. In central
Africa, the upheavals of population sparked by the mass
genocide in Rwanda have destabilized the region and
caught up half a dozen countries in the conflicts that have
ensued. Across the countries of Europe there are now
several hundred thousands of citizens of the former
Yugoslavia who have fled to seek sanctuary from the
repeated conflicts there. Just as few nations can stand
alone in the modern world, there are now few major
conflicts which remain only an internal matter with no
impact on the rest of the world.
If we are to respond adequately when conflict
breaks out, then the United Nations needs to develop
three strengths — credibility, consensus and capacity.
If the United Nations is to have the credibility to
press the parties to a conflict to a solution, it must be
more representative of the modern world. A small
increase in the size of the Security Council would be a
modest price to pay for the big increase in its credibility
which would come from a more representative permanent
membership.
But greater credibility would be pointless without
consensus on when the authority of the United Nations
should be invoked. Intervention must always be a last
resort. We can all agree that the first responsibility for
reconciling internal conflict rests with the State in which
that conflict arises. But we also have a shared
responsibility to act when we are confronted with
genocide, mass displacement of people or major breaches
of humanitarian law. To know that such atrocities are
being committed and not to act against them is to make
us complicit in them. And to be passive in the face of
such events is to make it more likely that they will be
repeated.
Credibility, though, also requires us to demonstrate
not just the consensus, but also the capacity, to act. We
often hear demands that the United Nations should do
something. Let us be honest — the United Nations is
nothing more than the aggregate of its Member States.
The United Nations cannot do something except when we,
its Member States, are prepared to provide the means.
We need to ensure that the United Nations has a
sound financial base, which requires all of us to meet our
assessed contributions in full, on time. But we must also
ensure that when peacekeeping forces are required, they
are made available. Britain has signed a standby
agreement earmarking forces we are prepared in principle
to provide for emergency peacekeeping work. Such
agreements enable the United Nations to plan for
emergencies with greater confidence that we can rapidly
put in the field the right skills, with the necessary
equipment. A score of other Member States have signed
similar agreements. The more of us that do so, the greater
35


will be the capacity of the United Nations in brokering a
basis for peacekeeping deployment.
But in Kosovo we discovered that it was less difficult
to put together an armed force to end the military violence
than to assemble a United Nations police force to keep civil
order. Today, therefore, I can announce that Britain will
follow up our standby agreement with the United Nations
on troops with a similar agreement increasing the number
of United Kingdom police officers available for United
Nations troops. This will include a commitment to a rapid
response squad, ready for deployment at short notice when
it is urgently needed. We shall also be establishing with the
United Nations a flagship training course in Britain to train
police from around the world to play their part in our joint
missions.
I am conscious that the agenda I have set out is an
ambitious one. But, in all humility, I have to say that it is
less ambitious than the visionary programme set out half a
century ago by the founders of the United Nations. As our
Secretary-General said earlier this year, unless we can unite
around the aim of confronting massive human rights
violations, against crimes against humanity, then we will
betray the very ideals of our founders.
In the modern world in which we live — the modern
world of satellite communications — we know instantly
when such violations are taking place. We have the
resources and the mobility to move our assets quickly in an
emergency. Modern technology has made all of us each
other’s neighbours. We now need to match that technology
with an international doctrine that also reflects the modern
world. And it must be founded on the clear principle that
the only war we agree to wage is one in which our nations
are united in combating conflict.





It is a particular pleasure to see
Mr. Gurirab presiding over the last session of the General
Assembly of the twentieth century. I consider myself
singularly fortunate and greatly honoured to be representing
my country, India, on this occasion. I do believe that, in the
many years that he spent here pursuing the dream of
independence for his people — which, happily, is now a
reality — he, more perhaps than others, has seen the United
Nations at its best. That is why the perspective that he
brings to the office of the President, enriched as it is by
living through the very articles of faith of the United
Nations, is near unique. I am sure we will all profit from it.
I take this opportunity also to warmly welcome three
new Members to the United Nations: Kiribati, Nauru and
Tonga. I have no doubt their presence shall enrich our
deliberations.
Even as I address this Assembly, the century draws to
a close and the world prepares to meet the year 2000. It is
only appropriate and instructive, therefore, to look back and
to reflect upon the journey that humanity set out upon 100
years ago. Where did we think we were then headed and
where have we actually reached? Could any then foresee
what 1999 would bring? Thus, are there, in the passage of
the years that have gone by, any landmarks that could
indicate a path for our future? For that, we need to assess
the twentieth century, and there is but one yardstick by
which we can judge: the criteria of the stated objectives
of the United Nations.
Indisputably, the twentieth has been the bloodiest of
all centuries. But, in contradistinction, it has also been a
century of the most profound transformations and of the
most significant social, political and technological
advancements. This, above all, has been the century of
the ascendancy of the individual and of democracy. It is
that period in which dynasties vanished and revolutions
swept empires off the face of ancient lands. Centuries-old
colonialism became history against the irresistible heave
of the colonized to reclaim their lands, their souls, so that
oppressed humanity could regain a voice, a say in its own
political and economic destiny. It is the century in which
we plumbed the depths of the oceans and soared into the
infinities of space; when man first set foot on the moon,
reached Mars and even deeper into the recesses of the
unknown. In a wired-up world, the computer has today
become what the fountain pen was in the early years of
the twentieth century. The revolution of the digital has
arrived.
Humanity today is healthier, better fed and more
sheltered than our forefathers were. But want and hunger,
disease and deprivation are still widespread, including in
developed societies. We have at our command more
information than ever before, but are we that much wiser?
Literacy has spread, but is mankind better educated? We
are more connected globally, but are we as humankind?
Have this linkage and interconnection reduced conflict
and animosity? And thus, the tabulation of our assets and
liabilities of this century flows.
As we have improved upon and added to almost
everything that we inherited in 1900, so most sadly have
we to violence, too. This century has been the most
bloodthirsty, perhaps because it is in these last 100 years
that humanity has employed science to perfect means of
killing as never before. Our passage has seen us move
from the Gatling gun to a world menaced today by
MIRVs. That early machine gun, the then-great mower
down of the early 1900s, seems today almost a toy by
comparison. We have split the atom, but employ the
released energy less for peace and more for weapons of
unimaginable destruction. Chemical defoliants and
sophisticated biological weapons are also this century's
contribution.
The century that passes experienced not two, but
three great wars. Each was a cataclysm, fought globally
and at enormous cost. When the first ended, the survivors
39


emerged from the trenches, searching for a better world so
that war would not recur. In response, we created the
League of Nations. But war, regrettably, was not avoided.
The League failed because we failed the League. And thus
followed the second great war, at the end of which the
world emerged armed with weapons that could destroy all
that human genius and ingenuity had created and every
vestige of life. But, from the ruins and devastation of the
second also emerged the United Nations, with mandates of
broader powers and responsibilities. The third great conflict
was the cold war. This deeply affected, shaped and
influenced the development of the United Nations. This
war, too, extracted a heavy price, directly and through
proxy conflicts, as well as political and social upheavals,
but then these became its epilogue. What significance lies
in the observation that no global peace conference has taken
place to mark the end of this last war?
The United Nations could have been cast anew, made
contemporary and democratized, drawing upon our
collective experience to tackle new challenges with greater
responsiveness. Can we, even now, do something at this
last session of the General Assembly of this millennium to
correct this? Can we pledge afresh to invest this institution
with faith, commitment, political will and the resources that
it needs to make it the vehicle capable of realizing the
aspirations of all humanity, an instrument that will steer
planet Earth into the next century?
We do not enjoy an abundance of options. The
sapping of the vitality or the diminishing of the centrality
of the United Nations must not be permitted. We have but
one Earth, and there is but one United Nations.
Another development of this century, of crucial
significance, is the transformation that we have experienced
in the role of the State. From an agency that controlled and
regulated all spheres of human activity, we move into a
phase wherein the State must become more supportive,
caring and encouraging of the citizen's individual and
collective endeavours; it must release, not contain, the
energies and genius of its people.
It would be an error, however, to assume that the days
of the State are over. The State continues to have a crucial
role and relevance; also, therefore, do national
sovereignties. The United Nations was not conceived as a
super-State. It will not ever become so, principally because
there is no viable substitute for the sovereign State. Even
globalization can work only through State intermediaries.
To diminish, marginalize or ignore the State would also be
bad practice, because the weaker the State is rendered, the
less it shall be able to promote the interests of its citizens.
The State needs to be strengthened functionally, not
weakened. Besides, it is axiomatic that a United Nations
of weak nations can only be a weak United Nations.
Globalization is an idea that has re-emerged, but also
its reverse: fragmentation. The first is politico-economic,
the second entirely political. Let us dwell a bit on this.
Obviously, the technology that is driving this process can
now scarcely be unlearned; the speed of travel and of
communications will only increase; the age of the digital,
as I said, has dawned. However, though globalization may
apparently be driven by impersonal market forces, it is in
reality impelled by power seeking political and financial
advantage. It is, in essence, a political process, and if
history teaches us anything, it is that such processes are
not linear. Simply in terms of economic indicators, the
world was as globalized at the turn of the century as it is
now. A backlash followed: barriers went up, confrontation
replaced cooperation and the world jostled into the
tensions that led to the first great war. Are we, for the
sake of temporary gain, perhaps even unwittingly,
repeating yesterday's mistakes? Political hindsight tells us
that globalization has to be politically directed for
creating equal economic opportunity, both within States
and among States.
In India, we cherish the creative genius of the
people. We believe that Indian excellence lies in the
freedom of the individual. We do not subscribe to
constricting choice through State impositions. But can free
markets offer true freedom of choice to those that are not
even a part of the market? That is why the State
continues to have the responsibility to protect the needy,
to strengthen the weak. That is a part of our democratic
creed, too.
We note that human rights have been made a cross-
cutting theme of the work of the United Nations. That is
important. The flowering, however, of human rights
requires economic development and growth because many
of the deprivations faced by individuals, whether in the
developed or in the developing world, are rooted in
marginalization created by poverty. We believe, therefore,
that development should be the cross-cutting theme of the
United Nations and that the multilateral development
system, which has been one of its successes, must be
strengthened, its focus narrowed to the core challenges of
economic growth with social justice, and it must be given
the resources it requires to respond to the needs of the
developing countries. The international community will
find that no investment yields better returns.
40


I have the honour to address the Assembly as a
representative of the largest democracy in the world. Even
now, as I share these thoughts, an electorate of about 600
million, matching the combined populations of the United
States, Canada and Western Europe, is going through the
exciting process of democratically electing its next
Government in my country. It is an awe-inspiring spectacle,
this unstoppable flow of the great Ganga of Indian
democracy. It is a democracy whose economy grew by
more than 6 per cent last year, even in the aftermath of the
major shocks to the international economy brought about by
what was described as the East Asian meltdown of the mid-
1990s.
We move with the challenges posed by globalization,
without either retreating into a “fortress India” or
abandoning our social objectives. We have worked out our
own answers and devised our own policies to meet these
new challenges because we hold that the sheer diversity of
mankind dictates differences in approach, in human beings'
respective search for relevant alternatives. This is a truth
borne out by the fact that the twentieth century has been
witness to the detritus of many false certainties.
Today, when capital moves without almost any
constraint, it is virtually impossible for developing countries
to resist either its demands or manage the consequences of
its sudden departure. Let us reflect upon the absence of
order, system or any global oversight of currency flows,
particularly short-term flows, even as we attempt to bring
order and equity to trade in goods, services and
commodities. But how are we to address the problem when
currency, instead of being a vehicle of trade, has in itself
become a commodity of trade, when the volume of trade in
currency daily has outstripped global trade in goods and
services or even global gross national product manifold?
If globalization is to benefit all, and as we simply
cannot accept that wheels of progress should grind down
the common man, then surely some new international
regulation, some order, is needed here. Let the United
Nations take the initiative to hold an urgent international
conference on financing for development.
In the political domain, too, managing change
demands openness and reasoned discourse, an essential
ingredient of which is abjuring violence. That is why
terrorism is the very antithesis of all that the United
Nations represents and stands for. Terrorism is the great
global menace of our age. In this age of democracy, it is a
violation of the very basic precepts of it. Because its
principal targets become the innocent, it is a crime against
humanity, a violation of basic human rights. It is also
now a grave threat to international peace and security.
That is why I urge that we strengthen the international
consensus against terrorism. India has called for a
comprehensive international convention against terrorism.
We hope to make progress on the issue in this session of
the General Assembly.
We also know how terrorism uses the international
financial system, how it exploits the breakdown of
countries and societies, and how it has preyed on the
nexus between drugs and the proliferation of small arms.
Thus, today, we witness a scimitar of narco-terrorism
cutting across the Caucasus to the South Asian
subcontinent. Two of the world’s largest sources of illicit
drugs flank us. Terrorism financed by drugs has for years
been the deadly export of our neighbours.
Here the crippling intermixing of cause and effect is
cruelly exemplified in Afghanistan. The world has been
witness to the decades-old distress of the innocent men,
women and children of that country. The disorders of
Afghanistan, and the near anarchy into which that country
has been pushed, are a consequence, chiefly, of the play
of external forces and of a reversion to medieval
fundamentalism of the most obscurantist variety. This
disorder now overspills; it is also exported. It is not that
human rights, particularly of women and children, are
routinely violated there; they simply do not exist.
Our relationships with this neighbour are ancient and
rooted in a past that we share. That is why we urge this
Assembly to be seized of the enormous human suffering
of the Afghans, and to encourage and support the early
formation of a Government truly representative of all
sections of that society and country.
Terrorism is a menace to which open societies are
vulnerable; it becomes particularly difficult for
democracies to counter when terrorists are armed,
financed and backed by Governments or their agencies,
and benefit from the protection of State power. Cross-
border terrorism, sponsored from across our borders, has
taken the lives of thousands of our citizens and ruined
those of countless others. We will counter it, as we have
done over the past decades, using the methods available
to a democracy. India will defeat such forces. That is both
our duty and our obligation to our citizens.
Earlier this year India was subjected, yet again, to an
act of premeditated aggression. In February this year,
hoping yet again to set aside the sterility of relations of
41


the past half century to set the South Asian subcontinent on
the path of development, with a view to addressing the real
adversaries of our region — poverty, want and hunger —
Prime Minister Vajpayee extended a hand of peace, amity
and cooperation to neighbouring Pakistan. The pathbreaking
bus journey from Delhi to Lahore followed. In Lahore we
concluded a triad of agreements, among which was the
Lahore Declaration. It was the route chart of moving
towards lasting amity and peace.
This act of faith was betrayed. Premeditated
aggression by regular forces was committed against India.
Not simply was the Lahore Declaration violated, but so was
the Simla Agreement, which had prevented conflict for
more than a quarter of a century. In self-defence, yet with
the utmost restraint, India took all necessary and
appropriate steps to evict the aggressor forces from its
territory. Most regrettably, this aggression has set back the
Lahore process of peace that we had initiated. For whereas
aggression over territory can more easily be vacated, that
territory of trust which has been transgressed is infinitely
more difficult to restore.
Permit me, Sir, to draw attention to the fact that this
aggression upon India in Kargil was a demonstration of
wanting to hold to ransom the world, through an act of
aggression. It was also a manifestation of the larger
disorders that the world has been witnessing in Afghanistan.
There is an aspect that I stress. It was a gross violation
of the Geneva Conventions when Indian soldiers taken
prisoner were tortured, subjected to inhuman treatment and
killed in captivity. These violations took place at a time
when the international community has repeatedly been
trying to establish the rule of law, stripping away the layers
of impunity that have protected those who give the orders
that lead to violations of international humanitarian law.
And it is thus that I find it necessary to reiterate some
essential verities of Indian nationhood. From the earliest
days of our struggle against imperialism and colonial rule
it has been an unquestionable article of faith with us that
India is one nation: a nation of many faiths, a diversity of
beliefs, a cultural harmony arranged through the interplay
of myriad forms and manifestations, but a unity,
strengthened by its pluralism, that is beyond question. And
of this is born India’s democratic vitality, too. Also of this
oneness and unity, the Indian State of Jammu and Kashmir
is an integral part, and shall remain so. Because this is not
any territorial dispute; it is the assertion of two antipodal
approaches to national identity. India has never represented
denominational nationhood; it is civic nationalism to which
we subscribe. That is why Jammu and Kashmir is not a
so-called core issue. It is at the very core of Indian
nationhood.
Yet the path of the India-Pakistan composite
dialogue process is open. No preconditions attend it. The
only essential ingredient that remains is an abjuring of
violence and cross-border terrorism, principles that are
integral to both the Simla Agreement and the Lahore
Declaration — indeed, the very process of peace itself.
This process needs to be resumed.
We have been greatly disappointed by this
compulsive hostility of Pakistan, because it is an
aberration in our region today, where all the other South
Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC)
countries are at peace with each other, and are trying,
bilaterally and through the SAARC mechanisms, to tackle
together the great challenge of development. But we
remain unshaken in our vision of cooperation and shared
prosperity of the South Asian region, as embedded in the
Charter of SAARC, as well as in our faith in the ability,
talent and will of the people of the region to take their
rightful place in the world community. The destiny of all
our peoples is linked. It is a region with a collective
history reaching back to the beginnings of human history
and of the highest civilizational accomplishments. In
striving to attain the promise of the future in our region,
we also see the recovery of a great past.
This is perhaps the right juncture at which to say a
few words about pluralism in an age of globalization.
Though we find sterile the debate over universal and
regional values, extreme positions are still taken on both
sides. In a spirit of engagement, we would urge our
partners in the West to be a bit more tolerant, and a bit
more introspective. While all democratic Governments try
to promote good governance, human rights and social
responsibility, the perspective they approach them from,
and their ability to implement them, vary. Rigidly
applying, as a universal paradigm, value systems that
reflect the state of western economies and societies in the
late twentieth century, produces an inevitable reaction,
which does not make either for dialogue or constructive
decisions.
Globalization has also influenced our thinking on
security issues by generating a greater awareness about
new security concerns. Equally important, with the end of
the cold war there is a growing realization that peace
cannot be maintained through balance of power or
hegemonic order. To maintain global peace and security,
42


to deal with threats of a global nature, the international
community has to accept the concept of collective security.
The United Nations provides a framework for such a
contract among nations. With the cold war behind us, the
General Assembly should reactivate this framework.
Global nuclear disarmament was the objective set out
by the 1946 General Assembly in the first resolution that it
adopted. That objective still beckons us.
I say this as the representative of a country that has
been obliged to acquire nuclear weapons because of the
failure of the existing non-proliferation regime to address
our primary security concerns. Yet let me also state with
full conviction that India’s commitment to global nuclear
disarmament stands undiluted. India is the only nuclear-
weapon State ready to negotiate a nuclear weapons
convention that will prohibit for ever the development,
production, stockpiling, use and threat of use of nuclear
weapons and provide for the elimination of all existing
weapons under international verification.
If this can only be a step-by-step process, the first step
at a technical level is for all countries possessing nuclear
weapons to take measures that will reduce the dangers of,
and provide added safeguards against, any unintended or
accidental use. Coupled with this is the political step of
reorienting nuclear doctrines, towards no-first-use, and then
non-use, thus delegitimizing nuclear weapons globally.
Independent expert opinion across the globe has spoken
strongly in favour of such measures. In fact, every single
study that has been published since the end of the cold war
on the measures to achieve a nuclear-weapon-free world
has highlighted the need for shifting to doctrines based on
no-first-use and non-use, and technical measures towards
de-alerting, as the inevitable first steps in the process. We
have taken initiatives to urge the international community
forward on both counts, and hope that in this General
Assembly session the Indian initiatives will receive the
unanimous support that they merit.
Last year my Prime Minister declared in this
Assembly that India was engaged in discussions on a range
of issues, including the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty (CTBT). These discussions are in process and will
be resumed by the newly- elected Government of my
country. Our position remains consistent. We remain ready
to bring these discussions to a successful conclusion.
Naturally, this requires the creation of a positive
environment as we work towards creating the widest
possible consensus domestically. We also expect that other
countries will adhere to this Treaty without any conditions.
Notwithstanding India’s readiness to engage in
constructive negotiations on a treaty to prohibit the future
production of fissile materials for nuclear weapons and
nuclear explosive devices, the Conference on
Disarmament in Geneva has so far, sadly, been unable to
register any forward movement. This, too, is something to
ponder over, for we all know that a fissile material cut-off
treaty (FMCT) can only contribute to our shared objective
as part of a step-by-step process. Let us then overcome
this reluctance and agree to look beyond the FMCT.
So, at the end of this centennial audit, what is it that
we would want the United Nations to do in the first few
years? It is clear that there are two major problems facing
the United Nations as an institution: Security Council
reform and the United Nations financial crisis. These need
to be addressed. The Security Council must be made
more representative, with developing countries inducted
as permanent members, to reflect the changes in the
United Nations membership and today’s political realities.
As we said earlier, on any objective criteria, India’s
credentials for permanent membership are persuasive.
Sustainable and environmentally sound development
is a goal to which India continues to attach the utmost
importance. In 2002 we will complete a decade of
Agenda 21, adopted at the Rio Earth Summit in 1992. I
trust that the current session of the General Assembly will
put in place a preparatory process for the “Rio + 10”
review. This will enable the Member States to take stock
of the implementation of the commitments undertaken by
the Member States in Agenda 21 over the past decade.
Such a process is vital for attaining our common goal of
sustainable and environmentally sound development.
This century has shown us that our challenges are
common; they are intertwined. Problems flow across
boundaries, they batten on each other. Political, security,
economic and social challenges are braided around each
other; when they form a knot, that has to be cut by all of
us together. Here, and nowhere else, can we do this. It is
convenient to look at security issues in the First
Committee, at economic issues in the Second, at human
rights and social issues in the Third, and so on, but we
often do not see them together, and so fail to use the
United Nations as we should.
May I, in conclusion, therefore, propose that in the
next decade the United Nations endeavour to address the
most urgent problems that face us today. We have to do
this as a unity of nations, as also of issues, for it is
evident that solutions in one field will depend on, or be
43


facilitated by, progress in another. Without tackling them
together we will fail to address them at all. Therefore, may
I urge the Assembly to consider the following areas for
action in the opening years of the next decade: an
international conference on financing for development;
binding, irreversible steps to reduce the dangers of use of
nuclear weapons; reform and expansion of the Security
Council; a comprehensive convention against terrorism; and
strengthening of the United Nations development system in
this era of globalization.
I leave you with a sloka from the Rigveda. Though
written 5,000 years ago, it reaches across time to us as at
this session of the General Assembly, in the last year of the
twentieth century. In translation, it reads,
“Be of one heart, one mind and free of hate.
Let your aim be common, your assembly common,
United your mind and thoughts;
May you make your resolutions with one mind,
Perform your duties righteously.
Let our hearts be together”.








The fifty-fourth session of
the General Assembly of the United Nations takes place
at a time marking humanity's crossing into the next
millennium. It emerges as a link in the long chain of
tumultuous events that have reshaped the map of the
family of nations.
12


The United Nations was born against the backdrop of
the destruction and desolation of the Second World War,
the most bitter, deadly and inhumane war known to
mankind. The descent of the Nazi regime to the depths of
evil was like an eclipse in the history of civilization and
will be recalled in history as a nightmare in which man
created the devil, who wreaked devastation, destruction,
terror and annihilation upon the world. The stand taken by
the Allied forces against the Nazi monster, and the creation
of the United Nations in April 1945, on the verge of the
defeat of the forces of destruction, was an act that marked
the return of humanity to its senses, to salvage the future of
mankind.
In this month when we mark 60 years since the
outbreak of the most horrible of wars, we are strengthened
more than ever in our sense of hope and confidence in the
necessity of the United Nations and of its activities
throughout the world. The various agencies of the United
Nations work to enhance world health and tend the sick; to
supply the needy with food and nourishment; to build
bridges between cultures; to promote education and
overcome ignorance; to instil hope into the lives of refugees
and displaced persons; and to assist the victims of disasters,
whether natural or man-made.
The soldiers of the United Nations forces are the true
peacekeepers of our age. In its corps are soldiers from all
the nations of the world. At times they risk their lives in
areas riddled with conflict and violence around the world,
whether their United Nations mandate is to make peace or
to be observers that safeguard the peace. These distinctions,
important as they may be to the policy makers and shapers
of international relations, have no meaning to the individual
United Nations soldier, posted far from his country, who
brings hope and tranquillity to places fraught with tragedy,
suffering and violence.
After many centuries of violence and war, of
enslavement and destructiveness in the name of murderous
ideologies, after decades of cold war and polarized world
alliances of the East and the West, the human race is now
making great strides down the paths of peace and
reconciliation. Before our very eyes, a process is
enveloping the world, signalling hope for the future.
Mankind is adopting a new path, the path of the prophet
Isaiah, who as far back as 2,600 years ago prophesied that
the day would come when
“they shall beat their swords into ploughshares, and
their spears into pruning-hooks: nation shall not lift up
sword against nation, neither shall they learn war
any more.” (The Holy Bible, Isaiah 2:4)
This prophecy — which has been adopted by the
United Nations as a source of hope, as the symbol of the
victory of the good in human beings over evil — should
serve today more than ever as a beacon and a path for all
who cherish peace around the world and for their
representatives gathered here today.
The world has become more open. Satellites, the
Internet and telecommunications networks shorten
geographical and cultural distances. The political and
ideological blocs of the past have disintegrated, and the
walls of animosity have fallen along with the tyrants and
dictators who built them. They are being replaced by new
blocs, some of which are in the process of being created
where development and prosperity reign. I hope and
believe that these beneficial transformations will also
occur in the Middle East.
In our region, too, the light of hope has been
rekindled. We are now in the midst of a political process,
the objective of which is to reach peace between States
and reconciliation between peoples. Israel aspires to reach
a comprehensive peace with its neighbours, a peace of
harmony. Israel will not be satisfied with a merely
political or strategic peace. In our eyes, the absence of
war is not the peace we aspire to achieve.
May I be allowed to emphasize once again that
peace means a culture of peace; peace means no more
threats of violence, whether implied or categorical; peace
entails the end of boycotts, the end of contempt and
defamation, the end of incitement and confrontation...
peace is also a language of peace: it is the way leaders
address their nations, teachers teach their students and
religious leaders inspire their followers.
At a time when various kinds of religious extremism
are rearing their heads and eroding human wisdom and
human freedom, it is essential that inter-faith dialogue be
strengthened and that the religions be manifested in their
enlightened forms, which sanctify tolerance and
coexistence.
On the way to achieving peace in our region, we
often find ourselves confronted with contradictory
realities. Parallel to the political process, our negotiating
partners are conducting a constant political war against
Israel in various international forums, including from the
podium of this Assembly. This dualism is inconsistent
13


with the peace process and is intolerable, as are the extreme
decisions taken by the Arab League against Israel. These
decisions are not in keeping with the spirit of peace, as
expressed in the Sharm el-Sheikh Memorandum.
We hoped for and expected a different atmosphere,
one that would complement the impetus initiated by the
new Government in Israel. We have been saddened to
witness events that undermine the essence of peace. These
events can be defined only as anti-peace resolutions.
Engaging in a peace process, on the one hand, and
maintaining anti-Israel declarations and resolutions, on the
other, raises some serious concerns about our negotiating
partners and their concept of peace. Is it a peace of
normalization with open borders, or is it only one of
temporary initial recognition? Will our relations with the
Gulf and Maghreb countries, such as Morocco, Tunisia,
Mauritania, Qatar and Oman, be allowed to expand and
develop? Or will these relations remain hostage to mood
swings after each and every difficulty in the negotiations or
whenever there is disagreement? Continued doubts about
these cardinal questions cannot be tolerated in the light of
the heavy price and grave risks that Israel is taking upon
itself in this process.
Three weeks ago, on 4 September, Israel and the
Palestinian Authority signed the Sharm el-Sheikh
Memorandum, which for the first time creates a direct,
chronological, political and conceptual link between the
Interim Agreements and the final status agreement. On 13
September, the final status talks were renewed between
Israelis and Palestinians.
We are determined to reach a framework agreement
that will form the basis of the final status agreement by
February 2000, as stated and agreed upon in the Sharm
el-Sheikh Memorandum. In this framework we will select
the issues and set an agenda for the final status agreement.
The topics at hand are known, as are the differing vantage
points and positions of each side. The differences can be
resolved only by direct negotiations.
Regarding the final status, I wish to affirm from this
podium that when we refer to political separation as one of
the prime concepts of the permanent settlement, we are also
saying that, for the benefit of both sides, we should not
necessarily sever ties that are vital to coexistence in the
various spheres of living.
From Israel’s perspective, there is no competition and
never has been any between the different negotiating tracks.
Israel also aspires to reach peace with Syria, our
neighbour to the north. This is, after all, in the higher
common interests of both Israel and Syria. H o w e v e r ,
along with these common interests, the following point
must be made clear: A democratic country like Israel
cannot accept a precondition to beginning the talks that
requires a prior acceptance of the final outcome as
dictated by the extreme and dogged formulas of the
opposing side.
We must maintain the momentum of good will so
that we can face our children, Syrian and Israeli alike,
with a clear conscience and say to them in all honesty:
We tried everything and did our utmost. I call upon the
leaders of Syria, in view of what we have gone through
together, to cease hesitating. It is time to talk. Meetings
and discussion are not political sacrifices — they are
basic necessities.
On the road to a comprehensive peace, we wish to
see Lebanon join the camp of peacemakers. The anomaly
which has developed in its territory must come to an end.
We have never had nor do we have now any territorial
claims or disputes with Lebanon. Our one and only
interest is to guarantee the safety and security of our
citizens. I must say that, regrettably, the Government of
Lebanon has for many years failed to enforce its
sovereignty in the southern part of Lebanon and to disarm
Hezbollah. I hope that this situation will improve and that
Israel, within the framework of an agreement, will be able
to leave the southern part of Lebanon.
Nevertheless, with that as our ambition, I wish to
emphasize that we will not be held hostage much longer
on this track to a stubborn and defiant attitude. We will
make our own independent decisions, as we see fit, in
order to ensure our protection and our vital interests,
taking all options under consideration.
A reconciliation between Israel and its neighbours
must extend the promise that all the peoples of the region
may reap the benefits of peace. Normalization must not
be viewed as a one-sided gesture. As a natural outcome
of peaceful coexistence, normalization is not in the
service of one particular party. It is in the interests of all
the nations of the region.
We hope to renew the multilateral tracks as early as
this year. There is a need for close cooperation in
regional multilateral projects. Our region has tremendous
potential. In order to fully realize this potential, we must
establish a mechanism of true cooperation among the
14


States of the region. This cooperation would clearly be to
the benefit of all of us in the region.
The scarcity of water in our region, which will only
get worse, may impose a new way of life on the inhabitants
of the Middle East in the coming years. Israel is
anticipating this problem and preparing for it, but in this
case, as in others, cooperation in the region is essential and
will benefit all sides.
The working groups of the multilateral tracks
undertook various assignments of primary importance.
Unfortunately, their activities have been frozen for
irrelevant reasons. This is the time to resurrect them. Any
delay or imposed condition is liable to undermine the peace
process and delay the aid packages so essential to the
peoples of the region. Throughout this important process,
on the bilateral and the multilateral tracks alike, we are
accompanied by the international community. First and
foremost was the United States of America, along with the
Russian Federation, the European Union, Canada, Norway,
Japan, China and other countries and organizations that
have assisted and continue to do so. Their key contributions
earn them special commendation from this rostrum.
Egypt and Jordan were our first partners in breaking
down the walls of enmity and in thawing relations in our
region. Improving our relations with Egypt, as well as
renewing the multilateral tracks, are essential to furthering
the common objectives of the nations in our region. T h e
relations between Israel and Jordan are an example of
appropriate and favourable relations between neighbouring
countries. We intend to strengthen and broaden the relations
between the two nations in the economic, social and
political realms.
As we march further along the difficult path of
making peace, we look back with sorrow and sadness as we
remember the pioneers who broke new ground and are no
longer with us today: the late Menachem Begin, Anwar
Saddat, Yitzhak Rabin, King Hussein and King Hassan II
of Morocco. Their vision and their work inspire us to
continue to work towards completing their enterprise of
peacemaking.
We cannot afford to be disillusioned. Our region is
neither North America nor Benelux. Even as we negotiate
the peace process, we remain aware of the threats and
dangers directed against us, threatening the stability of the
entire region. The mix of extreme fundamentalism, on the
one hand, and of the potential use of weapons of mass
destruction, on the other, threatens the peace, stability and
future of the entire region. This threat is not just an
element of academic debates in the study of international
relations, but a harsh reality which we must all face.
From this international platform, I call for a halt to
all technological, scientific and other kinds of assistance
to countries looking to obtain unconventional weapons,
while threatening the existence of the State of Israel and
the region as a whole.
The Persian Gulf War demonstrated that leadership
lacking reason and stability poses a threat to all the
countries in the region and to the world at large. The
monitoring groups and machinery in Iraq must be
immediately resumed. That is the obligation of the
international community so long as the Iraqi regime seeks
non-conventional weapons and threatens the region. The
United Nations is the largest, most authoritative and most
recognized international body. It should therefore be the
one to take the initiative and the responsibility in curbing
this danger.
Terrorism is an additional strategic enemy and we
cannot come to terms with its existence. It is a threat not
only to Israel, but to many other nations across the world
as well. Terror knows no borders or civilized rules. There
can be no coexistence with terror, either in the context of
the negotiations conducted by Israel with its neighbours,
or in the broader regional context. Anyone who believes
that terror is a nuisance which can be tolerated is
mistaken. Terror is in essence a strategic threat. A
synthesized, coordinated and unrelenting approach must
be adopted against it.
Here, in this building of stone and glass, reflecting
the current image of our world today with its points of
light and shadows of darkness, counterparts and enemies
meet as friends and allies in the creation of a forum for
discussion and coexistence. Discussion is the way to
resolve conflict. It is also the way of tomorrow. Dialogue
and common language are the tools of diplomacy, the raw
material for the creation of a new reality and the
foundation for a stable and safer society.
It was here in the General Assembly, at the
beginning of the decade, that I first met with my Chinese
counterpart. After 40 years of total dissociation between
our two countries, we endeavoured to re-establish
diplomatic relations between Israel and China. It was also
here that we laid the groundwork for establishing ties
with the former Soviet Union, as well as with India,
Nigeria and other States. These are only a few examples
15


demonstrating the possibility in this arena for building a
bridge between nations and States.
As a nation that experienced great difficulties,
overcome only by accelerated development efforts, the State
of Israel takes part in the international effort to aid others
and share knowledge, experience and technology,
experience which it has accumulated in various fields. The
nation of Israel is proud of its ancient tradition of sharing
and identifying with the world at large.
Through the Division for International Cooperation
within the Israeli Foreign Ministry, Israel maintains ongoing
projects and a broad range of training courses in Israel. We
have demonstration units and we are conducting research.
For example, a special medical centre was recently
established in Mauritania and serves the many citizens of
that State who suffer from chronic eye problems. Similarly,
Israel invests great efforts and resources in training
professionals to acquire the skills and abilities necessary for
meeting the various challenges that engage many parts of
the world.
In the more than 40 years since its inception, the
Division for International Cooperation has trained more
than 70,000 trainees from more than 120 countries, who
have come to Israel and attended its training courses in the
areas of agriculture, water resources, health and medicine,
science, education and others.
In 1998 alone, some 155 courses were held in Israel
on a variety of topics, with the participation of more than
4,000 trainees. Gladly, I can report that many of the
trainees were from Middle Eastern countries. Fully 820
Palestinians participated in these courses over the past year,
thereby helping to strengthen the bridges of peace which
have been built between Israelis and Palestinians. In the
same year, Israel ran more than 150 courses in over 60
different countries, with the participation of over 7,000
trainees. I am proud to point out that in many of the
countries to which we sent Israeli experts, the local
personnel managed to translate our goodwill into positive
results on the ground, to the benefit of their people and
their land.
Because of the reputation it has acquired, the Division
for International Cooperation is also one of the central
addresses in Israel to which people can turn in times of
disaster around the world. We have recently witnessed just
how essential such assistance can be in times of natural
disasters. Israel has always responded favourably to
requests for aid and relief, regardless of the political
context or the state of diplomatic relations.
We wish to support and commend the United States
of America, our friend and ally, an inspiration to us all in
its efforts to promote the values of cooperation among
nations. This is also the time to express our appreciation
to the United States for its intensive efforts to bring true
peace to the Middle East.
Even today in the United States we have witnessed
again a new resort to the threat of boycott. The case at
hand is the threat to declare a boycott against the
American company Disney, because the company dared
to allow Jerusalem to be portrayed in an exhibition
celebrating the millennium. We condemn these threats and
the use by certain Arab States of this anachronistic
device. It has no place here or anywhere else in the
world.
Over thousands of years, since the time of biblical
King David, the builder of Jerusalem, until the present
day, Jerusalem has not served as the capital of any other
nation in the world besides the nation of Israel, the
Jewish people. Even after our forced exile from the land
of Israel, we continued, generation after generation, to
stay faithful to Jerusalem. The flame of Jerusalem was
carried in our hearts as a hidden source of faith and hope.
In our wanderings, in the East and in the West, in
the African deserts and on the outskirts of Siberia, from
the golden age of Spain through the dark Inquisition,
during the prosperous Europe of the romantic era to the
charred ashes of the Holocaust, throughout all the above
the eyes of the Jews and their prayers have been directed
toward Jerusalem. Year after year, from father to son, the
anthem of the Jewish nation has constantly been “Next
Year in Jerusalem”.
With the passing of those previous generations and
exiles, we have had the privilege of being deemed worthy
to return to Jerusalem, to rebuild the ruins, to rededicate
the city as a centre radiating with beauty, open to all
followers of all religions, as the poet has said, where
freedom of all religions is a fact of life.
It is so upsetting then that even today, 51 years since
the independence of the State of Israel, there are still
those who would deny our natural right to decide the
location of our capital, a natural right given to every
nation in the world. From Jerusalem, the city of David, I
will quote from the original song of David on Jerusalem,
16


in words which transcends the limits of time and retains
their meaning in every generation:
“Our feet shall stand within thy gates, oh Jerusalem.
Jerusalem is built as a city that is bound firmly
together.” (The Holy Bible, Psalm 122:2-3)
Today, as before, from this podium we declare to the
entire world, to our friends and people and those who are
distant from us: Jerusalem, unified under Israeli
sovereignty, is and will remain forever the capital of Israel.


First let me
congratulate you, Sir, the Foreign Minister of Namibia, on
your election as President of the General Assembly this
session. I certainly recall my meetings with you and your
President in your country last year.
I also wish to welcome three new Members to the
United Nations — Kiribati, Nauru and Tonga — all very
close friends and neighbours of New Zealand. I trust that
the faith they have shown in the United Nations will be
fulfilled in the years ahead, and we certainly look forward
to working closely with them.
When addressing this Assembly, especially as a
representative of a smaller Member State, one is reminded
10


that the United Nations must remain the fundamental point
of reference in international relations. Indeed, that is a truth
that all Member States have an obligation to acknowledge.
Furthermore, it is of course sound policy for all who need
and rely on the rule of international law in place of
lawlessness. And it is particularly important to restate it at
this time. The United Nations collective security
framework, which is one of the fundamental elements of
the Charter together with cooperation on economic and
social problems and promoting respect for human rights,
has perhaps never been more severely tested than in this
last year of the twentieth century.
Armed conflicts, many of them internal and ethnically
based, have continued to present a serious moral challenge
to the international community, and they are likely to do so
for the foreseeable future. The Security Council's response
to these problems does not always increase our confidence
in the Organization.
The Secretary-General's remarks in his statement at the
beginning of this debate about the need to reconcile
universal legitimacy with effectiveness in defence of human
rights were most timely. New Zealanders place a very good
deal of faith in the United Nations: when we see on our
television screens evidence of violence and inhumanity
against the vulnerable, and we are told that the Security
Council cannot reach an agreement on collective action, we
are left worried, and wondering whether our trust in the
Security Council is well placed. A Council which loses the
trust of the people is a Council which will become
irrelevant.
I want to talk to the Assembly about two extremely
serious challenges the Council faced this year: Kosovo and
East Timor. Both highlight the importance of the actions of
the Security Council.
In East Timor, following President Habibie's
courageous offer to the East Timorese people, prompt and
effective action was taken by the Security Council to set in
train the popular consultation process. The ballot —
undertaken in extremely difficult circumstances by highly
committed United Nations workers, international and local,
all of whom deserve acclaim — produced a resounding and
incontrovertible expression of the will of the East Timorese
people. This was the essential basis for the international
community's response since the ballot.
Post-ballot events were appallingly tragic and have
rightly provoked a strong reaction around the world. The
dispatch to Jakarta and Dili of the Security Council mission
led by Ambassador Andjaba of Namibia was a key step
in addressing this grievous situation. The efforts made by
representatives of all countries present at the time of the
meeting of Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Council
leaders in Auckland, joined by the British Foreign
Secretary representing the European Union, reinforced the
Secretary-General's urging that Indonesia accept the offer
of international help. The assistance could not have come
too early.
New Zealand is proud to be a contributor, alongside
the forces of other nations from the region and from
further afield, and under the leadership of Australia, to the
United-Nations-authorized multinational force that is now
operating in East Timor. Our soldiers from New Zealand
are on the ground in East Timor right now. We are
prepared also to take part in the United Nations
peacekeeping operation foreshadowed in Security Council
resolution 1264 (1999), and we urge the Council to take
prompt action — next week would not be too soon — to
establish this operation, which would be part of the
United Nations transitional administration in East Timor.
We are contributing to the efforts of humanitarian
agencies to provide support to the hundreds of thousands
of ordinary people who have been displaced in East
Timor; those currently in West Timor should be speedily
repatriated. New Zealand has added its voice to those who
believe that the people responsible for crimes against
humanity in East Timor should be brought to account.
The overriding objective must now be to ensure the
realization of the 30 August ballot outcome and East
Timor's transition to independence. It is clear that in
laying the basis for East Timor's future, the United
Nations will be the indispensable organization.
It is inevitable that comparison will be made
between East Timor and Kosovo. In Kosovo the world
saw a grave humanitarian crisis with the Security Council
unable to act. In New Zealand's view, collective action to
try to put a stop to a humanitarian disaster involving
genocide and the most serious crimes against humanity
should never be held hostage to the veto. When it is, the
Security Council loses its credibility and its relevance. I
need hardly reiterate New Zealand's continuing opposition
to the veto, voiced since San Francisco in 1945. While it
is understandable that national interests will influence
how members vote in the Security Council, we have
never accepted that some narrow interests of any one of
five countries should be able to override the will of a
clear majority of members.



The adoption by the Security Council of its resolution
1244 (1999) of 10 June, which provided the international
community's endorsement of a political solution to the
Kosovo conflict, was certainly greeted with much relief in
most quarters, including in New Zealand. The resolution
was proof, if any were needed, that the United Nations
remains, as in East Timor, the indispensable organization.
And as the Secretary-General observed at the time, it also
gave strong legal underpinning to the task ahead, a task
which, he noted, is daunting. The contribution of the
dedicated United Nations and specialized agency staff who
are now working with little fanfare in Kosovo certainly
deserves our recognition.
Both Kosovo and East Timor have put the Security
Council to the test. In their own ways they have challenged
this Organization's capacity to take effective action in the
face of severe difficulties. The world must never again
witness horrors such as those in Kosovo whilst the Security
Council remains impotent. The case of East Timor shows
that the Security Council can react swiftly and effectively
when the will exists. For this to be possible, the fullest
commitment to support those humanitarian ideals that are
the basis of the United Nations Charter remains essential.
The adoption of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court shows such a commitment. The
international community must now deliver on its promise,
with signature and early ratification of that Statute.
As we know, the United Nations also has before it the
pressing demands of the various and sometimes interrelated
conflicts throughout Africa with, of course, their appalling
humanitarian consequences. Who can put out of their minds
the images of atrocities we have seen from Sierra Leone,
for instance? Yet the Council's response has until very
recently been low-level. Once again, the credibility of the
Security Council depends in large part on its being seen as
even-handed in its attention to crises, wherever they may
occur, and whether the Cable News Network (CNN) is
there or not.
For much of the past year we have seen the Council
virtually paralysed on the important question of
disarmaming Iraq of its weapons of mass destruction. In the
meantime, this potentially very serious threat to the security
of the region remains unresolved. The reason again has
been the very sharp divisions among the permanent
members, which by virtue of the veto power can block any
action. This situation remains unacceptable.
New Zealand's awareness of the importance of the
role of collective action has also been heightened by
recent events in our own immediate region. Here, the
United Nations demonstrated its ability to respond to the
different demands of supporting the regionally inspired
peace process on the island of Bougainville, part of Papua
New Guinea, and of assessing the needs created by
disruptions to the population on Guadalcanal in the
Solomon Islands.
The United Nations must be capable of responding
effectively. Small and vulnerable nations in particular
need confidence in the United Nations, as it may be their
only hope in times of trouble. I am very concerned
therefore by the apparent trend away from financing new
peacekeeping operations by means of assessed
contributions and an increasing reliance instead on
voluntary funding. This, of course, poses a threat to the
collective responsibility that is at the heart of this
Organization. In practical terms it is likely to mean that
those regions which fail to attract donor support will not
receive the response they are entitled to as Members of
the United Nations. This trend must be urgently reversed;
all operations must be put on an equal financial footing
by means of assessed contributions.
In addition, as I noted here last year, the largest
contributor's arrears to the peacekeeping and regular
budgets continue to cast a long shadow over the
Organization. Outstanding dues and very slow payments
to troop contributors affect us all, and can severely
constrain the ability of countries to contribute to pressing
peacekeeping needs. We call again on those Member
States who are in dereliction of their obligations to make
payment on time, in full and, of course, without
conditions.
Reform of the Security Council remains one of the
most important items on our agenda. Further useful
progress has been made this year. While the issue of
enlargement continues to be complex, we believe there
has existed for some time wide agreement on the equally
important areas of reforming the Council's working
methods and the curtailing of the veto. The linkage
between the veto and enlargement was also explicitly
recognized in this year's report to the General Assembly
of the Open-ended Working Group on the Question of
Equitable Representation on and Increase in the
Membership of the Security Council and Other Matters
Related to the Security Council.
12


As for the task of providing more equitable
representation, I am not convinced that we will be able to
achieve this while the regional groups in the United Nations
continue to reflect the political geography of the 1960s.
Quite different and far more sensible arrangements have
been adopted in other multilateral forums, as, for example,
in the context of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty (CTBT). The present system here in New York
locks in very great disparities in representation. Small
countries that can make an excellent contribution are often
severely disadvantaged, especially where a political bloc
inside a regional group may coordinate closely on electoral
matters.
I would, therefore, wish to add my voice to those of
the Prime Ministers of Fiji and Samoa and the Foreign
Ministers of Papua New Guinea and Australia, who spoke
earlier in this debate on the need for reconfiguration.
Reconfiguration of the regional groups may well hold one
of the keys to an overall package on Security Council
reform.
New Zealand still looks forward to the day when we
can join a regional group here in New York which includes
our Asia-Pacific neighbours. In the meantime, we will
continue to build linkages in our region and developing the
many areas of our common understanding.
One of the great strengths of the General Assembly is
the equal status ascribed to each Member. All Members,
large or small, rich or poor, have a right to be heard here.
Each has a single vote. While we must all from time to
time temper our own national ambitions in the interests of
reaching a common understanding, we respect the point of
view of each individual member. The special session on
small island developing States over the last few days was
a very good opportunity to do just that. New Zealand is
firmly committed to assisting the small island developing
States SIDS in the spirit of common purpose and
partnership envisaged at Barbados five years ago. We are
very pleased that all participants in the special session have
reaffirmed their commitment to implement fully the
Barbados Programme of Action.
In April New Zealand, represented by my colleague,
the Honourable Simon Upton, had the privilege of chairing
the seventh session of the Commission on Sustainable
Development. We were pleased to be able to help
reinvigorate debate and build consensus around the need for
a more coordinated approach to stewardship of the world's
oceans and the need to recognise, in an ongoing way, the
special characteristics and needs of small island
developing States.
The Commission faces the great challenge of
pursuing the implementation of Agenda 21. Two other
great challenges we as a world face on the environmental
front are the threat of global climate change, caused at
least in part by human-induced emissions of greenhouse
gases, and the need to maintain an approach to
international trade and environmental issues which is
based on sound scientific analysis and agreed rules and
procedures. It is vitally important that we should continue
to act in concert to face these international challenges.
International cooperation in addressing economic,
social and humanitarian problems is, and always will be,
one of the cornerstones of the United Nations Charter.
The substantial decline in official development assistance
flows over the last decade is of great concern to many
Member States. In this connection, I am concerned to
note that the core resources of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) have been greatly
reduced over the past five years, to the point where its
universality is seriously threatened. I applaud the efforts
the new administrator is making to turn this situation
around and to put UNDP on a more secure footing, with
more clearly defined priorities.
Private capital flows to developing countries have
shown major increases. There is a tendency, however, for
such investment to be heavily concentrated on a few
countries where investment prospects seem brightest.
Many developing countries remain vulnerable and can be
all too easily marginalized. Official development
assistance continues to be an essential tool to help build
the capacity of countries in sectors such as education so
that they can benefit from the unstoppable phenomenon
of globalization. It is certainly a matter of particular pride
for me, as New Zealand's Foreign Minister, to have
overseen increases in New Zealand's official development
assistance funding effort — up by some 40 per cent since
the time of the Rio Summit in 1992.
I welcome, also, the positive steps that are being
taken on the financing for development and debt-relief
initiatives. It is vital that we continue the dialogue among
Member States and with the international financial
institutions to ensure a sounder basis for meeting the
challenges of international development.
Last year I referred to the important role the United
Nations has to play in shaping the moves towards
13


globalization and the opening up of opportunities for world
trade. Later this year, in Seattle, we expect to launch a new
round of multilateral trade negotiations. This will clearly
provide a forum in which to advance trade liberalization
and the rules-based trading system. The role of these
negotiations in promoting the development prospects of all
countries and in fostering the integration of least developed
countries into the global system will be a particular focus.
Deliberations in this Organization at many levels will help
to advance our people's understanding of the value and
purpose of the global trade agenda and their ability to
benefit from it. However, I would emphasise the
importance of major trading partners in continuing to play
a leadership role. The adoption of trade restrictions and
distortions by wealthy economies does much to erode their
moral authority in the broader debate.
New Zealand continues to attach the utmost
importance to seeing all countries work together to bring
about a world free of nuclear weapons. For this reason we
were a cosponsor last year of the so-called New Agenda
resolution, which called for faster progress towards the
elimination of nuclear weapons. The cosponsors will be
presenting this moderate resolution again this year, and we
urge all countries to look carefully at it.
The Conference on Facilitating the Entry into Force of
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty will meet in
Vienna in a week's time. I would urge all those countries
which have not ratified the Treaty to do so, so that it can
enter into force without further delay.
Strengthening the United Nations remains an important
goal for New Zealand. I take this opportunity to commend
the forward-looking management reforms introduced by the
Secretary-General. They have greatly improved policy
coordination among senior management and have produced
positive, tangible effects throughout the Secretariat.
Improving the way the Organization plans its programmes
and expenditures is a critical next step, where work is
already under way. There must be a greater focus on results
when budgets are prepared in order to promote the best use
of the resources of the Organization, and in turn the best
return for Member States.
This year marks the fiftieth anniversary of the Geneva
Conventions, and last year we commemorated the fiftieth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Events over the past 12 months have shown that challenges
to the values and principles embodied in the Universal
Declaration remain as daunting as ever. In this
interdependent world in which we live, New Zealand
continues to see the United Nations as central to
international efforts to work together to protect and
promote, for all our people, those fundamental human
rights and freedoms to which we are committed under the
Universal Declaration.
Next year the United Nations will host the
millennium summit. This symbolic event will provide an
excellent opportunity for Member States to reaffirm their
commitment to the ideals of this great Organization.
Recognizing the frailties of our collective performance to
date, and the critical importance of finding workable
solutions for the future, I call on all Member States to
take the opportunities offered by the millennium summit
to enter into open and constructive dialogue and step into
the next millennium with an unequivocal recommitment
to the visionary principles enshrined in the Charter.
It is nine years since I first addressed this body in
1991 as the Foreign Minister of New Zealand. For the
United Nations, and particularly the Security Council, it
has been a tumultuous period. After the cold war the
number of problems multiplied; the world's expectations
of what the United Nations could deliver were raised
above the possible; and the solutions demanded required
determination, resolve, tact, understanding and
imagination. The demands on the United Nations will not
lessen, but each year must see a better performance than
in the past. However, as this may well be the last
statement I make to this body, I want to thank all United
Nations officials and peacekeepers everywhere: those I
have met here in New York; in Cambodia and in
Somalia; in Mozambique; in Bosnia, Croatia and Albania;
in Papua New Guinea and, of course, now in East Timor.
I thank them for their continuing, often unsung and heroic
efforts. They are much appreciated.




There is no doubt that the twentieth century, which is now
coming to a close, will leave a deep imprint on the history
of the world. This has been an epoch of global
transformation and social change, scientific discoveries and
achievements. The realization of the idea of a universal
world Organization, which has become the foundation
uniting the entire international community, has indeed been
one of the positive things about this century.
However, the twentieth century has witnessed the most
severe upheavals. Millions of people have perished in the
flames of world wars, revolutions and civil and ethnic
conflicts. On a few occasions, humanity teetered on the
brink of self-destruction, and the burden of outstanding
problems it has left for the new era is a heavy one. We
cannot resolve all these problems before the advent of the
third millennium, but we are indeed duty bound to lay
down the foundations for resolving them in the long-term
and to start moving in that direction.
The most important thing we should do is to define
the parameters of the world in which we are going to live.
This lies at the core of the initiative put forward by the
President of the Russian Federation, President Yeltsin, to
develop a world concept for the twenty-first century. As a
world Power and permanent member of the Security
Council, Russia is fully conscious of its special role in and
responsibility for world developments and stands for the
establishment of a multipolar world built on a solid
foundation of international law. Our country is pursuing in
practice a multifaceted foreign policy with a view to
establishing equitable and mutually beneficial bilateral and
multilateral relations with all the countries of the world and
to strengthening international security and stability.
The world concept for the twenty-first century
involves establishing a new culture which would aim to
form a common system of values and models of
behaviour. A world without wars and conflict, a world of
democracy and prosperity must be the highest priority for
all peoples and States. Every nation is entitled to its
rightful place among other nations and to security on an
equal footing in all its aspects, including in the political,
military, economic and social areas.
How and through what mechanisms can this be
achieved? Is there a body which can reflect the interests
of all States in a balanced manner? The answer is
obvious: it is the United Nations. From the outset, the
United Nations Charter put the Organization at the service
of all humankind. There is simply no other universal
mechanism to regulate international relations.
We are fully aware of the danger posed by the
threats and challenges facing our world today: the various
manifestations of militant nationalism, separatism,
terrorism and extremism, which know no borders. This is
a common challenge which is claiming countless victims
and wreaking destruction in various parts of the globe.
Aggressive separatism, which has become a growth
medium for various extremist forces, has become one of
the main sources of domestic conflict and regional
instability. No one is immune to it. The international
community and, above all, the United Nations, must
decisively clamp down on any manifestations of
separatism and strictly and consistently defend the
principles of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
States and the inviolability of their borders. Outside
encouragement and support for separatist forces must be
totally eradicated.
Recently, separatism has been increasingly merging
with the monster of terrorism. We could even now, during
this session, take a number of specific steps to stimulate
practical international cooperation in combating terrorism.
We must finalize the draft international convention on the
suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism. I therefore
suggest that we should develop and adopt a declaration of
principles for cooperation between States on combating
terrorism more vigorously. It is the States’ bounden duty
to protect their citizens against terrorist attacks and to
prevent activities from taking place in their territory that
are aimed at organizing such acts against the citizens of
other countries. Russia therefore supports the initiative to
convene, under United Nations auspices, a conference or
a special session of the General Assembly next year on
13


combating terrorism. Such an event would give a powerful
political impetus to the struggle against terrorism at a global
level.
The capabilities of the United Nations should also be
used more efficiently in the fight against drug-related
threats and organized crime. Only through joint efforts that
are also in strict compliance with the rules of international
law can we defeat this evil.
The founding fathers of the United Nations made
provision for a law-based response to violations of peace
and security. The international community can take also
coercive measures, but this should be done in accordance
with the Charter and following a decision by the Security
Council. Unlawful means can only undermine rightful ends.
It is from this very perspective that we assess such
doctrines as that of humanitarian intervention. In general,
we should take an extremely careful approach to coercive
measures; what is more, we must not allow them to turn
into a repressive mechanism for influencing States and
peoples that are not to the liking of some.
Of course, evolution of the international situation
means that it is appropriate for existing rules of
international law to be developed and adapted to prevailing
conditions, but this should be done through collective
discussion and the adoption of appropriate decisions, not as
a fait accompli and not working from scratch: it should be
based on valid rules of international law. This is precisely
what Russia had in mind with its initiative to consider at
the Millennium Summit legal aspects of the use of force in
international relations in the era of globalization. We invite
all countries to a broad and open dialogue on this issue.
Much has been said in recent years about the reform
of the United Nations, which is only natural. Life is an
evolving process and, as times change, any system will
need to be updated. What objectives future reform should
pursue is another matter. In our view, reform means, first
and foremost, the adoption of a package of measures to
enhance the role of the United Nations in the world arena.
The Organization should be ready to respond in a timely
and appropriate way to the challenges that globalization
presents to mankind. We must give serious thought to how
to enhance the efficiency of the Security Council and how
to make that principal organ of the United Nations more
representative through the inclusion of influential new
members, including — and this is absolutely
indispensable — developing countries. This would help
maintain the overall balance in the system of international
relations, especially when the use of force, bypassing the
Security Council, continues. It is also beyond doubt that
preservation of the right of veto of permanent members
is indispensable for meaningful and efficient work in the
Council.
Generally speaking, the entire system of international
organizations needs sensible and responsible reform. At
the same time, the United Nations must remain a focal
point of the international community’s efforts to settle the
most burning problems of the day. The issue of
strengthening the authority of the United Nations after it
has been seriously and painfully tested by the Balkan and
Iraq crises is at the very top of the agenda at the current
session of the General Assembly. First of all, we must
continue strenuous efforts to restore the role of the
Security Council in world affairs.
We have managed through joint efforts to bring the
settlement of the Kosovo problem back within the legal
and political framework of the United Nations. Now we
need jointly to strive for strict and consistent
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999). We cannot afford to let the re-emerging political
process be undermined again, since that could become a
tragedy for all of Europe and could once again bring the
world to the brink of catastrophe. Equally urgent is the
issue of post-conflict rehabilitation in the Balkans. The
United Nations has an important role to play in meeting
these challenges as well.
We all should draw serious lessons from recent
crises. Non-legitimate methods of exerting power only
exacerbate problems and result in even greater deadlock.
Developments in the Middle East, where the peace
process has of late acquired a new positive impetus,
clearly exemplify the optimal alternative, that of
negotiated settlement.
Also on the agenda is the issue of improving
sanctions regimes, to which the international community
has frequently resorted over the past decade. Sanctions
are an extreme measure. They must be applied only when
other means of political influence have been exhausted
and when the Security Council has established the
existence of a threat to peace. The Council, for its part,
should be guided by clear criteria for the imposition and
the lifting of sanctions, and should not permit any free
interpretation of the decisions it has adopted, much less
permit the use of its decisions by anyone for selfish
political or economic ends. It is necessary to take very
serious account of the humanitarian implications of
sanctions both for the population of the States subject to
14


such sanctions and for third countries. The punishment of
entire nations, especially for an indefinite time and
indiscriminately, is inadmissible.
Peacemaking is one of the key areas of United Nations
activities. During the past 50 years the Organization has
acquired vast practical experience in this field. Having
successfully survived intense disputes and ideological
battles, peacemaking has proved its vital power and
importance for securing world and regional stability. The
evolution of the theory and practice of present-day
peacemaking confirms that there is no alternative to
maintaining the central role of the United Nations in this
sphere. The encouragement of peacemaking and the
strengthening of its legal basis in strict conformity with the
fundamental principles of the Charter should become an
important component of the concept of the world in the
twenty-first century. Building up and modernizing the anti-
crisis capability of the United Nations is a key prerequisite
for tackling these tasks successfully. The top priority here
is to begin truly using the system of stand-by agreements
with the United Nations.
Taking into account the limited resources of the world
Organization, and given the high demand for peacekeeping
operations, cooperation and division of labour between the
United Nations and regional structures has become a
priority. It is of fundamental importance that such
cooperation should be in strict accordance with Chapter
VIII of the Charter and should be fully consistent with the
prerogatives of the Security Council.
For Russia, the question of peacemaking cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations is
far from theoretical. For many years, Russian peacemakers
within the peacekeeping forces of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) have contributed to stabilizing the
situations in Abkhazia, Georgia, in Tajikistan, and in Trans-
Dniestria, Moldova. This testifies to the fact that the
settlement of conflicts within the framework of the CIS is
a priority for Russia. As before, we do not see any
reasonable alternative to political settlement of these crisis
situations, for which political will, patience and
commitment to one’s obligations are needed. We consider
it important for the United Nations to continue to play a
prominent role in finding solutions in Tajikistan and in
Abkhazia, Georgia.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), which is called upon to play a central role
in ensuring European security and stability, can and should
be the main United Nations peacemaking partner in Europe.
When this arrangement fails to work, not only do specific
European countries suffer, but providing for global and
continental security becomes complicated. In a broad
sense, OSCE peacemaking parameters, ranging from
conflict prevention to peacekeeping operations and post-
conflict rehabilitation, should be defined in a charter on
European security. Russia proposes too that the charter
should also reflect such principles important for the future
of Europeans as ensuring the security and the foundations
of the relations between European and Euro-Atlantic
organizations in this area. Then the charter will indeed
become a kind of political constitution for the Europe of
the twenty-first century. As the Istanbul summit of the
OSCE, which is expected to adopt the charter, is
approaching fast, we should press ahead with the
formulation of a substantive document.
The Conference on Interaction and Confidence-
building Measures in Asia may become an important
factor for stability on the Asian continent after the new
positive impetus it received at the recent Almaty Foreign
Affairs Ministers’ Meeting of the founding States. The
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN)
Regional Forum, a venue for active dialogue on a broad
spectrum of urgent international issues, is yet another
example of the focus of the Asian countries on the
formation of solid structures for security and cooperation
on the continent.
It is necessary to enhance the potential of African
regional and subregional organizations, which are acting
in close cooperation with the United Nations to curb and
cope with conflicts and humanitarian catastrophes
emerging in Africa. It is the duty of the international
community to render every possible support to the
African peoples.
While strengthening the legal and practical basis of
peacemaking activities, special attention should be paid to
what is commonly called the human rights dimension.
This relates not only to measures to minimize human
sufferings caused by armed conflicts, but also to efforts
aimed at preventing humanitarian crises.
In this connection, I cannot fail to mention the
unacceptable situation of countless thousands of people in
the centre of Europe who, due to arbitrary actions by
authorities, have found themselves deprived of their
citizenship and of the right to use their native language
and enjoy full rights in their State of residence. Civilized
integration, rather than latent assimilation — this is the
way out of the prevailing humanitarian situation in these
15


countries. We welcome the efforts of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the Council
of Europe and the Council of Baltic Sea States (CBSS)
aimed at eliminating violations of human rights and
freedoms of the non-indigenous population of Latvia and
Estonia. We hope that the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights will make her contribution
to these efforts.
The risk of losing positive dynamics in the sphere of
disarmament as a result of attempts to rely on unilateral
power methods cannot but cause concern. If the political
and legal fabric regulating international relations continues
to disintegrate further, then trends to ensure national
security through an arms race will become even stronger.
Russia has consistently advocated the reduction and
limitation of nuclear arsenals and strict compliance with the
non-proliferation regime. For without this, ensuring
strategic stability would prove impossible.
We realize the importance of early ratification of the
START II Treaty and of the initiation of START III
negotiations, under which Russia would be prepared, on a
reciprocal basis, to agree to considerable further reduction
of strategic offensive armaments. Naturally, this process
will be feasible only if the existing agreements in this field,
first of all the ABM Treaty, are strictly observed. We
believe that the General Assembly should come out clearly
in support of the preservation and observance of the ABM
Treaty, which is a cornerstone of strategic stability, because
unilateral actions aimed at undermining the time-tested
regime established by this Treaty are fraught with
extremely dangerous consequences. A collective search for
political and diplomatic solutions is the alternative to
military responses to the problems of proliferation. This is
precisely the target of Russia’s initiative concerning the
global system of control over proliferation of missiles and
missile technologies.
Substantive discussions on threats to international
information security must also be continued within the
framework and under the auspices of the United Nations.
The time has come to reach, through joint efforts, a
common understanding of such threats and of measures to
reduce them.
The twentieth century has brought about economic
globalization. All economies have become open and closely
linked as a result of advances in science and technology.
All these factors have provided a powerful impetus to
social and economic development while creating their own
specific problems. The gap between the industrial and the
formerly colonial worlds has not only persisted but has
begun to widen. Development assistance should remain a
principal focus of future United Nations activities. Crises,
primarily financial ones, have assumed an international
character. We must draw the appropriate lessons and
modernize the architecture of the world financial system.
The United Nations and its specialized agencies should
play a role here.
The expansion of human economic activities has
brought about a globalization of both natural and
man-made disasters, and this has become a major
destabilizing global factor. The challenges related to the
prevention of such disasters and the elimination of their
consequences require that the most advanced technologies
be used for the benefit of the world community as a
whole. Why not consider, therefore, the establishment,
under the auspices of the United Nations, of a specialized
international emergency agency which would assume
relevant functions?
A widely known saying reads: "It is much easier to
win a war than a peace." The United Nations founders
won the war and laid the foundations for peace. It is our
duty to win this peace and to make it comprehensive and
irreversible.













Today, we look ahead to the
new millennium. And at this last General Assembly of the
twentieth century, we look back on a century that taught
us much of what we need to know about the promise of
tomorrow. We have learned a great deal over the last one
hundred years: how to produce enough food for a
growing world population; how human activity affects the
environment; the mysteries of the human gene. An
information revolution now holds the promise of universal
access to knowledge. We have learned that open markets
create more wealth, that open societies are more just. We
have learned how to come together, through the United
Nations and other institutions, to advance common
interests and values.
Yet for all our intellectual and material advances, the
twentieth century has been deeply scarred by enduring
human failures: by greed and lust for power, by
hot-blooded hatreds and stone-cold hearts. At century’s
end, modern developments magnify greatly the dangers of
these timeless flaws. Powerful forces still resist
reasonable efforts to put a human face on the global
economy, to lift the poor, or to heal the earth’s
environment. Primitive claims of racial, ethnic or religious
superiority, when married to advanced weaponry and
2


terrorism, threaten to destroy the greatest potential for
human development in history, even as they make a
wasteland of the soul.
Therefore, we look to the future with hope, but with
unanswered questions. In the new millennium, will nations
be divided by ethnic and religious conflicts? Will the
nation-state itself be imperiled by them, or by terrorism? Or
will we keep coming closer together instead, while enjoying
the normal differences that make life more interesting? In
the new century, how will patriotism be defined — as faith
in a dream worth living, or as fear and loathing of other
people’s dreams? Will we be free of the fear of weapons of
mass destruction, or forced to teach our grandchildren how
to survive a nuclear, chemical or biological attack? Will
globalism bring shared prosperity, or will it make the
desperate of the world even more desperate? Will we use
science and technology to grow the economy and protect
the environment, or put it all at risk in a world dominated
by a struggle over natural resources?
The truth is that the twentieth century’s amazing
progress has not resolved these questions. But it has given
us the tools to make the answers come out right — the
knowledge, the resources, the institutions. Now, we must
use them. If we do, we can make the millennium not just
a changing of the digits, but a true changing of the times —
a gateway to greater peace, prosperity and freedom. With
that in mind, I offer three resolutions for the new
millennium.
First, let us resolve to wage an unrelenting battle
against poverty and for shared prosperity so that no part of
humanity is left behind in the global economy.
Globalization is not inherently divisive. While infant
mortality in developing countries has been cut nearly in half
since 1970, life expectancy has increased by 10 years.
According to the United Nations Human Development
Index, which measures a decent standard of living, a good
education, a long and healthy life, the gap between rich and
poor countries on this measure has actually declined.
Open trade and new technologies have been engines
of this progress; they have helped hundreds of millions to
see their prospects rise by marketing the fruits of their labor
and creativity abroad. With proper investments in education,
developing countries should be able to keep their best and
brightest talent at home and to gain access to global
markets for goods and services and capital.
But this promising future is far from inevitable. We
are still squandering the potential of far too many. As many
as 1.3 billion people still live on less than a dollar a day.
More than half the population of many countries has no
access to safe water. A person in South Asia is 700 times
less likely to use the Internet than someone in the United
States. Forty million people a year still die of hunger,
almost as many as the total number killed in World
War II. We must refuse to accept a future in which one
part of humanity lives on the cutting edge of a new
economy, while the other lives at the knife edge of
survival.
What must we do? We can start by remembering
that open markets advance the blessings and
breakthroughs we want to spread. That is why we in the
United States have worked to keep our markets open
during the recent global financial crisis, though it has
brought us record trade deficits. It is why we want to
launch a new global trade round when the World Trade
Organization meets in Seattle this fall. It is why we are
working to build a trading system that strengthens the
well-being of workers and consumers, protects the
environment and makes competition a race to the top, not
the bottom. It is why I am proud we have come together
at the International Labour Organization to ban abusive
child labour everywhere in the world.
We do not face a choice between trade and aid, but
instead the challenge to make both work for people who
need them. Aid should focus on what is known to work:
credit for poor people starting businesses, keeping girls in
school, meeting the needs of mothers and children.
Development aid should be used for development, not to
buy influence or finance donors’ exports. It should go
where Governments invest in their people and answer to
their concerns.
We should also come to the aid of countries
struggling to rise but held down by the burden of debt.
The G-7 nations have adopted a plan to reduce by up to
70 per cent the outstanding debt of the world’s poorest
countries, freeing resources for education, health and
growth.
All of us, developed and developing countries alike,
should take action now to halt global climate change.
What has that to do with fighting poverty? A great deal.
The most vulnerable members of the human family will
be hurt first and hurt most if rising temperatures devastate
agriculture, accelerate the spread of disease in tropical
countries and flood island nations.
3


Does this mean developing countries must sacrifice
growth to protect the environment? Absolutely not.
Throughout history, a key to human progress has been
willingness to abandon big ideas that are no longer true.
One big idea that is no longer true is that the only way to
build a modern economy is to use energy as we did in the
industrial age. The challenge and opportunity for
developing countries today is to skip the costs of the
industrial age by using technologies that improve the
economy and the environment at the same time.
Finally, to win the fight against poverty, we must
improve health care for all people. Over the next 10 years
in Africa, AIDS is expected to kill more people and orphan
more children than all the wars of the twentieth century
combined. Each year diseases such as malaria, tuberculosis
and pneumonia leave millions of children without parents
and millions of parents without children. Yet for all these
diseases, vaccine research is advancing too slowly, in part
because the potential customers are too poor. Only 2 per
cent of all global biomedical research is devoted to the
major killers in the developing world.
No country can break poverty’s bonds if its people are
disabled by disease and its Government overwhelmed by
the needs of the ill. With United Nations leadership, we
have come close to eradicating polio, once the scourge of
children everywhere. We are down to 5,000 reported cases
worldwide. I have asked our Congress to fund a major
increase to finish the job, and I ask other nations to follow
suit. We have begun a comprehensive battle against the
global AIDS epidemic. This year I am seeking another
$100 million for prevention, counselling and care in Africa.
I want to do more to get to those who need them most new
drugs that prevent transmission from mothers to newborns.
And today I commit the United States to a concerted effort
to accelerate the development and delivery of vaccines for
malaria, tuberculosis, AIDS and other diseases that
disproportionately affect the developing world. Many
approaches have been proposed, from tax credits to special
funds for the purchase of these vaccines.
To tackle these issues, I will ask public-health experts,
the chief executive officers of our pharmaceutical
companies, foundation representatives and members of
Congress to join me at a special White House meeting and
to strengthen incentives for research and development,
working with, not against, the private sector to meet our
common goal.
The second resolution I hope we will make today is to
strengthen the capacity of the international community to
prevent and whenever possible to stop outbreaks of mass
killing and displacement. This requires, as we all know,
shared responsibility, like the one West African nations
accepted when they acted to restore peace in Sierra
Leone; the one 19 democracies in the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) embraced to stop ethnic
cleansing in Bosnia and in Kosovo; the one that Asian
and Pacific nations have now assumed in East Timor,
with the strong support of the entire United Nations,
including the United States.
Secretary-General Annan spoke for all of us during
the Kosovo conflict, and more recently in regard to East
Timor, when he said that ethnic cleansers and mass
murderers can find no refuge in the United Nations, no
source of comfort or justification in its Charter. We must
do more to make these words real. Of course, we must
approach this challenge with some considerable degree of
humility. It is easy to say “never again”, but much harder
to make it so. Promising too much can be as cruel as
caring too little.
But difficulties, dangers and costs are not an
argument for doing nothing. When we are faced with
deliberate, organized campaigns to murder whole peoples
or expel them from their land, the care of victims is
important but not enough. We should work to end the
violence. Our response in every case cannot and should
not be the same. Sometimes collective military force is
both appropriate and feasible. Sometimes concerted
economic and political pressure combined with diplomacy
is a better answer, as it was in making possible the
introduction of forces to East Timor. Of course, the way
the international community responds will depend on the
capacity of countries to act and on their perception of
their national interests. NATO acted in Kosovo, for
example, to stop a vicious campaign of ethnic cleansing
in a place where we had important interests at stake and
the ability to act collectively.
The same considerations brought Nigerian troops and
their partners to Sierra Leone and Australians and others
to East Timor. That is proper — so long as we work
together, support each other and do not abdicate our
collective responsibility. I know that some are troubled
that the United States and others cannot respond to every
humanitarian catastrophe in the world. We cannot do
everything, everywhere. But simply because we have
different interests in different parts of the world does not
mean we can be indifferent to the destruction of innocents
in any part of the world. That is why we have supported
the efforts of Africans to resolve the deadly conflicts that
4


have raged through parts of their continent. It is why we
are working with friends in Africa to build the African
Crisis Response Initiative, which has trained more than
4,000 peacekeepers from six countries. It is why we are
helping establish an international coalition against genocide
to bring nations together to stop the flow of money and
arms to those who commit crimes against humanity.
There is also a critical need for countries emerging
from conflict to build police institutions accountable to
people and the law, often with the help of civilian police
from other nations. We need international forces with the
training to fill the gap between local police and military
peacekeepers, as French, Argentine, Italian and other
military police have done in Haiti and Bosnia. We will
work with our partners and the United Nations to continue
to ensure that such forces can deploy when they are needed.
What is the role of the United Nations of in preventing
mass slaughter and dislocation? Very large. Even in
Kosovo, NATO’s actions followed a clear consensus,
expressed in several Security Council resolutions, that the
atrocities committed by Serb forces were unacceptable and
that the international community had a compelling interest
in seeing them end. Had we chosen to do nothing in the
face of this brutality, I do not believe we would have
strengthened the United Nations. Instead we would have
risked discrediting everything it stands for.
By acting as we did, we helped to vindicate the
principles and purposes of the United Nations Charter to
give the United Nations the opportunity it now has to play
the central role in shaping Kosovo’s future. In the real
world, principles often collide and tough choices must be
made. The outcome in Kosovo is hopeful.
Finally, as we enter this new era, let our third
resolution be to protect our children against the possibility
that nuclear, chemical and biological weapons will ever be
used again. The last millennium has seen constant advances
in the destructive power of weaponry. In the coming
millennium, this trend can continue or, if we choose, we
can reverse it with global standards universally respected.
We have made more progress than many realize. After
the collapse of the Soviet Union, Belarus, Kazakhstan and
Ukraine courageously chose to give up their nuclear
weapons. America and Russia have moved forward with
substantial arms reductions. President Yeltsin and I agreed
in June, even as we await Russian ratification of START II,
to begin talks on a START III treaty that will cut our cold-
war arsenals by 80 per cent from their height. Brazil has
joined the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), capping a process that has almost totally
eliminated the threat of nuclear proliferation in Latin
America. We have banned chemical weapons from the
Earth, though we must implement that commitment fully
and gain universal coverage. One hundred and fifty-two
nations have signed the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty and, while India and Pakistan did test nuclear
weapons last year, the international reaction proved that
the global consensus against proliferation is very strong.
We need to bolster the standards to reinforce that
consensus. We must reaffirm our commitment to the
NPT, strengthen the Biological Weapons Convention and
make fast progress on a treaty to ban production of fissile
materials. To keep existing stocks from the wrong hands,
we should strengthen the Convention on Physical
Protection of Nuclear Materials. And today, again I ask
our Congress to approve the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty.
We must stop the spread of nuclear weapons,
materials and expertise at the source. Since 1992, we have
worked with Russia and the other nations of the former
Soviet Union to do that. We are expanding that effort
because challenges remain, but thus far we can say that
the nightmare scenario of deadly weapons flowing
unchecked across borders and of scientists selling their
services en masse to the highest bidder has been avoided.
Now, we must work to deny weapons of mass
destruction to those who would use them. For almost a
decade, nations have stood together to keep the Iraqi
regime from threatening its people and the world with
such weapons. Despite all the obstacles Saddam Hussein
has placed in our path, we must continue to ease the
suffering of the people of Iraq. At the same time, we
cannot allow the Government of Iraq to flout 40 — and
I say 40 — successive United Nations Security Council
resolutions and to rebuild his arsenal.
Just as important is the challenge of keeping deadly
weapons away from terrorist groups. They may have
weaker capabilities than States, but they have fewer
compunctions about using such weapons. The possibility
that terrorists will threaten us with weapons of mass
destruction can be met with neither panic nor
complacency. It requires serious, deliberate, disciplined
concern and effective cooperation from all of us.
There are many other challenges. Today I have
spoken about just three: the need to do something about
5


the world’s poor and to put a human face on the global
economy; the need to do more to prevent killing and
dislocation of innocents; the need to do more to ensure that
weapons of mass destruction will never be used on our
children. I believe they are the most important. In meeting
them, the United Nations is indispensable.
It is precisely because we are committed to the United
Nations that we have worked hard to support the effective
management of this body. But the United States also has a
responsibility to equip the United Nations with the
resources it needs to be effective. As I think most Members
know, I have strongly supported the United States meeting
all its financial obligations to the United Nations and I will
continue to do so. We will do our very best to succeed this
year.
When the cold war ended, the United States could
have chosen to turn away from the opportunities and
dangers of the world. Instead, we have tried to be engaged,
involved and active. We know this moment of unique
prosperity and power for the United States is a source of
concern to many. I can only answer by saying this: In the
seven years that I have been privileged to come here to
speak to this body, America has tried to be a force for
peace. We believe we are better off when nations resolve
their differences by force of argument rather than force of
arms. We have sought to help former adversaries like
Russia and China become prosperous, stable members of
the world community because we feel far more threatened
by the potential weakness of the world’s leading nations
than by their strength. Instead of imposing our values on
others, we have sought to promote a system of
government — democracy — that empowers people to
choose their own destinies according to their own values
and aspirations. We have sought to keep our markets open
because we believe a strong world economy benefits our
own workers and businesses, as well as the people of the
world who are selling to us. I hope that we have been and
will continue to be good partners with the rest in the new
millennium.
Not long ago, I went to a refugee camp in Macedonia.
The people I met there, children and adults alike, had
suffered horrible, horrible abuses, but they had never given
up hope because they believed that there is an international
community that stands for their dignity and their freedom.
I want to make sure that, 20 or 50 or 100 years from now,
people everywhere will still believe that about our United
Nations. So let us resolve, in the bright dawn of the new
millennium, to bring in an era in which our desire to create
will overwhelm our capacity to destroy. If we do that, then,
through the United Nations and far-sighted leaders,
humanity finally can live up to its name.








On behalf of our Government and
in my capacity as Chair of the Non-Aligned Movement, I
wish to extend our sincere congratulations to you,
Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab, on your election as President of the
General Assembly. I would also like to thank you for the
kind remarks you made about my country as you assumed
your high position.
We have worked together for many decades. Thanks
in good measure to your statespersonship, as neighbours we
live together in peace and have joined hands as equals to
ensure the all-round fulfilment of both our peoples. These
experiences convince us that you will discharge your
responsibilities as President of the General Assembly in a
manner that will help humanity make our common world a
better place for all. We are pleased that you will be
working with the Secretary-General, Kofi Annan, who has
demonstrated unquestionable commitment to the realization
of the attainment of the goals of the Organization.
The Charter of this Organization and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights provide all of us with the
vision towards which we should strive. At the time these
documents were adopted, they reflected the international
determination to ensure that the catastrophe occasioned by
the rise of fascism and Nazism should never recur. We
recall them today because we believe that the time has
come for determined measures to be taken to ensure that
they inform what happens in the common world we all
share. The central message they contain is expressed in the
words of the preamble to the Declaration:
“the peoples of the United Nations have in the Charter
reaffirmed their faith in fundamental human rights, in
the dignity and worth of the human person and in the
equal rights of men and women and have determined
to promote social progress and better standards of
life in larger freedom”.
We believe that the time has come for all of us to
ensure that we work together to reconstruct human society
in a manner consistent with this perspective. We further
believe that what we have said constitutes a particular and
historic challenge to those who occupy positions of
political leadership in the modern era, those who, like us,
will have the privilege of addressing this General
Assembly. Only time will tell whether we have the moral
and intellectual courage to rise to this challenge.
But this we feel we can say: that conditions exist in
the world today for us successfully to pursue the vision
contained in the United Nations documents to which I
have referred. What may be in short supply is the courage
of the politicians, as opposed to an abundance of good-
sounding rhetoric. What are these conditions of which we
speak? The cold war has come to an end. There is no
sign anywhere of an ideology-driven contest among
super-Powers which dictates that each should seek to
destroy the other in order to protect itself. It is true that
a number of countries still possess weapons of mass
destruction, especially nuclear weapons, which constitute
a threat. The only logical way to address this is
vigorously to sue for universal disarmament and the
destruction of such weapons.
Secondly, I believe it would be correct to say that
the overwhelming majority of countries in the world have
opted for democratic forms of government. Having
learned from their own experiences, the nations have
turned their backs on dictatorship. Of course, we cannot
say that such dictatorships do not exist or that no attempt
will be made in the future to establish them. But we can
make bold to say that these exceptions prove the rule,
rather than disprove the proposition we are trying to
advance.
The combination of these two factors should lead to
three conclusions, at least. The first is that there should be
no need on the part of any country to seek to establish
spheres of influence as a supposed necessary condition for
the advancement of its national interests.
Secondly, the very sustenance of democracy across
the globe requires that in every democratic country the
ordinary people should feel that they actually do enjoy the
right to determine their destiny. In other words, no
country should be required to restrict its exercise of this
8


right simply because some other more powerful country
dictates that this should be so.
Thirdly, these circumstances create the possibility for
a more democratic system of international governance, as
would be reflected by a correct restructuring of this very
Organization. In any case, the process of globalization
necessarily redefines the concept and the practice of
national sovereignty. The frontiers of that sovereignty are
being pushed back, especially as regards the smaller
countries of the world, such as our own. As this happens,
inevitably, so does it become necessary that a compensatory
movement take place towards the reinforcement of the
impact of these countries on the system of global
governance through the democratization of the system of
international relations.
The developments we have spoken of also suggest that
perhaps, and depending on what we all do, humanity has
never had as bright a prospect for durable world peace and
security as it does today. The mere spread of democracy
throughout the world speaks of a greater commitment
among the nations to the resolution of national and
international conflicts by peaceful means.
I am certain that when President Abdelaziz Bouteflika,
the current Chairperson of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), addresses the Assembly, he will report on the
important decision recently taken at the Algiers summit of
the OAU to exclude from its ranks, with effect from the
next summit, all military regimes that may still exist on the
African continent. A further decision was taken to assist
such countries resolutely to move towards a democratic
system of government.
The developments on which we have commented
would suggest that the Organization has a responsibility to
focus especially on the objective contained in Article I,
paragraph 1, of its Charter, which says,
“to take effective collective measures for the
prevention and removal of threats to the peace ... and
to bring about by peaceful means, and in conformity
with the principles of justice and international law,
adjustment or settlement of international disputes or
situations which might lead to a breach of the peace”.
This, we believe, imposes a solemn and supreme
responsibility on the United Nations to work for the
prevention of conflicts and to endeavour to resolve them so
that a durable peace can be established. Sometimes, our
response to conflicts has been to wait for them to develop
into violence, and even wars, and subsequently to
intervene through costly peacekeeping operations. These,
at times, serve to freeze those conflicts, perpetuate
polarization and make their timely resolution more
difficult.
Moreover, the requirement on the United Nations to
make such interventions to prevent the outbreak of
hostilities imposes an obligation on the United Nations
that it should be seen by Governments and peoples as a
truly even-handed interlocutor and peacemaker. It can
attain this only if it works genuinely to
“develop friendly relations among nations based on
respect for the principle of equal rights and self-
determination of peoples”,
as stated in Article I, paragraph 2, of its Charter.
If indeed we are seriously committed to these critical
objectives of peace and democracy in the world, then we
have no excuse to permit the further postponement of the
meaningful restructuring of the United Nations. If we
were honest with ourselves, we would admit that what is
blocking progress is the desire to accommodate what are
perceived as new power relations, to reinstitutionalize
relations of inequality within the United Nations in an
amended form. This is based on the thesis that the
institutionalization of such relations has precedence over
the Organization’s founding principle of respect for the
principle of equal rights among the nations.
In the situation of the cold war and the prevalence
of dictatorship in many countries, the politics of power
might have been seen as the only path to survival. The
management of the world today through the exercise of
such power, however modified, will itself subvert the
objectives of democracy and peace, spawning pretenders
to the throne at global, continental and regional levels.
Simultaneously as the United Nations focuses on the
critical question of the prevention of conflict, so must it
attend to such issues as the elimination of weapons of
mass destruction, the implementation of the ban on anti-
personnel mines, the removal of mines in those countries
which face this problem and the control of the
proliferation of small arms. Of course, none of these
proposals gainsay the need for the United Nations to act
with all necessary vigour to help end all existing conflicts
of which it is seized, including those in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Angola, Western Sahara, East
Timor, Eritrea and Ethiopia, Kosovo and others.
9


We started off with a quotation from the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, which speaks of affirming
the dignity and worth of the human person, the promotion
of social progress and securing a better life for all. We
argued that conditions exist for movement towards the
realization of the objectives spelt out in the Declaration. It
is a matter of common cause among all of us that the levels
of poverty, ignorance and disease that continue to afflict
billions around the globe constitute a direct denial of the
dignity and worth of the human person to which we have
committed ourselves. I am certain that we would also agree
that the process of globalization has also been accompanied
by growing inequality within and among countries. We
have also seen how movements of short-term capital have
produced disastrous economic consequences in some
countries.
As with the challenges of peace and democracy, it is
our firm belief that sufficient resources exist within the
world economy actually to address the social progress and
the better life for all for which the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights calls. Further to this, science and technology
continue to develop in such a way that it is difficult to
believe that, taken together with the large concentrations of
capital that characterize the world economy, the means do
not exist within human society to make the required impact
on poverty, ignorance and disease. Indeed, it can be argued
quite rationally that international peace, democracy and
prosperity are a necessary condition for the further rapid
growth of the world economy, and with it the further
expansion of the corporations, both small and big, which
require global markets.
Similarly, the revolution in information and
communication technology, a critical driver of the process
of globalization, both enables and calls for higher levels of
education and standards of living among the billions who
constitute the human population. However, it is clear that
there is no automatic or inherent mechanism within the
operation of the markets to enable both capital and
technology to make the sort of impact we are talking about
on all countries of the globe. When we say this we should
not be taken to mean that we are contemptuous of all that
has been said about what each country needs to do to create
the conditions conducive to investment and technology
transfers. Nor should it be taken to mean that we are
reopening the debate about the role of markets in the
allocation of resources. What we are saying is that the
functioning of the markets does not and cannot exclude
conscious interventions being made, both to increase
economic opportunities and to raise the standards of living
and the life possibilities of many in the world denied their
human dignity by the scourge of poverty.
In his interesting book Living on Thin Air, the
British author Charles Leadbeater, writes:
“The new (knowledge driven) economy needs a
mobilizing vision and institutions fashioned to make
it real. Bit by bit, our institutions are changing
through reform, reorganisation and restructuring —
but the process is much too slow, haphazard and
piecemeal — it must become more conscious,
imaginative and radical.”
Once more, the matter turns on the will of the
political leaders actually to discover among themselves
the moral and intellectual courage to do what is correct
and necessary. What is correct and necessary also requires
that in this field as well, which affects socio-economic
matters, we should review the functioning of all
multilateral institutions, including those that belong within
the United Nations family. This should be done to ensure
that these too reflect the very necessary imperative of the
democratization of the international system of governance.
The United Nations documents to which we referred
earlier give us a starting point. Accordingly, we believe
that there is no need for anyone among us to rediscover
a new vision that would inform our actions to build a new
world which affirms the dignity and worth of the human
person. What is necessary is that we match the beliefs we
profess with the necessary action.
We speak of action that will practically address the
related issues of peace, democracy and development.
I am certain that such a practical programme of
action would meet the aspirations not only of the
members of the Organization of African Unity and the
Non-Aligned Movement, of which we are a member. It
would also respond to the most deep-seated feelings of
the peoples of the developed North, who can have no
interest in conflict, oppression and poverty, even if these
occur beyond the borders of their own countries.
It also goes without saying that the democratic
systems in which we operate would also require that,
through committed advocacy, we should secure the
support of the electors for what should be a programme
of action of the United Nations for the twenty-first
century.
10


The evolution of human society has presented the
world leaders who will stand at this rostrum with new
possibilities to move our globe a giant step forward towards
a new actuality, of which the poor and the powerless dream
every day. We will be betraying those millions if we do not
act to turn their dream into reality. Let future generations
not say that because of the force of inertia we failed to act.




